




















































Hansard: June 22, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2741 

 June 22, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I have on 

behalf of Saskatchewan residents a petition to present this 

afternoon, and I'll read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition comes from the McCord, Eastend, 

Glentworth, Mankota areas of the province.  And I lay it on the 

Table now. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I too 

would like to read the prayer on my petition. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these petitions are signed mostly by individuals from the 

Prince Albert area. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have some 

petitions to lay on the Table.  I'll read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are also from the Prince Albert area -- 

Meath Park, and so on, Albertville, Knox Place -- and I would 

like to present them at this time. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have 

petitions to present today.  The prayer reads: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever 

pray. 

 

These petitions come from the Vanscoy, Delisle, Harris area of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to lay them on the 

Table now. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

present the following petitions on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These come from the city of Prince Albert and I'd be happy to 

table them now. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have a 

petition to lay upon the Table today.  And I'll read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitioners today are from Shellbrook, 

Prince Albert, Smeaton.  I guess mostly Prince Albert.  Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker.  I lay this now on the Table. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- My petition, Mr. Speaker, is similar to my 

colleagues.  And it states: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are mostly from Prince Albert and a few 

from Meath Park as well.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have 

petitioners petitioning the government.  The prayer says: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 



2742 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 1993 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And I have people from Carrot River, Arborfield, and from 

Prince Albert. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it 

gives me great pleasure to table on behalf of Saskatchewan 

citizens and, I would say, over the course of this session 

thousands of Saskatchewan citizens who have presented this 

petition to the government on this particular issue. 

 

I'll read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, I have petitioners from Prince Albert, 

Shellbrook, Holbein, Carrot River, Rose Valley, Watrous, 

Simpson -- people all over the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, who take issue with what the government has done 

this session. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are read and 

received. 

 

 Of citizens of the province praying that the Assembly defeat 

any legislation introduced to redefine the NewGrade Energy 

corporate governance and financing arrangements. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like 

members of the Assembly to join with me today in welcoming 

Mr. Edward Légaré.  He is the great grandson of Jean-Louis 

Légaré who I will be attempting to recognize through a private 

member's motion in this House today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, as government caucus chairperson, it's been extended 

to me the privilege of introducing 97 guests from across 

Canada who are seated today in the west gallery. 

 

These people, Mr. Speaker, are attending the Canadian 

Automobile Association national conference which is being 

held in Regina.  They're employees and members of families of 

the employees connected with CAA (Canadian Automobile 

Association).  They're on a tour of the building and are 

stopping by to observe the proceedings of our question period 

here today. 

Mr. Speaker, for those from other provinces, they'll know that 

Saskatchewan is famous for two things, the friendliness of our 

people and the sunshine in our skies.  We trust that you have 

and will continue to have lots of contact with our friendly 

people, and we promise that right after the rain comes plenty of 

that Saskatchewan sunshine. 

 

I'll ask all members of the Assembly to extend a welcome, a 

warm Saskatchewan welcome to our guests from across the 

country. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's my 

pleasure today to introduce to you a number of people from 

across the province, a number in the city of Regina who have 

taken the time to come and observe the procedures in the 

Assembly today. 

 

And I'd just quickly like to raise the names of individuals who 

are up in your gallery, I believe most of the individuals are.  

And some of the names I might not quite pronounce properly, 

but I'll raise them:  Arnold Reimer from the Alliance Church, 

representing 45 churches across the province; Sheryl Schnare, I 

believe, from the Regina Evangelical Free Church; Margaret 

Hall and Daisy Greiner from the Hillsdale Alliance; Elwood 

Larson representing Focus on the Family; Bill Daryluk, 

Hillsdale Baptist general conference representing 20 

assemblies; Doug -- and I'm not sure of this; could be Lancaster 

-- Southside Pentecostal Assembly, 60 churches, PAOC 

(Pentecostal Assemblies of Canada); and Erica Collen from 

Southside Pentecostal Assembly; Mary Loeppky and Phil 

Loeppky, Parliament Community Church; Vonda Kosloski, 

Saskatchewan Natural Law Society; Marlene and Jack 

Wilhelm, His Way Ministries; Jason Boyd, representing 13 

Churches of the Nazarene in Saskatchewan; Bob and Jean 

Casson, Harvest City Church; Esther Burke, Flo Marshall, H.S. 

Gould, from Hillsdale Alliance; Stephen Weir, North American 

Baptist Conference, 15 churches in our province; Earl and Ella 

Roberts, Hillsdale Alliance; Jean Johnson, Community Impact 

Saskatchewan; Bill Harvey, Hillsdale Alliance; Ernest Budd, 

Evangelical Free Church; Harold Lutzer, Community Impact 

Saskatchewan; and Dale Hassett from Saskatchewan Insight. 

 

I'd like the members to welcome all these members here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

introduce to you, and through you to all the members of the 

Assembly, an individual seated in the east gallery, a person by 

the name of Dwight Herperger who was a former student of 

mine, some few years ago.  Dwight has attended university at 

Kingston, Ontario and is presently in Saskatchewan on 

business.  And I'd like you to take time out to welcome him to 

our Assembly this afternoon. 



June 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2743 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Negotiations with FCL 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Premier today.  Mr. Premier, we witnessed 

the very unfortunate spectacle last night of your Minister of 

Justice taking Bill 90 through this House last night and 

protesting up and down that your government has never 

threatened, that you don't have some kind of political agenda in 

mind, vis-a-vis the NewGrade upgrader project. 

 

All along, Mr. Premier, people have been suspicious that your 

government has been threatening that you would negotiate in 

bad faith to fit your political agenda.  And we've seen how you 

cancelled the contracts of 60,000 farm families, how you 

negotiated with 52 local hospitals by shutting them down, and 

now we see the spectacle once again, Mr. Premier, of some of 

your cabinet henchmen threatening people in our society. 

 

Mr. Premier, when are you going to start threatening people in 

this province and start acting like a premier?  When people take 

issue with your government, that's when you act like a premier, 

not one who threatens, Mr. Premier.  When are you going to do 

that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the question is very easy 

to answer since neither myself nor the government has 

threatened FCL (Federated Co-operatives Ltd.) or anybody else 

involved in this matter.  I don't think I've got to answer the 

question about when I'm going to stop.  I can't stop something 

that I never started. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

Premier.  Mr. Premier, that's not what Bud Dahlstrom says.  He 

says that as early as 16 months ago your minister of the 

Environment was threatening to shut down the Co-op refinery 

on environmental grounds if you did not . . . if they did not 

bend to the wishes of your friends in CIC (Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan). 

 

Mr. Dahlstrom says there was also another minister.  And I 

guess what co-op members and what voters in this province 

want to know, Mr. Premier: which other minister besides the 

Environment minister of the day was part of this threatening 

operation? 

 

Mr. Premier, you threatened farmers, you threatened hospital 

workers, you threatened municipalities, you threatened glass 

dealers, and it appears, Mr. Premier, that your ministers will go 

out and threaten anyone who stands in the way of your agenda. 

 

Do you deny, Mr. Premier, that the then minister of the 

Environment and one of your other cabinet colleagues 

issued those threats to CCRL (Consumers' Co-operative 

Refineries Ltd.) as long as 16 months ago?  Do you deny that, 

sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I deny the Leader of the 

Opposition's interpretation of the story in which Mr. Dahlstrom 

is quoted because the exact quotation from the story -- on the 

assumption that the quotation is accurate -- says, quote: "Two 

of the senior ministers of the Crown suggested that" . . . And 

then it goes on to say . . . Suggested -- that's his interpretation 

of what was said. 

 

Now I can tell the hon. member opposite that the question of 

the environmental concerns of the upgrader remain a very 

serious matter for this government.  In fact it can tend to be a 

very serious matter for your government.  In fact I believe it 

was your government that actually launched proceedings and 

those proceedings ended up with a fine against the NewGrade 

upgrader. 

 

Of course, you wouldn't characterize that as being threats and 

we don't characterize it as being threats; we characterize it as 

being totally responsible in the attempt to make sure that 

whatever enterprise functions, functions in an environmentally 

safe way.  And that means that's exactly what we want to do 

and that has no relationship to the financial dispute or the Estey 

report. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier can try and 

put whatever light he wants upon this.  Mr. Dahlstrom felt that 

he had to go speak to the same service club that the Premier 

spoke to a little over a week ago in order to set the record 

straight, to set some of the half-truths and misconceptions and 

outright innuendo that this Premier and this government have 

used against FCL and CCRL and try and set the record straight. 

 

My question to the Premier is:  Mr. Premier, why have you felt 

it necessary to make CIC the most powerful bureaucracy this 

province has ever seen?  Why have you felt that it is necessary 

to give your friends -- as the media says, the cronies -- Mr. 

Ching and Mr. Dombowsky such power that they can now 

rewrite the agreement, knowing full well, as you do, that as 

long as 16 months ago you had set an agenda that your minister 

of the Environment and other member of the cabinet were 

saying that they would have this deal negotiated their way or 

they would use the power of their office, no matter what it 

might be, to threaten FCL into seeing it your way. 

 

Why have you felt, Mr. Premier, that you have to have such 

power?  What are you afraid of? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't think that I'm 

afraid of that aspect of the issue.  There are some 



2744 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 1993 

things, of course, which any mere mortal should be fearful, but 

not that particular issue, except from this point of view: that I'm 

fearful of the consequences of a $600 million obligation on the 

taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan -- which, sir, you 

obligated the taxpayers -- $600 million come crashing down 

around this province's financial necks, so to speak, affecting all 

of the people in the co-op movement, of which I'm one, and all 

the taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

It is that oath of office which we have taken, all of us, to 

protect the taxpayers to renegotiate the deal that -- I shouldn't 

say I'm fearful of; I'm hopeful -- will result in a negotiated 

settlement, a proper negotiated settlement. 

 

The fact that we were going to be negotiating and we're 

determined to solve this problem, unfortunately culminating in 

the legislation, is clear right from day one -- the day that we 

opened up the books -- that we had to act.  You people chose 

not to act although you knew the problem was serious.  We 

took our responsibilities seriously, and we're acting. 

 

Now as for the allegation that CIC is the most powerful unit in 

government, I want you to know that I've got one real angry 

president of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation on my hands 

now after you leaked that secret out. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, I 

heard he lost all his friends a long time ago. 

 

The simple fact, Mr. Premier, the simple fact is: are you going 

to now use, for instance, the occupational health and safety 

legislation which gives your bureaucrats the ability to shut 

down a work site?  Are you going to use that one now if 

environment doesn't work?  Are you going to use that 

particular piece of legislation to get your way with FCL?  

Because that legislation, sir, gives your minister the power to 

order that work site shut down. 

 

Now I want to know, Mr. Premier, why do you believe that you 

need that kind of power?  Why do you need to have the heavy 

hand all the time in dealing with these issues?  Surely to 

goodness the responsibility of being a premier means that there 

are other things except the mailed fist to solve your problems, 

sir. 

 

Why is it that Mr. Dahlstrom has to go to the same service club 

that you spoke at to set the record straight?  Why is that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- You'll have to ask Mr. Dahlstrom.  

But I can tell you that Mr. Dahlstrom listened to my 

presentation.  And during question-and-answer period, he even 

got up and he tried to -- in your words, quote -- set the record 

straight. 

He's a member of that particular service club and I only can 

assume that they asked him or he asked them to be given a spot 

to have his side of the story told.  That's only fair and normal.  I 

think in a democracy, why not?  It's not a question of setting 

the record straight.  He puts his position forward. 

 

I might say about his position, there is nothing new about this.  

This is an old mishmash of the disputes about the Saskatoon 

Co-op, you know, and the numbers are all wrong.  But you 

can't change the spots on the leopard.  You can't change the 

hand that you're dealt.  And the hand that we're dealt is a $600 

million taxpayers' obligation. 

 

And you yourself recognize that that's serious and it's got to be 

renegotiated.  May I say before I sit down in closing, when you 

say why do you have to use the heavy hand all the time -- well 

we don't use it all the time and we don't want to use this hand.  

But it's not good enough to say, don't use the heavy hand but I 

have no other idea available to me as to what you should use if 

the other side fails to come to the table, other than some 

generalized statement of the need to talk.  Well we've been 

wanting to talk for 16 months, 18 months, and we have not had 

that response. 

 

I'm sorry.  I think the FCL's a wonderful institution; it's a 

wonderful economic institution, co-op movement; I subscribe 

to it; I support it.  But I repeat again I did not take an oath of 

office to FCL.  I took an oath of office to all the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan and with this $600 million obligation, in the 

absence of a negotiated settlement, we are going to act to clean 

up this and other financial messes that you left behind. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's fine . . . it's 

strange that we find the Premier so bereft of ideas these days.  I 

remember in the fall of '91 that he was the solution to 

everything.  He had an idea per day.  He could walk on water.  

He was the be-all and end-all to the province of Saskatchewan.  

Now we don't have any ideas on how to solve a financial 

dispute with one of our major citizens. 

 

Mr. Premier, the fact is that you can't blame the opposition for 

this one.  The opposition agreed to vote with you, brought in an 

amendment last night that would help you solve your problem.  

Don't point the finger over here, sir.  Point the finger directly 

where it should be pointed and that is at the seat for the 

member from Saskatoon Riversdale who lacks the ideas and 

says that I have to use the heavy hand. 

 

Mr. Premier, this is probably the final day of this session.  Why 

don't you say to those thousands of co-op members that have 

tabled their names in this House in opposition to your moves, 

why don't you give them the solemn promise today that you 

will not implement that legislation and you will let true 

negotiation work?  Will you do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



June 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2745 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm at least thankful 

about the Leader of the Opposition's characterization of my 

activities in 1991 today because he characterizes them as 

saying that I'm a person who could walk on water.  But I recall 

very vividly, during that election campaign when I tried that, 

he characterized it as: Romanow can't swim.  So today we're 

making progress, or depending on your point of view, there's 

some improvement.  So I appreciate them and I thank him very 

much. 

 

The question that the hon. member asks deserves a serious 

response, as I'm trying to answer to him.  I say to all of those 

co-op people who have petitioned, I say to them as I say to 

you: I am ready to walk out of this Chamber as soon as it is 

appropriate and convenient and proper for me to do so to meet 

with Mr. Leland, to meet with Mr. Thompson, to meet with Mr. 

Empey, or any combination thereof, with my officials or any 

other combination of officials, non-stop to negotiate a deal on 

the principles -- note the word that I use -- of Estey. 

 

I've said that for weeks; I've said that for months.  That offer 

has not been picked up.  I can't do any more.  I can't fly up to 

Saskatoon and say here, let me in, I want to talk to you.  I 

cannot do anything about it if FCL has shut the government 

out.  I can't do anything about it. 

 

But I repeat publicly, I say publicly: I am ready to leave now.  

All I want is a phone call.  All I want is some communication.  

Not even a phone call, it can come from you . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well unless the Leader of the Opposition is 

suggesting that I should just simply go up and see if they're 

around.  That's the position that we take. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Next question. 

 

Medical Laboratory Testing 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

directed to the Minister of Health.  Madam Minister, seven 

weeks ago in this House I asked you whether shifting medical 

laboratory testing to hospitals would cost more money than it 

would save.  And you indicated at that time that you would 

provide me with government cost Estimates of the change in 

policy.  Can you explain why the information has not been 

forthcoming to date, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I will check into where that information 

is and why it hasn't got to you. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, public labs 

do not have much testing equipment that exists in the private 

lab system.  And that's well known.  You would not confirm 

seven weeks ago that public labs will have to purchase a $10 

million computer laboratory system to bring them up to the 

same level of what is in the private lab system.  Can you 

confirm this now, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- It's my understanding that that 

purchase will not have to be made. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam 

Minister, can you confirm that University Hospital in 

Saskatoon has purchased testing equipment which is called the 

Stack-S?  It's a form of computer-generated microscopic testing 

equipment and it's purchased for its hematology department.  

This equipment valued at over $300,000; equipment that 

already exists at City Hospital in Saskatoon. 

 

Madam Minister, just so you know, one Stack-S can service the 

entire province.  How do you rationalize this duplication of 

equipment that it seems quite unnecessary? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I will have to take notice, Mr. Speaker, 

on the information she's provided. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, you have 

stated on many, many occasions that all of these decisions are 

local health board decisions and that they are to determine how 

to distribute funding for medical lab testing. 

 

But you also stated something else on March 16 and I wish to 

quote you directly:  The government's role will be to provide 

overall direction and to set standards for the delivery of lab 

services.  End of quote. 

 

What concerns me, Madam Minister, is this.  And my question 

to you: how can you tell local boards that they have to be able 

to meet specific standards, to tell in fact private labs that they 

are no longer needed in this province, that this is something 

that can be taken over, and yet these particular local boards are 

going to require more money than the health budget actually 

allows for?  How do you reconcile all of this? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, with respect to the issue of 

labs, what the government will be doing is monitoring the 

delivery of lab services from a quality point of view.  We will 

also be setting any standards and guidelines with respect to the 

delivery of lab services. 

 

A budget will be allotted to the district boards to do whatever 

they have to do with respect to delivering lab services.  

Obviously that's going to mean a combination of public and 

private labs at this point, with a general direction to use more 

fully and maximize the public facilities that are already in the 

system.  So there will, as we move through this period of 

transition, be a dual system. 

 

Now the member opposite is making some assumptions -- that 

it's going to cost more money -- that I do not think are accurate 

because there has been 10 million taken out of the budget, and 

district boards will have to deliver the services within that 

context. 

 

As she well knows, there has been a report and study done that 

actually indicates substantially more than that could be taken 

out of the lab system and we could still deliver in this province 

a very high quality of lab services.  So the government has put 

forward the 



2746 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 1993 

general guidelines for a policy of that nature, and district 

boards will implement it. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This really is not 

rationalization if we're talking about the way the monies are 

being looked at and distributed.  It's competition between 

hospitals in one city which is something that one was trying to 

make sure didn't happen. 

 

Madam Minister, you stated on March 16, that you're trying to, 

and I quote you directly again:  manage lab services in the most 

effective and efficient manner possible.  End of quote. 

 

Now if this is the case, Madam Minister, how do you 

rationalize these expenditures that are taking place as we speak 

for equipment at City Hospital, much of which is already 

present at University Hospital and in the private system as 

well?  This is not effective or efficient use of resources.  What 

we're talking about are millions and millions of dollars that 

could have been used to keep hospital beds open.  I'd like your 

comment, please, on what seems to be transpiring under this 

new system. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, had the member asked 

questions in Estimates of this detail, had she asked any health 

questions in Estimates, this information could have been 

provided to her in a detailed fashion with the officials present 

in this House. 

 

Now with respect to what is being purchased at University, 

what is being purchased there, I will look into the matter and 

take notice of that.  But the member opposite has already made 

assumptions . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  If the minister is going to take 

notice, she can't answer the question. 

 

Free Vote on Bill 38 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Premier, and as my colleague before pointed 

out, my colleague pointed out the fact that you've used your 

heavy hand and threat against people across this province, even 

in this Legislative Assembly.  There's an iron hand just sitting 

over all government benches at the present time even though it 

wasn't that long ago we had a discussion paper that talked 

about the enhanced role of members in the Legislative 

Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, you do have one more opportunity, one 

more opportunity to allow members in this Assembly to speak 

out and truly represent the views of their constituents, to stand 

up today and speak out and let people know back home that 

they stood up on the issue. 

 

Mr. Premier, later on we will probably have a vote on Bill 38.  

We've been asking you to allow your members that freedom.  

The other evening when my colleague asked you, you said you 

believe in party 

solidarity.  Well, Mr. Premier, for the good of democracy, for 

the good of this Legislative Assembly, for the good of all 

public officials, will you allow your members, on that final 

vote before the Bill goes through third reading, to stand up and 

express the opinions of their constituents?  Will you do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Shows you who's got the heavy hand 

around here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- It's the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The hon. member from Moosomin is 

going around the third time on this idea and I would have 

thought his lack of success on the first two times around would 

have deterred him.  I say to the member with . . . I say to the 

member with all of the kindness that I can muster: the vote in 

principle on Bill 38 was held in this House on the afternoon of 

June 3, 1993.  The vote is over.  We can't conduct it again.  It's 

all finished.  Leave it alone. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, if 

everybody gave up, as the minister is suggesting, we probably 

wouldn't have seen the heroic feats of people such as Sir 

Winston Churchill or Mr. Roosevelt and other members of our 

society. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, as I was giving the question a minute ago, I 

was afraid of the fact that the Premier was again going to divert 

to the Minister of Justice.  Mr. Premier, the vote that is going to 

take place -- and the Minister of Justice says it's already 

happened -- the fact is until that final vote is taken on third 

reading, the Bill does not become law. 

 

On that final vote, we're asking the Premier, rather than forcing 

his members to either abstain from the vote or not to be present 

for the vote, why will you not allow them that opportunity, just 

take the shackles off, release everybody to express their 

opinions, to vote freely, so that the people of Saskatchewan 

know that democracy is working here in this Legislative 

Assembly?  Take the shackles off. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, the member invokes the 

name of Winston Churchill and he really couldn't invoke a 

better name.  If there was anybody that understood the 

parliamentary process in the history of the English-speaking 

peoples, it was Winston Churchill.  Winston Churchill 

understood that the principle of a Bill is debated and decided 

upon at second reading. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- And that was what happened here and 

that happened on June 3, 1993, and there's no way that we can 

make this legislature retroactive on this question.  That vote is 

over; it's done; let's get 



June 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2747 

on with other business. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well the minister 

continues to . . . I refrain from using the word that was coming 

to my mind.  But the minister continues to lead us to believe 

that the vote on second reading is of major principle and that 

once that vote has been taken the legislation has been passed. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, has Bill 38 received final reading in this 

Assembly?  Has Bill 38 been through a committee?  Has it seen 

third reading?  Has it received the nod of Her Honour?  Mr. 

Speaker, that hasn't happened yet.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, there 

are a number of votes that will continue to take place in this 

Assembly yet.  There are, I believe, somewhere in the 

neighbourhood of eight or nine votes. 

 

Will the minister ask his Justice minister to release all their 

MLAs (Members of the Legislative Assembly) to vote freely so 

that they need not be available but they can stand up here and 

express their opinions publicly regarding their constituents' 

wishes? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- All right, let me try once more to answer 

the substance of the question; the question of how the vote was 

conducted by our side of the House.  It wasn't a question of the 

Premier saying how it would be or how the cabinet said it 

would be, it was a matter that was decided after lengthy caucus 

consideration over a long period of time.  And we decided what 

kind of a Bill this was in terms of whether it raised moral or 

conscience issues, and we decided in light of all of that 

discussion which extended over weeks, even months, that we 

would vote as a caucus, that we would vote with solidarity, that 

this was not an appropriate case in which to decide to have a 

free vote. 

 

Our caucus made this decision, our caucus has not changed its 

mind on that, our caucus has spoken, and that's the end of the 

matter. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 

informed that at any time a Bill can be defeated.  In fact I 

believe it was Mr. Blakeney's government in the . . . early in 

the '80s, prior to the defeat of 1982, that had a Bill before the 

Assembly that was in committee that allowed the Bill just to 

die on the order paper rather than passing the Bill through the 

Assembly.  Mr. Minister, Mr. Premier, you could do that right 

now. 

 

What you are doing, Mr. Premier, you are forcing your 

members, rather than taking their place in this Assembly, to 

express their opinions by maybe not being available.  By not 

expressing their opinions, by not standing up, Mr. Speaker, it's 

not a vote against Bill 38; what it is, Mr. Premier, is a vote 

against your leadership, against the way you dictatorially run 

your . . . all the members and run your party and run this 

government. 

 

Mr. Premier, as your minister has mentioned, you've made that 

decision.  We regret it, but we give you one more opportunity.  

Allow for the freedom of expression.  Will you do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- As I said, Mr. Speaker, our caucus, after 

careful analysis of this Bill, decided that it did not raise a moral 

issue or issues of conscience that would justify a free vote.  

They saw it, quite correctly, as a question of discrimination.  

And that is not a matter over which moral or conscience issues 

arise. 

 

As I said the other day in the House, we have a lot of red 

herrings being dragged across the path of what is essentially a 

plain, simple, ordinary, anti-discrimination Bill.  One of the red 

herrings, one of the red herrings, Mr. Speaker, is the idea that 

God created women to meet the needs of a man and for 

procreation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Order.  Why is the member on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise to ask leave to make a 

statement. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Resignation of Member 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you.  I'd like to thank all 

members for their indulgence and courtesy in providing me 

with this opportunity to speak on this, my last day in this 

legislature as an MLA. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are few special occasions in one's life and 

career where speaking from the heart expresses the poignant 

feelings of the moment.  For me, this is one of those occasions 

-- an occasion filled with reluctance, sadness, and anticipation.  

Reluctance that I leave provincial politics at such an exciting 

and rewarding time for New Democrats; sadness at leaving my 

friends and colleagues in this House; anticipation that I look 

forward to the challenges which exist by taking the needs and 

priorities of Saskatchewan people to Ottawa. 

 

In the time I have spent in politics in Saskatchewan -- about 20 

years in total -- both as an active party worker and as a member 

of this House, three things have guided me. 

 

The first is a deep and abiding faith and trust in our 

parliamentary democratic form of government as a mechanism 

to assist people in creating a good and acceptable life for 

themselves and their families. 



2748 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 1993 

The second is a profound gratitude to those politicians, some of 

whom are no longer with us, who have demonstrated by their 

consummate belief in people that we can create a society and a 

government founded upon fundamental benchmarks of dignity, 

compassion, fairness, and independence -- politicians such as 

Tommy Douglas, whose picture hangs in my office; Woodrow 

Lloyd; Allan Blakeney; Wes Robbins; Ted Bowerman; our 

current Premier, the member from Riversdale; and my good 

friend, Ed Whelan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to acknowledge and pay tribute to 

those ordinary private members, those who never served in 

cabinet, but who in their hard work, loyalty and wisdom had a 

significant, positive effect upon the direction of government 

and the province that we love.  Private members like the former 

member from Lumsden, Clifford Thurston; the former member 

from Weyburn, Auburn Pepper, who is a good friend of ours; 

the former member from Rosemont, Regina Rosemont, Bill 

Allen; and Peter Prebble, to name only a few. 

 

The third measure of guidance in my political life, Mr. 

Speaker, has been and always will be the people, the people 

who I represent and serve, women, men, and children 

throughout Saskatchewan, but particularly in my home area of 

north-west Regina who have put their trust in me to represent 

them in this Assembly just as I have trusted them and respected 

them for what they are: good, decent, hard-working people who 

want from government responsibility, accountability, and 

fairness. 

 

I have always trusted these people.  And, Mr. Speaker, I will 

continue to trust them, and I thank them for their support over 

the past four elections and the times in between the elections. 

 

It is with this grounding, this immersion in the lives and times 

of people and politics in Saskatchewan over the past 20 years, 

that has brought me to this point.  It's because of what I have 

learned from the people, the politicians, and from my own 

knowledge and experience of our democracy that I feel 

compelled to contribute what talents and abilities that I may 

have to the challenges facing Canada.  It has never been more 

obvious, Mr. Speaker.  Our country needs all of us to 

participate and work together to preserve and maintain our 

national integrity.  Our country needs all of us to rebuild the 

future of hope for all Canadians. 

 

I was proud to call myself a member of the NDP government 

after October 21, 1991.  I am still very proud of our 

government and the steps it is taking to put Saskatchewan back 

on track.  I am proud of my role in this legislature and would 

continue to enjoy a role within our caucus.  I still find very 

satisfying my role in this legislature representing and serving 

my constituents.  But at the urging and support of friends and 

these constituents, many of them, I have decided the time is 

appropriate for me to take this step. 

 

I believe that the people of Canada and of Saskatchewan in 

particular would not be well served 

by an election of a Conservative or a Liberal government in 

Ottawa.  These two parties have an agenda which is at odds 

with the needs and aspirations of the Canadian people.  They 

ignore the things that count.  Their agenda is not the agenda of 

the people of Canada or of the people of Saskatchewan.  I love 

our country as much as I love my family and our province, and 

I'm not about to stand by and allow my country to be torn apart. 

 

It is this latter observation, Mr. Speaker, that has brought me to 

the decision to seek election on behalf of the federal New 

Democratic Party in the constituency of Regina-Lumsden.  As 

we watch older societies around the world rip themselves apart 

by deliberate, artificial division growing from ancient mistrust 

and contemporary greed, hatred, and self-interest, Canada as a 

relatively new and abundantly rich democracy is challenged to 

set the pace for a better, more peaceful tomorrow. 

 

I want to work alongside those who share that dream.  I want to 

contribute to the reforging of our national identity and the 

strengthening of those qualities that make us what we are.  I 

sense a new feeling of hope and optimism across our province 

and our country, a new attitude that finds people from all walks 

of life joining together to work on the problems and 

possibilities that face us.  Visionary ideals and sound ideas are 

what they seek for themselves and their neighbours.  I want to 

be part of that new hope and vision. 

 

(1445) 

 

Embarking on this journey filled with risk and hope, I am 

heartened by the commitment and dedication of my brothers 

and sisters in this Assembly who have taken difficult decisions 

and who competently and responsibly meet the modern 

challenges of government in order to rebuild Saskatchewan.  

Theirs is not an easy task, but I am confident they are on the 

right track, and with the strong leadership of the Premier, the 

cabinet, and my caucus colleagues, this government will be 

successful, and Saskatchewan people will surely see better days 

and times ahead. 

 

I offer my deepest appreciation and good wishes to my leader, 

the Premier, and all members of this House, and to all members 

of this House, for the privilege of serving with you as we've 

served collectively the people of this province.  I wish you 

Godspeed in your future deliberations.  I extend my 

appreciation to the NDP (New Democratic Party) caucus office 

staff, my personal staff, and to the staff of the Legislative 

Assembly for their hard work, support, and kind courtesies 

which they have shown me over the years. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, least but not last and last but not 

least, I would like to extend my heartfelt gratitude to the people 

of north-west Regina, especially to those many hundreds over 

the years who worked so hard on my campaigns.  Without you 

I would not be here.  But it has been an honour to serve you 

and your families, and I thank you for the terrific support over 

the years.  God bless each and every one of you. 



June 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2749 

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 2 -- An Act to recognize Jean-Louis Légaré / Projet 

de loi No. 2 -- Loi sur la reconnaissance de Jean-Louis 

Légaré 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I rise 

today to give second reading to the Bill to recognize 

Jean-Louis Légaré. 

 

The Speaker: -- I believe the member must ask for leave in 

order to do this. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I would suggest we 

just go down the order paper for private members' day . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Well I've already recognized one member.  

The Government House Leader should have done that before I 

recognized another member.  So I'm at a loss as to what to do.  

I've already recognized the member from Saskatoon Greystone. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I wonder if the member could just 

do it under private members' orders. 

 

The Speaker: -- Why doesn't the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone simply ask for leave to move to her item, and if it's 

denied then we'll go down the order paper and deal with it at 

that time. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I ask leave of the 

House to proceed to private members' public Bills and orders, 

second readings.  The great-grandson of this gentleman is in 

our midst today.  I ask this leave in view of the very 

non-controversial nature of Bill No. 2. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The member only has to ask for leave. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  I am rising today 

to give second reading to An Act to recognize Jean-Louis 

Légaré.  Mr. Légaré owned and operated a fur-trading post in 

Wood Mountain in the south-western part of Saskatchewan 

during the time of Sitting Bull, Chief Sitting Bull, and his 

people who sought refuge from United States cavalry in that 

area through the years 1876 to 1881. And he supplied food and 

shelter and hunting supplies for these nearly 5,000 exhausted 

and hungry people, for which he received little compensation.  

He kept the peace between these people and those of United 

States and Canada, and their military and police forces during 

those many troubled years.  I really do wish for people to 

realize that I consulted with numerous individuals on this 

gentleman, and that one head of a department 

of political science in Saskatchewan states this, and I wish to 

quote him directly: 

 

 The only comments that I can make in regards of Jean-Louis 

(whom he called the man everyone could trust) is that he was 

a man of even greater achievements than the Bill credits him 

for.  He was someone who was astonishing in what he was 

able to accomplish. 

 

Many people perhaps do know that in 1889 he established the 

first cheese factory in Saskatchewan at Willow Bunch. The 

first cheese maker for Jean 

_Louis' factory was Gaspard Beaupré, the father of the Willow 

Bunch giant.  And Jean-Louis Légaré served as his godfather.  

He brought a very business-like approach to the dairy industry 

in our province and really became a cheese making expert in 

our country.  It's with great pleasure that I would like people to 

consider this Bill. 

 

I move that Bill No. 2, An Act to recognize Jean-Louis Légaré 

be now read a second time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise to speak 

in support of this Bill.  Sitting Bull and his Sioux warriors had 

the famous battle at Little Big Horn in which they defeated the 

seventh army under General Custer and in so doing incurred 

the wrath of the entire military establishment of the United 

States.  And he was, from that point on, in full retreat, and he 

and his warriors were hunted throughout what is now the 

mid-west United States. 

 

To escape that pursuit, Sitting Bull came to Canada with his 

people and emerged, as it were, at the trading post run by 

Jean-Louis Légaré at Wood Mountain.  They were at that time 

hungry, starving, homeless, and they were in a country where 

the number of buffalo had . . . where the buffalo had practically 

disappeared, Mr. Speaker.  God only knows what the fate of 

those people would have been were it not for the presence and 

for the generosity of Jean-Louis Légaré.  And his act of 

humanitarianism in providing food and shelter and hunting 

supplies to Chief Sitting Bull and his people is one of the great 

acts of that nature in the history of this country. 

 

It is all the more poignant to me because in the camp of Sitting 

Bull at that time was a young woman who was my 

great-grandmother.  And I take great pleasure and honour in 

supporting this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Draper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, sir.  I would like to 

take the opportunity to add a few words to this debate.  Both 

Willow Bunch where Jean-Louis Légaré domiciled, and Wood 

Mountain where his most famous customer settled, are within 

my constituency of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 

 

At both places there are now regional parks, and virtually all 

the school children in our area camp in Jean-Louis Légaré Park 

in Willow Bunch or at Woodboyer Park which abuts on the old 

North-West 



2750 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 1993 

Mounted Police barracks where Chief Sitting Bull was camped. 

 

My own family have taken the opportunity to camp with the 

Girl Guides in Willow Bunch and gone to Bible class at Wood 

Mountain, and have had stories of these two famous men.  The 

rodeo in Wood Mountain is still running and is the 

longest-running rodeo in western Canada.  It'll be there next 

month, if anybody wants to go down there. 

 

The rolling hills with their wooded ravines and coullées are 

beautiful and striking and have enormous amounts of game, 

both furred and feathered. 

 

And in the course of my quarter century of medical practice in 

the area, I was fortunate to count among my friends and my 

patients granddaughters of Jean-Louis Légaré, Mrs. Alberta 

North, and Mrs. Elizabeth Ogle, who received the Order of 

Canada a few years ago and was the granddaughter of Chief 

Sitting Bull.  In fact she taught my children beading and we 

have quite a few gifts of hers and mementoes and I still go and 

visit her in the nursing home at Assiniboia whenever I get a 

chance to go down there. 

 

I was able at one time to get them together and tell me tales of 

their respective grandparents and fascinating stories of two 

strong men they were -- two strong men whose destinies led 

them together at a pivotal time in the history of western 

Canada. 

 

It was and still is the examples of men like these who make 

Saskatchewan the place it is today.  They've demonstrated how 

men of goodwill whose origins were from thousands of miles 

apart and who had to communicate with each other in a third 

language that was not native to either of them . . . and they give 

us good guidance in conducting our lives today. 

 

And it gives me great pleasure to give my support to this Bill to 

recognize the part that Jean-Louis Légaré played in the 

province of Saskatchewan and Canada as a whole.  Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, and the Bill read a second time. 

 

The Speaker: -- When shall the Bill be considered in 

committee? 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- By leave, now, Mr. Speaker.  I move that 

the Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: -- I believe that the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone is one step ahead of me.  We were to consider by 

leave to have it considered in committee.  That leave has been 

granted.  Now the member must ask leave that we waive . . . or 

I guess I can ask the House.  Do we have leave to waive 

consideration of the committee stage of this Bill? 

 

Leave granted. 

The Speaker: -- Now the member may ask for leave for third 

reading. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I move that the Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title.  I ask for leave. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 2 -- An Act to recognize Jean-Louis Légaré / Projet 

de loi No. 2 -- Loi sur la reconnaissance de Jean-Louis 

Légaré 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I move that the Bill now be read a third 

time and passed under its title, and thank you. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave I would 

move that we go to government business, Committee of the 

Whole, constituency boundaries Act, Bill No. 79. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

(1500) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 79 -- An Act to Provide for the Division of 

Saskatchewan into Constituencies for the Election of 

Members of the Legislative Assembly 

 

The Chair: -- I would like to ask the Minister of Justice to 

please introduce his officials to the committee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Seated beside 

me is Darcy McGovern of the Department of Justice.  And 

behind Darcy is Doug Moen, also of the Department of Justice, 

officials who are well known to the Assembly. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I 

want to take this opportunity on clause 1 to just review for the 

Assembly some points that I think are very important in 

discussing how Saskatchewan voters will go to the polls next 

time, and the parameters under which we should operate. 

 

I think when the government initially said that they were going 

to speed up the process of electoral boundary review from the 

normal pattern of every second census -- approximately every 

10 years -- they said it was because some basic questions had 

to be answered, vis-a-vis our electoral process.  And they put 

questions surrounding fairness, cost reduction, efficiency of the 

electoral process, and the fact that Saskatchewan needed to 

position itself, going into the next century, with a better 

electoral system. 

 

Well as you know, Mr. Chairman, a great number of people 

around the province are very interested in this because it is an 

area that has always been fraught with 



June 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2751 

some degree of politicization.  And it has been traditional 

whichever government brought in an electoral boundaries Bill, 

we have seen the opposition take issue with it and condemn the 

process because of the self-interests that governments are 

traditionally accused of. 

 

And it was no different under the administration in which I 

served or administrations in the 1970s, '60s and on and on and 

on.  And there's been a well-documented review, Mr. 

Chairman, of how the process has gone on, and sort of the 

events that led to this particular Legislative Assembly having 

66 seats in it. 

 

As you know, Mr. Chairman, I took issue with the government 

on their proposal because I don't think that it meets all of the 

criteria that they themselves have laid out as being a reasonable 

process. 

 

Number one, that that question of fairness, of cost efficiency, 

cost reduction, I don't think is totally behind what the 

government is proposing here.  And that's because I would 

suggest to you, Mr. Chairman, that I have history on my side, 

because I listened very carefully to the debates in the 

Legislative Assembly back in 1989 when the New Democrats 

sat in opposition. 

 

I listened very carefully to some of the friends of the New 

Democratic Party who were in positions of authority and the 

College of Law and other learned institutions in the province of 

Saskatchewan, and their endeavours during the last time that 

we went through this to have that particular electoral 

boundaries Bill quashed by the Supreme Court of Canada. 

 

As you know, Mr. Chairman, that particular Bill was not 

quashed by the Supreme Court of Canada and it was not 

quashed, as it was not quashed in other jurisdictions, because 

there are some things about the Canadian parliamentary system 

that are fairly unique in its application of the British 

parliamentary system. 

 

Canada is a very large country.  It has a very sparse population 

in relation to it size and has historically had allowances built 

into it to allow rural representation, to allow natural 

boundaries, to allow the uniqueness of community of interest, 

of trading areas, to be recognized.  Because if that were not the 

case, Mr. Chairman, if we simply applied the concepts of the 

British parliamentary system as they are in other areas of the 

world, I don't think some of the unique flavour, unique flavour 

of our system would be here today. 

 

And I say to you, Mr. Chairman, that that unique flavour is 

what makes Canada a very workable democracy.  It is why that 

people in the Northwest Territories, why people in the 

Maritimes, why Canadians as a whole have a great deal of 

comfort with their system, because it has allowed recognition 

at the federal level, it has allowed recognition at the provincial 

level, that makes people feel a part of the system. 

And I think, Mr. Chairman, in all fairness in this province of 

ours, which is the third largest in land area in Confederation, it 

has allowed Saskatchewan, in our case at present, to have 14 

federal seats legislated and constitutionally guaranteed, when if 

you applied the system as it is in other jurisdictions that adhere 

to the British parliamentary system, we might only have four or 

five. 

 

And that is something I think unique and special.  It means that 

our sister province of Manitoba also has 14 seats.  It means that 

Prince Edward Island has four.  It means that there are 

constitutional guarantees in place, Mr. Chairman, that 

recognize the uniqueness of the Canadian system. 

 

And I think it is why, Mr. Chairman, the Supreme Court has 

recognized that uniqueness time and time again.  And they 

have done it in such a way that I think their decisions are above 

reproach. 

 

I would say to you, Mr. Chairman, I would say to you on this 

Bill that if this government truly recognized, truly recognized 

that uniqueness, then it would not have taken unto itself the 

power, the power to set in place a commission that has its 

hands tied.  That commission has its hands effectively tied by 

this Bill, Mr. Chairman, so that those questions of fairness and 

efficiency, of the reduction of the number of members, and 

others cannot be addressed in a way that will make all 

Saskatchewan people happy with the outcome. 

 

Instead we have the commission having to adhere to a number 

of MLAs which the government themselves admit and the 

Premier admits he basically plucked out of the air one day.  It 

wasn't because there was any rhyme or reason, that there was 

any synergy with other institutions in society, that there was 

any synergy, for instance, with federal boundaries, that there 

was any synergy with municipal boundaries, with hospital 

districts, with urban municipalities, that there was any synergy 

with things like the Saskatchewan River Valley, the Qu'Appelle 

River Valley, that there was any uniqueness to a trading area 

like the south-west which has vast miles to travel for individual 

constituents, that there was any ability of measuring how 

MLAs serve constituents in an equal manner. 

 

This Bill brought forward by this government does not 

recognize the fact that urban citizens, urban MLAs have a 

totally different ability to service constituents than do rural 

MLAs.  Instead what this government has said is that they will 

all be the same, irregardless of miles, irregardless of natural 

boundaries, irregardless of natural trading areas, irregardless of 

the tenets that have built the system as we know it in Canada 

today. 

 

And I know the minister will stand up and say, well it's the 

same as Manitoba.  And that, Mr. Chairman, is simply not a 

fair comparison because the province of Manitoba has over half 

of its citizenry living in one major urban centre and the rest 

only covering about a third of that province because the rest of 

it has a very, very sparse population because of geography. 



2752 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 1993 

So instead of having, as in Saskatchewan's case, two major 

urbans and several minor urbans uniformly spread around the 

province, all with communities of interest, all with trading 

areas, all to some extent regulated by natural boundaries such 

as the Saskatchewan River, this government sets in place the 

rules that mean those aspirations cannot be fully met.  And they 

will find all sorts of excuses, Mr. Chairman, of why this 

process has to go ahead earlier than is the norm, why this 

process has to have the margin tightened up to the tightest 

parameter in Canadian parliamentary democracy. 

 

I could see this, Mr. Chairman, if we were dealing with an 

island like Prince Edward Island, very small, cohesive, 

uniform.  I could see this if we were dealing with Metro 

Toronto where you had basically a very large population all 

under the same circumstance.  But we don't have those things, 

Mr. Chairman.  We don't have; we never will have. 

 

And if any government in this province puts in place 

regulations, whether they be economic, social, or electoral, 

which predicates against one area of the province against 

another, then yes you will have rural depopulation.  If you put 

enough things in place that say to people who live outside of 

the major urban areas, there are restraints, constraints, there are 

reasons why you should not live here, then they will not live 

there, Mr. Chairman.  They will say:  I am a second-class 

citizen; why should I continue to reside in an area that is under 

attack constantly on the economic front, on the social front, and 

now I believe on the electoral front? 

 

That is why, Mr. Chairman, I believe the challenge presented to 

people in the province of Saskatchewan, a challenge that this 

official opposition took up, was to come up with a system that 

met those aspirations, those reasons for being in the province of 

Saskatchewan with its large land area and its diverse 

population. 

 

And it seemed to me, Mr. Chairman, if the number one 

problem that we were trying to address was fewer MLAs, then 

we should address that problem in a manner that allowed those 

fewer MLAs to provide as close as possible the quality of 

service that 66 MLAs used to provide, that that quality of 

service because there was fewer members available had to be 

done in a more cost-effective, had to be done in a more 

institutional way than we had seen in the past. 

 

And that is why, Mr. Chairman, we suggested as an alternative 

the fact that there should be synergy between federal and 

provincial ridings in the province of Saskatchewan, that 

because so many programs and delivery mechanisms today are 

jointly funded and shared by provincial and federal levels of 

government, that if fewer MLAs are going to be available to 

the population that there should be different ways to make 

those MLAs more effective. 

 

(1515) 

I would suggest to you, Mr. Chairman, that that is one way, but 

I'm also not suggesting to you or to this Legislative Assembly 

that the proposal as put forward by the official opposition is the 

right one.  I believe, Mr. Chairman, if we were doing this 

properly, that the commission as struck in the province of 

Saskatchewan, should have the ability to choose from many 

options, not simply the one dictated by a majority of 56 New 

Democrat MLAs. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Chairman, that that is arrogant; that 56 New 

Democrat MLAs are not the only ones in the province of 

Saskatchewan with ideas how fewer numbers of MLAs can be 

more effective in the service to the voters of this province.  I 

am sure, Mr. Chairman, in giving a true functioning, workable 

commission, that they indeed would be flooded with options 

from which to choose and perhaps combine in coming to what 

would be a better system. 

 

And I say to you, Mr. Chairman, another reason that the 

official opposition came to this conclusion was that those 14 

mandated constitutional units of federal boundaries would help 

depoliticize the process in Saskatchewan, that the accusations 

of gerrymander of the narrow interest of the governing majority 

would then not be the leading factor in electoral boundary 

redistribution.  That particular mandate of the federal electoral 

officer is one I think that is recognized Canada-wide as being a 

good process.  As I've said in this House before, Mr. Chairman, 

and I say to the minister, anyone attending those hearings over 

a number of years, as I have done and I'm sure members of his 

party have done, have known that those commissions have 

established a good reputation with Saskatchewan voters and 

Canadian voters. 

 

Given the premise that you would start out with those 14 

constitutionally mandated units, it then would be very simple 

for a non-partisan commission without its hands tied to then 

divide each of those into four appropriate units adhering to the 

principle that the Minister of Justice talks about of having a 

very small variation. 

 

And there's another benefit to this, Mr. Chairman, that I think 

most people don't realize, is that traditionally when we have 

large urban growth in a particular suburb of a major 

Saskatchewan city, what it does when it grows is it sets in place 

a tumbling action.  It is like the whole house of cards has to be 

knocked down and restarted because we've had urban growth in 

one particular neighbourhood.  Because in order to redefine 

those particular boundaries, it then knocks out the rest of the 

boundaries in the province. 

 

I say, Mr. Chairman, if that occurs, it would be much easier to 

adjust the boundaries within that particularly mandated federal 

unit to adhere to the principles than it would be to redraw the 

entire map of the province.  And that would be done at far less 

cost. 

 

And therefore if you had in one of the Saskatoon ridings a 

major growth in a particular suburb, it would be very simple 

some time to realign the four boundaries within that mandated 

unit to bring them 



June 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2753 

back into some type of representational balance rather than 

knocking out every boundary within the particular city and 

surrounding area and in effect knocking out all the boundaries 

in the province and starting over again.  That is a process, I say, 

Mr. Chairman, which is expensive and not necessary. 

 

It would then allow the bigger question to be dealt with as has 

been tradition after every second census, approximately every 

10 years.  And if, if Saskatchewan's constitutionally mandated 

number of seats were to change, it then would be very simple 

to amend our own electoral boundaries Act to redefine the 

number of seats which would occur within those mandated 

boundaries -- very simple, very cost effective, and easy for the 

voting public to understand. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I find it utterly bizarre that the constituents of 

Bengough-Milestone, a provincial riding -- now one of 66 -- 

would have four different federal boundaries within its own 

provincial riding.  In other words, an individual living in the 

middle of that particular riding possibly could have four federal 

MPs (Member of Parliament) within a few miles. 

 

Now I say to you, Mr. Chairman, one of the problems that we 

do have in our system is that I think we have too much political 

manoeuvring going on at various times, federally and 

provincially.  I believe that if you had coterminous boundaries 

that you would have the situation of provincial MLAs and 

federal MPs, irregardless of their political stripe, having to 

work closer together on behalf of their mutual constituents, 

mutual constituents on the delivery of the programs that they 

pay for as taxpayers -- that they pay for as taxpayers -- rather 

than some of the gamesmanship which we have seen occur in 

the past. 

 

And I think if you go out and ask the average voter and 

taxpayer if that is a good idea of coterminous boundaries, they 

will tell you, yes.  Every major newspaper in this province, Mr. 

Chairman, has commented on the idea and said, yes.  And it 

probably will not be accepted by this government simply 

because it was a Tory thought. 

 

That was the comment that the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix wrote.  

It was similar in the Leader-Post.  And once again I say to you, 

Mr. Chairman, the idea put forward by this particular 

opposition party should not necessarily be the one that would 

be accepted because I believe the electoral commission should 

have that ability. 

 

The Minister of Justice has said in this Legislative Assembly 

that he wants to consult with the Leader of the Liberal Party 

and the Leader of the Official Opposition to pick the 

commissioners.  Well that's a grand thought, Mr. Chairman, but 

picking commissioners to do what?  To simply deal with the 

prearranged rules as dictated by the NDP majority in this 

House? 

 

That isn't a process, Mr. Chairman, that I feel terribly 

comfortable with.  That isn't a process that I would want to 

recommend a prominent citizen in our 

province take part in, because what I would be doing is 

recommending to that citizen that they simply do the bidding of 

the New Democratic Party, that they would not have, within 

their hands, the ability to truly, truly work out a system to have 

fewer MLAs more effective. 

 

And I also believe -- and I know the Minister of Justice will 

take great issue with this -- I also believe, Mr. Chairman, that 

the fundamentals of the British parliamentary system as it 

applies in Canada would be better upheld using the 14 federal 

boundaries because they do allow for more variance than the 5 

per cent between them.  And they do that for some very 

specific reasons as they do throughout Canada because they are 

able to take into consideration those natural boundaries and 

those trading areas that the Supreme Court of our country has 

upheld not once, not twice, but to my understanding three 

different times -- three different times.  And even then, even 

though that variance is recognized under the last redistribution 

in this province, Mr. Chairman, every effort was made to bring 

those federal boundaries within the small variances proposed in 

this Bill. 

 

And I, Mr. Chairman, do not feel threatened by the fact that for 

instance Kindersley, Lloydminster which uses the boundaries 

of the North and South Saskatchewan River with very few 

crossings and ferries as a natural boundary worth recognizing, 

that the citizens of Lloydminster who live in a tax free zone 

because of Alberta are a special trading area recognized.  That's 

what those boundaries do, Mr. Chairman. 

 

My suspicion -- and I'll let the Minister of Justice counter this 

-- is that one of the reasons that the proposal does not fly with 

the New Democratic Party is because if we look at the cities of 

Saskatoon and Regina, those boundary changes that would be 

necessitated by this plan would throw most of the front benches 

into a real quandary because they would be in a position of 

competing for seats.  They would be competing for seats.  And 

one does not have to take a very long look at the electoral map 

to know that that would be the case, Mr. Chairman.  I say to 

you that is not a credible reason.  That is not a credible reason 

to change the electoral law of the province or to be against 

changing the electoral law of the province. 

 

If the Premier and others . . . and we must recognize, Mr. 

Chairman, and I believe there's eight or nine front-bench 

cabinet members from those two major cities, that is not a good 

enough reason not to do as the government has said themselves 

to look at how we have fairness, cost efficiency, and a 

reduction in the number of MLAs. 

 

Mr. Chairman, there are proposals, I believe, that any electoral 

commission in the province who was truly independent, who 

truly had a powerful mandate, that could put in place a system 

that we can be proud of for a long time to come. 

 

Mr. Chairman, under what the NDP are proposing in this 

Assembly, I have a really good idea of what the 



2754 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 1993 

electoral map of this province will look like.  I have a very 

good idea, as do most rural people.  And I would hope that the 

government would simply not continue using the ruse of being 

cost effective, of being fair, in making their arguments. 

 

It is a well-known fact, Mr. Chairman, dollars and cents wise, 

that the reduction which has occurred to the cabinet of 

Saskatchewan with the resignation of two ministers will save in 

dollars and cents the equivalent of the loss of eight 

back-benchers in this Assembly, that the costs that the 

taxpayers of this province will save in total cost by the 

reduction from 66 to 58 will be accomplished if the Premier 

does not reappoint two individuals to the cabinet of this 

province.  That simple. 

 

That is simply a ruse, Mr. Chairman, and I don't believe 

Saskatchewan taxpayers and voters will buy into that.  The 

reduction has already been achieved in this Assembly simply 

by two members resigning from cabinet. 

 

Mr. Chairman, what I would ask the minister today is to simply 

amend his own legislation to take the constraints off of the 

electoral commission.  Simply take the constraints off and 

allow them to choose the system that Saskatchewan voters will 

feel most comfortable with -- will feel most comfortable with 

after consultation with the very people who will do the voting.  

The very people who will pay the bills, the very people, as the 

member from Greystone was so fond of saying, the people that 

pay the bills for this particular place and we are simply the 

tenants in. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, I will take my chances with my proposal 

at that time.  I would gladly put forward the arguments, the 

reasons, the fairness issues, the cost-effectiveness issues before 

that commission. And I would be proud as the Leader of the 

Opposition to submit names to such a commission because I 

think it would be a worthwhile cause that any Saskatchewan 

citizen could feel proud of entertaining. 

 

But I can tell you, Mr. Chairman, it does not give me a great 

deal of satisfaction of asking an individual in our society to sit 

on the predetermined commission which this government is 

proposing, because the cries that will arise about unfairness, 

about gerrymander, about taking away the rights of certain 

segments of our society, will be there. 

 

(1530) 

 

And there's only one way for this government to negate that, 

only one way and the Minister of Justice can do it very simply.  

If there is no other agenda, if there is no other agenda except 

fairness, in efficiency, and reducing the number of MLAs in 

this Assembly, then I know that could be done by a truly 

independent commission and they would do it with pride. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, I'll reserve any further comment I will 

have for the clause-by-clause discussion of this Bill. 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  This is really a 

fascinating subject and a very interesting debate.  It was during 

the second-reading stage and it is again with the member's 

speech leading off the work of the committee. 

 

The member hints at all sorts of dark motives that he believes 

lies behind this Bill, and I can do nothing more than simply 

deny that there are such motives here.  We made our position 

very clear on the question of constituency boundaries long 

before we were elected government.  Some of the principles are 

included in our democratic reform paper and in our various 

speeches at the time that the electoral boundary legislation was 

debated in this House. 

 

The most . . . One of the very important things -- I was going to 

say the most important thing; maybe it is the most important -- 

is the reduction in the size of the legislature.  That is a move 

that is just filled with significance in this day and age. 

 

As I said in my second-reading speech, and I'm sure the 

members opposite have had the same experiences, wherever 

you go in this province, wherever you go in this province, you 

are met with the statement from our citizens that this 

government is too large, that government is too large, there's 

too much government, that we have to reduce the size of 

government, that government's too expensive. 

 

And this happens over and over again to all of us.  And I think 

we were in a position, all governments are in a position, where 

we have to respond to that. Because the fact of the matter is 

that there is too much government. 

 

This province has 66 members representing about 666,000 

people, which means that we each represent about 10,000.  If 

we look at Alberta, we find each member there representing 

something over 18,000.  British Columbia, they represent over 

25,000.  In Ontario each member represents 48,000 people. 

 

So when people suggest to us that we have too much 

government, that we have too large an Assembly here, we have 

to admit that it is a very large Assembly.  Relatively speaking, 

it is very large.  So I think we have to respond to that, and we 

have to respond to it in some significant way. 

 

We felt that a 12 per cent reduction, from 66 to 58, was a 

significant reduction, and so we put it forward on that basis.  It 

could have been a larger reduction, but 12 per cent seemed to 

be significant and seems to have satisfied the wishes of people 

in that we have had a very large number of expressions of 

satisfaction with the reduction in the size of the legislature. 

 

There is some limit, I think, to a province the size of 

Saskatchewan, to how low you can go in terms of the numbers 

of members because, as we know, the constituencies, the rural 

constituencies can get very, very large if you reduce the 

number of members much lower than is being proposed.  Even 

as it is, I would think that some of the more lightly populated 

areas of 



June 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2755 

this province are going to be included in very large 

constituencies. 

 

It is cost-effective.  It does save a million dollars a year.  A 

million dollars is not going to balance the budget, but a million 

dollars is a significant amount of money and is above all, Mr. 

Chair, an important symbol.  It is a symbolic thing.  It's been a 

very, very long time indeed since the legislature of 

Saskatchewan has been reduced in size -- a very long time 

indeed.  And I think that in this day and age of fiscal restraint 

and deficits, it is an important move.  And so we have proposed 

that we do it now. 

 

The second matter that I'd like to address is the question of the 

differential between constituencies.  One of the problems that 

we have with the present Bill . . . with the present law on the 

basis of which all members are here, is that it is based upon a 

tolerance of plus or minus 25 per cent from the average, and 

that is too much.  We felt so at the time; we definitely feel so 

now. 

 

The member from River Heights, Saskatoon River Heights, sits 

in this Assembly representing 13,224 people.  The member 

from Morse sits in this legislature representing 7,120 people.  

The member from Saskatoon River Heights represents almost 

twice as many as the member from Morse.  That's wrong in 

principle.  We all know it's wrong in principle. 

 

There are arguments why constituencies should be of different 

size, but there are no arguments that one person's vote should 

be more important than another person's votes.  It is a 

democratic principle that we should strive as closely as 

possible to achieve voter equality.  That is contemplated by the 

Constitution of Canada certainly as an objective, and it is a 

well-recognized, commonly accepted democratic principle. 

 

And so we want to move in that direction.  We made that plain 

at the time of the debates in this House during the last 

government.  We made it plain in our democratic reform paper.  

We make it plain now.  We want to get closer to a system of 

one person, one vote. 

 

And I don't fear, I don't give any credence to, the argument that 

somehow urban and rural interests in this province are so 

different that allowances should be made for them.  I made the 

point in my second-reading speech -- I make it again today -- 

that we're all in the same boat.  We're going to sail together or 

we're going to sink together.  And we don't do ourself any 

service at all by trying to perpetuate the idea that there are 

divisions between rural and urban Saskatchewan.  There are 

not.  There are 55 members in the government caucus; 41 of 

them -- 41 of them, fully 80 per cent of them -- are from rural 

or small-town backgrounds.  These are not big-city kids who 

are governing in the interests of the big cities.  These are farm 

kids and small-town kids who are here with a broad knowledge 

of all of the issues of Saskatchewan and trying to do our best to 

govern on behalf of the people of this province. 

That leads me to the third matter, and that is the question of 

what the commission can take into account.  The member 

talked about the rivers, the natural boundaries, and I think those 

are very important factors -- very, very important factors.  As 

he mentioned, there are long stretches of river without any 

crossings in them, and so you have to be careful how you draw 

those boundaries so that people don't have to travel so far to get 

to the rest of the constituency. 

 

In section 14(2) there are a large number of considerations that 

the commission drawing the boundaries should take into 

account, and those include geographic considerations, sparsity 

or density of population, relative rates of growth of population, 

accessibility of regions, and the size and shape of regions.  As 

well, the section speaks to special community of interests or 

diversity of interests and physical features such as river banks 

and the like. 

 

So we have given those instructions to the commission, that 

they should pay attention to those things.  And I would think in 

the normal course they would.  They have to this point.  The 

member has cited the example of how that has been the case, I 

think, in the case of the Kindersley constituency.  And there are 

many other examples where the natural features form a 

boundary. 

 

I want to deal with the idea of using the federal constituency 

boundaries as a base, and that was the main thrust of the 

opposition's proposal.  And they've indicated some flexibility 

on it, but it was a very interesting idea.  And I want the 

Assembly to know that we considered it very, very carefully. 

 

We, as I have already said, wanted a maximum variation of 

plus or minus 5 per cent from the average numbers of voters 

per constituency.  That is to say you calculate the average; a 

constituency could have 5 per cent more people or 5 per cent 

less people.  That would allow an overall variance of 10 per 

cent, which is not one person, one vote, but which is close 

enough to it in a province like Saskatchewan to be satisfactory. 

 

We are heartened that this is a practical approach to it because 

of the configuration of federal boundaries as they were drawn 

in Saskatchewan prior to the 1988 election.  The federal law 

permits a variation of plus or minus 25 per cent and the 

commission in Saskatchewan achieved less than 5 per cent, 

plus or minus.  So we know that it can be done in 

Saskatchewan.  Furthermore, we have the example of Manitoba 

next door which the member has already referred to.  And it's a 

valid example because you have half the population in 

Winnipeg and half the population outside Winnipeg.  And yet 

they were able to draw boundaries for that province which 

were less than, well really less than 3 per cent, plus or minus.  

Maybe easier than here but they were able to achieve it and 

they're satisfied with it.  They're satisfied with it.  So we take 

heart from that. 

 

We also know that large constituencies are manageable.  The 

federal member from Swift 



2756 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 1993 

Current-Maple Creek-Assiniboia has a constituency that looks 

like it covers half of Saskatchewan -- huge seat.  And yet Mr. 

Wilson covers that with relative ease, and he's able to do that 

because of the very sophisticated means of communication that 

we all have at our disposal now.  We have our telephones and 

we have our cellular telephones and we have our faxes and we 

have our mail delivery service of one sort or another.  And 

those will become more so in the future. 

 

And if Geoff Wilson can do it in that huge seat of his, then 

surely we can do it in seats that will be probably less than 25 

per cent the size of Geoff Wilson's seat. 

 

The problem with using the federal ridings as a base is . . . well 

there are a number of them.  First of all, if you look at the 

referendum enumeration, that is the referendum on the 

Charlottetown accord conducted in 1992, you will see how out 

of line the population figures have become in a short space of 

five years.  You have constituencies that are larger than 57,000 

and constituencies that are barely 40,000 and any number of all 

the variations in between.  Saskatoon-Dundurn has more than 

57,000 whereas Mackenzie has 40,000 and 

Kindersley-Lloydminster has 40,000.  These are big variations. 

 

If we were to simply take that federal map, the boundaries of 

which are as they are today, and cut each of those in four, we 

would have remarkably different variations between provincial 

constituencies.  Kindersley-Lloyd would have an average 

number of voters of 10,000 then for each provincial 

constituency -- just by dividing 40,000 by 4 -- and 

Saskatoon-Dundurn would have I think 15,000, nearly 15,000. 

 

(1545) 

 

So it just doesn't work.  It may have worked in 1987, but we 

know the population numbers have changed sufficiently so that 

it just simply wouldn't work. 

 

We also have the 1991 census figures to show that that 

variation exists in the total population.  I was talking about the 

voting list with respect to '92.  The 1991 census shows 

Saskatoon-Clark's Crossing with over 85,000 people living in 

it, while Mackenzie has just over 60,000 and Swift 

Current-Maple Creek-Assiniboia has 62,000. 

 

There are very large variations in population in a five-year 

period.   So that's one reason why we weren't satisfied with 

simply dividing up each federal constituency into four parts. 

 

The other consideration is that we just have better numbers at 

our disposal.  I mean they're right here now; the 1991 census 

figures are here and available.  They're different figures than 

were used when the boundaries were drawn for the 1988 

federal election.  So why would we not take advantage of those 

new population data? 

 

We are also worried about tying our legislation to the 

federal legislation in the long run, and the reason for that is that 

the federal legislation allows a variation of plus or minus 25 

per cent.  That's probably appropriate in the country of Canada 

considering the population distribution across the country.  But 

in Saskatchewan the last federal redistribution was within plus 

or minus 5 per cent, but that's not to say that the next one will 

be within plus or minus 5.  It could be plus or minus 15 or it 

could be plus or minus 25 and still be within the federal law, 

within the framework of the federal legislation, and we're not 

prepared to tie our wagon to that particular star. 

 

I'm sorry to be taking so long, Mr. Chair, but these were very, 

very interesting points raised by the member and I'll try to get it 

over with here quickly and sit down. 

 

We have tried to guard against any allegation of a gerrymander 

by constructing a commission which is as unpolitical and 

objective as we possibly could.  It is much different than 

commissions which have been constructed in the past.  There 

are no obviously political people on it.  For example, the Chief 

Electoral Officer is not a member of this commission.  That 

person has been a member from time to time in the past.  So 

we've gone to some lengths to ensure that the commission will 

be non-political. 

 

I think I'll stop at that point.  I haven't covered all of the points 

raised by the member, but he looks like he wants to get to his 

feet. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I certainly do.  

Because what the minister says about his commission, the good 

Lord himself could serve on that commission, Mr. Chairman, 

and if his hands are tied, the eventual outcome, it's already 

happened. 

 

The minister's words ring hollow for a number of reasons, and 

I'll point them out to him.  In this Bill he has no hesitation 

about mandating two northern ridings, yet all of a sudden 

there's a special consideration.  They both happen to be New 

Democrat at the present.  They probably will vote that way in 

the future for some time to come because that has been long 

and historic.  And yet they have no compulsion at all about 

mandating those two areas. 

 

And yet the technological advances in society, with satellites 

and all of that other communication wizardry that we are so 

infatuated with today, is as available there as it is in the 

south-west part of this province, as it is in the north-west, as 

anywhere else -- yet no hesitation. 

 

Now the other thing, Mr. Minister, where your arguments ring 

absolutely hollow -- absolutely hollow -- you mix and match 

voter numbers and population numbers all the time.  And I'm 

going to give the minister an example of why what they're 

proposing here by using the quotient, which is total 

constituency population rather than voter population, is 

inherently wrong. 

 

Mr. Chairman, you could have an urban growth area, 



June 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2757 

one that has significant ethnic make-up where you would have 

very high birth rates, and if you set the quotient at 11,000 or 

12,000 or whatever within a boundary with a birth rate higher 

than the norm, you would then have significant numbers of 

non-voting-age people. 

 

You could then have a riding in the south-west part of this 

province with a very mature population, with a high proportion 

of senior citizens, with a birth rate, which is the case today, of 

less than 1.  In other words, people are not even replacing 

themselves.  So you would have the possibility of having a 

large rural riding with a mature population of about 11,500 

which may include 9,000 voters quite easily. 

 

And yet that would be stacked up against an urban riding with 

a high proportion of children in it, which might have the same 

population quotient but may only have 5 or 6,000 voters -- 5 or 

6,000 voters.  By the formula that the minister is proposing, the 

commission have their hands tied.  So in the case of the large 

rural riding where the majority of the people are voters who the 

member has to drive hundreds of miles to service, as opposed 

to an urban area where the member can walk across it in 20 

minutes, where half the population are children . . . And the 

minister says it's hypothetical.  Well I can take you places in 

this city, Mr. Chairman, where you will find hundreds of 

under-the-voting-age people walking the streets.  And it is a 

fact.  And yet the minister says this is fair, that we're going to 

use the population, not the voter quotient. 

 

Mr. Minister, tell me the fairness of that.  You have no 

hesitation to mandate two northern seats, two northern seats 

with very small populations, with all the technology available.  

And yet you'll use the population quotient to make disparity 

between a large rural riding with a mature population made up 

primarily of voters versus an urban one which could be 

primarily non-voters. 

 

Now you tell me that's fair, Mr. Chairman?  I don't think it is.  I 

wonder how the minister answers that.  And that's why the 

commission should have the power and not the minister, 

because that's what makes us suspect as to the motives of this 

minister and this government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, and to the member, this is a 

very interesting proposition.  And I recognize the validity of 

the question. 

 

If you consider the case of the United States, they draw and 

redraw their boundaries upon population numbers.  If you go to 

Australia, they draw and redraw their boundaries on the basis 

of voters.  And who's to say that one is right and that the other 

is wrong . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member says, not 

of the Senate.  And that's right.  They have an equal Senate.  

They have a Triple E Senate.  But with respect to the House of 

Representatives, those boundaries are redrawn all the time.  

Yes. 

 

The freshest data that we have available to work with 

in Canada is the census data.  And that comes to us now every 

five years.  And the other factor that is argued in the literature 

of course is that we as members of the legislature don't just 

represent voters, we represent everybody.  And that would 

include people under voting age, and they have issues that are 

important to them.  And that of course is an argument with 

which the member is familiar. 

 

So far as the two northern ridings are concerned, those have for 

a long time been considered a special case in Saskatchewan 

and in drawing our boundaries.  And the line, the southern line 

is the same here as it was under the legislation passed by your 

government . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No that doesn't 

make it right, I realize that.  But at least, you know, we're not 

radically changing things to try and favour ourself or anything 

like that. 

 

We simply recognize that the interests of . . . or the situation in 

northern Saskatchewan is different.  The road transportation is 

very, very difficult.  And that's the case both in Athabasca and 

in Cumberland.  And the distances are huge and the 

populations are sparse.  And it is a special case with social and 

economic problems that are different and more severe than the 

rest of the country.  And I just remind the member that it's not 

too many years ago that one of those seats was a Liberal 

stronghold.  Now in recent years they've been a New 

Democratic stronghold.  But you know, times change, things 

happen.  And we just simply try and appeal to them with our 

policies and try and establish credibility with them as do you.  

We'll see how it goes. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, I guess there's no point in 

belabouring it.  But you don't seem to see the inconsistency.  

And you're right, we do represent everyone.  But I would 

suggest to you the issues of the day, which are taxation, which 

are the social conditions under which we live, I don't imagine 

you or I converse with too many five-year-olds on those topics 

on a daily basis.  We represent voters, taxpayers.  And the 

anticipation has always been that those are the people that will 

elect us.  The five-year-olds don't vote, Mr. Minister.  The 

10-year-olds don't vote.  The 15-year-olds don't vote.  They 

don't vote till they're 18 years of age. 

 

Your system here says that high population growth areas 

peopled by children in urban areas will have better 

representation than areas peopled by mature voters with very 

little population growth.  And I just find that hard, very hard to 

accept.  That flies, to me, in the face of everything that our 

system stands for, totally flies in the face.  And I'm wondering 

why you would move off the voter quotient to the population 

quotient and use that as your argument, because if that's the 

case, then you have no right at all to mandate two northern 

ridings in this province -- no right at all. 

 

And there is a fairness.  There is a fairness question for 

representation in this legislature and how MLAs serve their 

constituents.  And I just can't see how the towns and villages 

and the farm population of this province, 



2758 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 1993 

where we know we aren't having many children born these 

days because the young people are moving out because of the 

policies of your government . . . They're not staying there.  

They're going to Calgary.  They're going other places, that the 

young people are moving out. 

 

And they're not having the babies there any more.  Your 

Minister of Health gives that as a reason why she can shut 

down 52 rural hospitals.  She says we don't need to deliver 

babies out there any more because there aren't any being born. 

 

So what we are left with out there is simply voters and 

taxpayers, and yet you say to them it's fair to have many more 

of you in a large rural riding, than it is in a downtown urban 

riding.  And I don't see the fairness in that, and I wouldn't see 

the fairness in going out on the street and getting into a 

conversation with somebody's 10-year-old about the taxation 

issues or the health issues or FCL or anything else your 

government's up to these days because it wouldn't be fair to 

them. 

 

And yet you're claiming them as your reason for delivering this 

system and tying the hands of the commission, and I don't think 

that's fair.  It's not fair to those children, and it certainly isn't 

fair to the other voters who expect, as you say, equal 

representation, and that's simply not the case.  And I don't 

know how you can stand in your place and justify it, I really 

don't.  I'd like an answer, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well the answer is that the census data, 

which is a total population data, is the best data that we have.  

It's the best available data, and it will continue to be that.  I'm 

not alarmed by it because the numbers . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- We know you're not. 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well we worked some numbers though.  

Let me just give them to you.  If you look at total population 

and then look back at the present legislation with 29 southern 

urban constituencies and compare it to the 35 southern rural 

constituencies and if you look at total population, they're about 

even.  There are 49.28 per cent in urban and 50.72 per cent in 

rural. 

 

If you then go to compare total voters, you wind up again with 

practically 50/50.  Now there's a slight shift in favour of urbans 

but just slight, because there the numbers are 50.11 urban and 

49.89 per cent rural.  Again, practically 50/50.  So we're not 

talking about a big difference.  There's no huge difference in 

outcome. 

 

And when you consider that in relation to the best available 

data, the census just seems to me a logical thing to do, and 

that's our justification for doing it.  Our justification is not that 

it's important to represent five-year-olds.  I mentioned that that 

was a point raised in the literature.  But it certainly is the best 

available data. 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, you said the 

federal data wasn't good enough because it wasn't up to date.  

We all know that that data will be updated probably about 

1996-97 because they have to do their system.  But the minister 

and I both know, for instance, that the birth rate in the 

aboriginal community is far higher than it is in some of the 

other areas of our province.  And that's not to denigrate it, it's 

just a fact of life.  We know that the aboriginal community 

tends to live closer together as do other ethnic groupings. 

 

The simple fact is, Mr. Minister, that I believe the legislation is 

flawed when you apply those principles because you have the 

possibility of having wide variations in the number of voters, 

not constituents -- voters.  And I think the whole principle that 

we have worked on here has been the application of voters and 

taxpayers and how their wishes, the people that pay for this 

building, that pay for the seats we sit in, the per diems we get, 

are the ones that need the level of equality and fairness of 

representation. 

 

And I would have thought, and I am sure that if a commission 

were challenged with those parameters, that a commission 

would look long and hard at that.  And that's why I'm saying to 

you, Mr. Minister, if you were going to do this process ahead 

of schedule and there is no politics tied to this, then you would 

not hesitate one minute in having those arguments placed 

before a commission of eminent people in this province to sort 

out.  You would not have the slightest hesitation.  And, sir, if I 

were here defending the previous boundary Bill, you could 

make those comments to me. 

 

But I have come forward with a proposal, my caucus has come 

forward with a proposal, which is diametrically different, 

diametrically different than the previous boundary proposal.  

And if the will of the people is to change that system, then I say 

we change it, change it good, and change it for the long term 

with something that is lasting.  Because for too long there has 

been a cloud of suspicion hanging over that process. 

 

And I'm telling you, sir, that without that commission having 

its hands freed up, that cloud will stay there.  And politicians 

being what politicians are, they will take every opportunity to 

point it out.  And whether it's my party or this party or your 

party or whatever party is put in that position, it will happen. 

 

What the public is demanding today is a better process.  And I 

don't believe you're delivering that.  I don't believe a process 

that says that five-year-olds equate with a 55-year-old farmer 

who has paid his bills, supported his school district, paid a 

disproportionate share of his education tax, and lives out a 

hundred miles from a major centre and continues to be a pillar 

in his community, I don't think that comparison is a fair one.  I 

really don't.  Maybe I'm biased, but I don't think it's a fair one.  

And I would have thought you would have wanted a system 

that didn't say to that individual, you don't equate with 



June 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2759 

somebody's five-year-old in downtown Regina.  I don't think 

you would want that kind of a system, and I see that kind of a 

system cropping up here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, Mr. Chair, I must say to the hon. 

member that when you look at the outcomes, the difference 

between calculating on the basis of total population and total 

voters is just insignificant.  It is . . . the shift, the difference is 

less than 1 per cent.  And we're talking here about a . . . yes, it's 

less than 1 per cent.  And the variation that the commission has 

to work with is a total of 10 per cent, plus or minus 5 from the 

average, and easily accommodated. 

 

And if you balance that against the advantage of having the 

best available data from the census, which is generally 

recognized to be really incredibly accurate, it just seems to me 

to be the more logical way to go.  Granted it's not the only way 

to go, but it does seem to be the most logical. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 24 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 25 

 

The division bells rang from 4:07 p.m. until 4:15 p.m. 

 

Clause 25 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Romanow Hamilton 

Thompson Trew 

Simard Draper 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Shillington Sonntag 

Koskie Flavel 

Teichrob Cline 

Solomon Wormsbecker 

Goulet Crofford 

Kowalsky Knezacek 

Mitchell Harper 

MacKinnon Kluz 

Penner Carlson 

Cunningham Renaud 

Upshall Langford 

Lautermilch Jess 

Murray Haverstock 

-- 34 

 

Nays 

Swenson Boyd 

Muirhead Toth 

Devine Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

-- 10 

 

Schedule agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill on division. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

Bill No. 79 -- An Act to Provide for the Division of 

Saskatchewan into Constituencies for the Election of 

Members of the Legislative Assembly 

 

The Speaker: -- When shall this Bill be read a third time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- By leave of the Assembly, now. 

 

The Speaker: -- Leave is not required. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave I would ask 

the Assembly revert back to motions for return on the issue of 

private members' day. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to introduce to 

you, and through you to members of the Assembly, 20 senior 

students who come to us this afternoon from other provinces -- 

Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario -- and from various parts of 

Saskatchewan.  They are attending the elderhostel program at 

the university and being hosted by the university extension 

program and are resident at Luther College. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they have a full week, and some of their 

programing includes: From Preacher to Politician: T.C. 

(Tommy) Douglas Transition, by Dr. John Oussoren; The 

Voice and the Ghost by Jill Spelliscy, talking about the golden 

age of radio and the role that media plays and talking about 

some of the shadows from the past.  And many of us have 

heard the stories, as I mentioned yesterday, of listening in the 

darkened room to Tommy on the radio. So I'm sure that that 

will be also interesting.  And Maggie Siggins is also 

conducting a class: Unsung Heroes of the West. 

 

It was my pleasure to be with them last evening to have supper 

with them at the home of the president of the university, and 

I'm looking forward to meeting with them and answering any 

questions they might have about some of the exciting 

procedure they've witnessed already in the House today and 

questions they may have about members of the Assembly. 

 

They've also had an opportunity to have an extra student in 

their program this morning, as the member from Regina Lake 

Centre attended one of the sessions on Tommy. 

 

And so I would ask all members to join with me in greeting our 

guests of the elderhostel program that are with us this 

afternoon. 



2760 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 1993 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 

 

Return Nos. 18, 21-25, 28, 29, 32, 34, 35, 42, 43, 45, 66, 68 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I move 

that an order of the Assembly do issue for a return no. 18 

showing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Now, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to try 

this.  What I propose that we do here is that we move an 

amendment that incorporates return nos. 18, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 

28, 29, 32, 34, 35, 42, 43, 45, 66, and 68.  And when I read the 

amendment, I think members will understand that this will 

speed up the process and get the response that they would get 

by going through them individually. 

 

I move, seconded by the member for Regina Churchill Downs: 

 

 1) that the words "each of the following:" be added after the 

word "regarding"; 

 

 2) that the following be added after the word 

"commissioner": 

 

 "the Liquor Board, the Department of Mediation Services, 

the Milk Control Board, the Municipal Employees' 

Superannuation Commission, the Municipal Financing 

Corporation of Saskatchewan, the Provincial Inquiry Centre, 

and the Public and Private Rights Board, the Saskatchewan 

Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission, the Saskatoon Health 

Board, the Saskatchewan Securities Commission, the 

Agricultural Development Fund, the Agricultural Credit 

Corporation of Saskatchewan, the Board of Examiners, the 

Saskatchewan Police Commission, and the Surface Rights 

Arbitration Board". 

 

I so move. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Just for clarification, Mr. Speaker, I'm 

assuming that's an amendment rather than a motion.  All right.  

Now that we know that we're talking about the amendment to 

the original motion from the member from Moosomin, I have 

no problem, Mr. Speaker, in getting up and endorsing a process 

that will expedite matters.  But I would indicate right now that 

we are going to be moving against the amendment, not because 

we are against the process of making it quicker and faster and 

more expeditiously handled, but what we are opposed to is the 

fact that we are not able, Mr. Speaker, to get the information 

that we are looking for. 

 

In the process of making that amendment, not only does it 

amalgamate many, many of the questions that we have asked 

legitimately of the government, but this affords an opportunity 

for the government to dodge, to duck, and to machinate so that 

indeed the questions 

that we want answered are not going to be answered properly. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, what we are going to be doing is simply 

this:  we'll be voting against this amendment.  We will be 

voting against the motion as amended, simply because this is 

one manner in which we will get some answers; otherwise 

we're not going to get anything. 

 

I just want to lay this out to the public so that they will 

understand what is going on here. 

 

Amendment agreed to on division. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

The Speaker: -- Items 2 to item 16 now are dropped because 

they have been dealt with by the House. 

 

Return Nos. 80, 81, 86, 91-93 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I move that an order of the Assembly do issue 

for return no. 80 showing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to do a similar 

amendment that would incorporate return nos. 80, 81, 86, 91, 

92, and 93.  And the amendment would read: 

 

 That all the words after the word "government" be deleted 

and the following substituted therefor: 

 

 "whether any relative of the Minister of Energy and Mines, 

the Minister of Justice, the Minister of Health, the Minister of 

Finance, the Associate Minister of Finance, or the Premier is 

employed by the government or any of its agencies or Crown 

corporations within the individual minister's responsibility." 

 

I so move. 

 

(1630) 

 

The Speaker: -- It makes it very difficult.  I think on further 

amendments the Government House Leader should indicate 

which motions these refer to.  It's not on here.  They could refer 

to really any one.  So I would ask the Government House 

Leader, on further amendments that he indicate which motions 

they pertain to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I read 

them to you again . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Yes, certainly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Okay, it's no. 80, 81, 86, 91, 92, and 

93. 

 

The Speaker: -- I'd ask the Government House Leader that in 

the future if he makes amendments to put them onto the 

amendment. 



June 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2761 

Amendment agreed to on division. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

The Speaker: -- Items 18 to 22 have been dealt with. 

 

Return Nos. 94-100, 107-109, 118-122, 138-156 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by my colleague, 

the member from Rosthern, that an order of the Assembly do 

issue for return no. 94 showing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as it would relate to 

return no. 94 and those that are left on the order paper between 

94 and 156, I would move the following amendment: 

 

 1) That the words "the conflict of interest policy of the 

government, whether one" be deleted and the following 

substituted therefor: "the following individuals:"; 

 

 2) That all the words after the words "Paul Mostoway" be 

deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

 "Donald Faris, Elwood Cowley, Bernard Poniatowski, 

Randall Nelson, Reginald Gross, Allen Engel, Edgar 

Kaeding, Norm Lusney, Gordon MacMurchy, Neil Byers, 

Ted Bowerman, Allan Blakeney, Dennis Banda, William 

Allen, Carl Siemens, Francis Schmeichel, William Sauter, 

Bob Robertson, Gordon Roberts, Charlotte Rasmussen, Bob 

Porter, Gerard Pikula, Irvin Perkins, Betty Payne, Keith 

Davis, Pat Connolley, Dixie Campbell-Tymchatyn, Dave 

Bridger, Lars Bracken, Ron Bishoff, Wayne Bim, Chris 

Banman, and Ross Arthur: whether any of these individuals 

is employed by the government or any of its agencies or 

Crown corporations". 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this would apply to the following, and I'll 

write these on the motion for you: no. 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 

100, 107, 108, 109, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122, 138, 139, 140, 

141, 142, 143, 144, 145, 146, 147, 148, 149, 150, 151, 152, 

153, 154, 155, 156, and that is . . . are the numbers inclusive. 

 

Amendment agreed to on division. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 195 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member 

from Rosthern, that an order of the Assembly do issue for a 

return no. 195 showing. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 196 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I move that an order of the Assembly do 

issue for a return no. 196 showing, seconded by the member 

from Maple Creek. 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member from Regina Churchill Downs: 

 

 Delete all the words after "regarding" and substitute therefor: 

 

 "the review of the health care in Saskatchewan: (1) was any 

study commissioned by the Department of Health with regard 

to the Regina Health Board's decision to terminate its 

contract with the VON on March 31, 1993;  (2) what are the 

government's plans for addiction services to youth and adults 

within the framework of the health reform; and (3) what 

studies were undertaken prior to the adoption of the wellness 

plan; what was the cost to the Government of 

Saskatchewan?" 

 

I so move. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 197 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move, seconded 

by the member from Souris-Cannington, that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for a return no. 197 showing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member from Regina Churchill Downs, an amendment that 

would: 

 

 delete sections 3(b), 3(c), and 3(d). 

 

I so move. 

 

Amendment agreed to on division. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 199 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move, seconded by 

my colleague the member from Kindersley, that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for a return no. 199 showing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for Churchill Downs, that an amendment be 

moved to delete parts 2, 3, and 4, and substitute therefor: 

 

 (2) which seniors are covered by the restructured drug plan; 

 

 (3) do seniors have adequate coverage for prescription drugs; 

and 

 

 (4) which seniors are eligible for insulin or oxygen coverage 

under the prescription drug plan. 



2762 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 1993 

I so move. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You've got the wrong amendment. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Return 199, no amendment to that. 

 

The Speaker: -- All right.  The question before the Assembly 

is motion for 199. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 200 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

move, seconded by the member from Morse, that an order of 

the Assembly do issue for return no. 200 showing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, now I'm going to 

move the amendment that I proposed to the . . . inadvertently to 

the previous motion.  But I'll repeat it: 

 

 delete parts (2), (3), and (4) and substitute therefor: 

 

 (2) which seniors are covered by the restructured drug plan; 

 

 (3) do seniors have adequate coverage for prescription drugs; 

and 

 

 (4) which seniors are eligible for insulin or oxygen coverage 

under the prescription drug plan. 

 

I so move. 

 

Amendment agreed to on division. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

(1645) 

Return No. 202 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I move, seconded by the member from 

Morse, that an order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 

202 showing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for Regina Churchill Downs: 

 

 an amendment that would delete Part (2). 

 

I so move. 

 

Amendment agreed to on division. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 204 

 

Mr. Devine: -- I moved, seconded by the member 

from Rosthern, that an order of the Assembly do issue for 

return no. 204 showing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to move an 

amendment, seconded by the member for Regina Churchill 

Downs: 

 

 to delete all the words after the word "regarding" and 

substitute the following therefor: 

 

 the health care services provided by the General Hospital and 

the recent comments by Dr. John Kim, what action has the 

minister taken to address the allegations made by Dr. John 

Kim regarding the waiting time for emergency surgery at the 

Regina General Hospital. 

 

I so move. 

 

Amendment agreed to on division. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 205 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I move, seconded by the member from 

Maple Creek, that an order of the Assembly do issue for return 

no. 205 showing, with no amendments allowed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- In the spirit of cooperation, there 

will be no amendment to this one. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 206 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move, seconded 

by the member from Arm River, that an order of the Assembly 

do issue for a return no. 206 showing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for Regina Churchill Downs, an amendment that: 

 

 In part (3) delete the words "have been eliminated from" and 

substitute therefor: "will be eligible for". 

 

 In part (4) delete the words "benefits from the remains of the 

children's dental plan", and substitute therefor, "dental 

benefits". 

 

 In part (5) delete the words "saving through denying children 

access", and substitute therefor, "save as a result of the 

changes". 

 

I so move. 

 

Amendment agreed to on division. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 



June 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2763 

Return No. 209 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by my colleague, 

the member for Kindersley, that an order of the Assembly do 

issue for a return no. 209 showing. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 211 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member from Morse, that an order of the Assembly do issue 

for return no. 211 showing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, because this Bill deals 

with the vote on Bill 38, and as the minister has indicated, the 

second-reading vote has already occurred, we will be voting 

against it. 

 

Motion negatived on division. 

 

Return No. 214 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move, seconded 

by the member from Morse, and an order of the Assembly do 

issue for return no. 214 showing. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 216 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by my colleague, 

the member from Wilkie, that an order of the Assembly do 

issue for a return no. 216 showing. 

 

Motion negatived. 

 

Return No. 218 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to move, 

seconded by the member from Estevan, that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for a return no. 218 showing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move an 

amendment, seconded by the member for Churchill Downs: 

 

 that we delete everything after "(1) A list of all trips by any 

Minister of the Government of Saskatchewan . ." and 

substitute therefor: 

 

 "out of the province of Saskatchewan in the fiscal year 

1992-93; and further provide the following: 

 

 . date, destination and purpose of trip; 

 

 . who accompanied the Minister; and 

 

 . the total cost of the trip." 

 

I so move. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 219 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member from Maple Creek, that an order of the Assembly do 

issue for return 219 showing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member from Regina Churchill Downs, an amendment that: 

 

 In part (1) delete the words "a French education system" and 

substitute therefor: "a component within education for French 

governance"; and 

 

 in part (2) delete the words "a third education system" and 

substitute therefor: "a component within education for French 

governance"; and 

 

 in part (3) delete the words "a third education system" and 

substitute therefor: "a component within education for French 

governance"; and 

 

 in part (4) delete the words "a French education system" and 

substitute therefor: "a component within education for French 

governance"; and further 

 

 delete part (5). 

 

I so move. 

 

Amendment agreed to on division. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 220 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move, seconded 

by the member from Estevan, to move that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return no. 220 showing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move an 

amendment, seconded by the member for Regina Churchill 

Downs, that: 

 

 In part (2) after the words ". . . November 1, 1991" add the 

words "on file". 

 

I so move. 

 

Amendment agreed to on division. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

(1700) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I propose the 

committee . . . or we now move to committee on Bill 38. 

 

The Speaker: -- The member must seek leave in order to do 

that. 



2764 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 1993 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I asked for leave earlier.  I asked for 

leave to go back to Committee of the Whole. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 38 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Human 

Rights Code 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, we've 

spent a fair bit of time in debate in this Assembly regarding the 

amendments to the Human Rights Code.  And just before I 

move into a fair bit on 38, I want to make a comment on a 

quote the minister supposedly has in his possession regarding 

women in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I must admit, Mr. Chairman, I am perplexed, too, as to where 

the quote had come from.  But just for a little bit of 

background, I just want to bring to the minister's attention that 

back in the beginning when God created the earth, he created 

all living beings.  He brought out all living beings before man, 

before Adam, and had Adam name them.  And as he was 

looking at his creation, he saw that it was good, he realized that 

he had male and female in all the species in all the animal 

kingdom and the bird kingdom. 

 

But for man he didn't have a helpmate, and he saw that man 

was alone.  And at that time it says that God didn't think it was 

right for man to be alone and so he created woman to be equal 

with him and to be part of the relationship so that man and 

woman could have an equal relationship working together, 

being a comfort and encouragement to each other. 

 

And also in that relationship, out of that relationship, out of that 

closeness and oneness of the man and woman, there would be a 

process of procreation as man and woman brought children into 

the world.  And God told them to be plentiful and to multiply 

and to replenish the earth. 

 

Now where the quote exactly came from, I don't know, because 

I've believed from day one and in all my days, even as an 

elected representative, that my wife is a very special person.  

She's as equal . . . and she really contributes to our home, and I 

believe there are people all across this province and across this 

country who indeed do believe that. 

 

And at this time, just for the sake of the minister and for the 

committee here, I just want to let people know that there is no . 

. . at no one time did I as a member ever take a slam against 

women on the basis of that and the fact that women play a very 

important and vital role in our society, certainly in the family 

relationship. 

 

That's one of the major concerns that we have with the Bill 

before us today -- the fact that the family relationship in this 

province and in this nation is under attack.  The family, the 

home, the role models.  And it's not specifically the 

homosexual relationships.  It's the 

heterosexual relationships and the message we are sending to 

young people about how easy it is for men and women to 

forget their responsibilities to their partners and to leave, and 

the breakup at homes and the problems it creates for children 

and in those relationships, and what kind of a message are we 

sending. 

 

And what we've done with Bill 38 and what we are doing, Mr. 

Minister, is we're creating another problem, another moral 

problem that's going to . . . and as I've indicated earlier, it's not 

necessarily a problem that we will see arise today specifically 

in the province of Saskatchewan.  But we're seeing in 

jurisdictions all around the world that have been changing and 

tampering with the Human Rights Code, we're seeing the 

demands by certain groups for greater availability to services 

that they feel that they've been discriminated against. 

 

Mr. Minister, in this whole debate we've been asking ourselves, 

where has the real push come from?  Who is really pushing for 

the changes to the Human Rights Code?  For the life of me, Mr. 

Minister, I really don't know.  As the mail that I have received, 

certainly the letters that my colleagues have received, the 

phone-in shows that have taken place, and all the information 

that is out there would indicate that a full 99 per cent -- if not 

quite that, almost that high  

_- of the residents of the province of Saskatchewan are 

opposed to this type of legislation. 

 

Mr. Minister, you have argued very strenuously that the only 

impact of Bill 38 is that it's going to allow . . . or disallow 

discrimination based on housing and employment.  And in that 

matter the people of Saskatchewan do not have a problem with 

that piece of the . . . with Bill 38.  But the problem is, Mr. 

Minister, as we've discussed it before and as we've raised it, it's 

certainly an issue that could have been raised outside of the 

Bill. 

 

The other day when we were debating this in the House we 

talked about spousal benefits, we talked about marriage, 

same-sex relationships.  We talked about adoption.  And in 

every circumstance, Mr. Minister, you indicated that it was 

your intention that the Bill not have anything to do with those 

relationships.  And in fact you also indicated that there's an 

Adoption Act that deals with adoption.  There's a Marriage Act 

on the federal level that deals with marriages and the different 

circumstances. 

 

The facts are, Mr. Minister, if all those other avenues are dealt 

with outside of the Bill, then why didn't we just deal with the 

housing and employment issue outside of the Bill?  And that's 

one of the major questions we have there. 

 

When we look at the debate that has taken place, one has to 

wonder who has really been . . . where does the lobby really 

come from?  And we look at the debate that has taken place in 

your caucus.  You've talked about the ongoing debate.  You've 

talked about the resolutions that have been presented to your 

NDP conventions on numerous occasions.  Resolutions 



June 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2765 

have been put forward calling for an amendment of the Human 

Rights Code. 

 

Mr. Minister, I guess one of the areas that amazes me . . . 

because certainly the group EGALE (Equality for Gays and 

Lesbians Everywhere), a group that lobbies for the homosexual 

community, has been very silent of late.  And in light of the 

lobby that has taken place over the years, their silence basically 

is a solid indication in my mind and in the minds of a lot of 

people that there must be a lot of pleasure in the piece of 

legislation that is coming forward.  Otherwise, they would be 

out here really pushing for it and demanding that your 

government get on with it a lot quicker publicly.  But it seems 

to me if they are pushing, it's taking place very privately and 

quietly. 

 

On CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) radio, the 20th 

of February . . . or November 1992, the chief commissioner, 

Donna Greschner, stated that she will use Bill 38 to ask the 

government for more money to re-educate the people of 

Saskatchewan out of their homophobia.  She says that the 

public's negative, repressive attitudes are not acceptable and 

must be changed. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, it seems to me when we look at it, those are 

some of the areas that the public in general are very concerned 

about.  In fact, as I indicated earlier, EGALE, on the same 

program, indicated that they were absolutely delighted with 

Bill 38. 

 

And when I look at Bill 38 and I look with what's taking place 

elsewhere in other jurisdictions, Mr. Minister, one of the areas 

that really bothers me . . . And you've continually indicated that 

as long as you are minister these concerns will not be a 

problem because it is not your intention to allow the Bill to go 

beyond the housing and employment aspect, and you will stand 

for that. 

 

And yet I refer to the situation in Ontario.  In Ontario they 

changed the Human Rights Code back in 1986, their Human 

Rights Code, to include discrimination for reasons of sexual 

orientation. 

 

Then the Human Rights Commission made them change a lot 

of things.  They had to remove "of the opposite sex" from their 

definition of marital status.  They now have three years to 

change their marriage Act, their insurance Act, dealing with 

homosexual spousal and survivor rights, and their adoption 

Act. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, if you think that was yesterday or that really 

isn't relevant, let me just look at an article.  First of all, I'm just 

going to quote an article, September 2, 1992.  This is regarding 

a ruling. "Gay ruling on benefits seen costing millions", and 

this is in regards to the changes the amendments made to the 

Human Rights Code back in 1986.  And the article says: 

 

 The order will have far-reaching effects on the private sector 

because the words "of the opposite sex" when defining 

marital status have been removed from the Ontario Human 

Rights Code, officials said. 

 

 The ruling legally requires the province to provide family 

benefits, such as health insurance, dental coverage, and 

bereavement leave to gay and lesbian bureaucrats' partners.  

The government has extended these benefits since January, 

1991 as a matter of policy, not as a legal requirement. 

 

So we see your colleagues in Ontario have already extended it 

into the public sector just on their own.  They really didn't 

bring it before the legislature.  They accepted the words of the 

commissioner to extend these rights.  Now they're forcing it on 

everybody in society. 

 

 "The Human Rights Code now applies with its new wording 

to all employers in Ontario", said Catherine Frazee, chief 

commissioner of the Ontario Human Rights Commission.  

This is a very important decision for all other Canadian 

jurisdictions, the province and the federal government (said 

the chief commissioner of Ontario). 

 

What I'm saying, Mr. Minister, is the argument that we've been 

presenting in this Assembly all along, that just by changing the 

code it may seem insignificant, it may seem irrelevant, but the 

fact is, Ontario has learned just by adding the words sexual 

orientation, they now face challenges in the courts and beyond.  

And what it's doing is forcing people, even people in the 

private sector, to apply all the basic principles that we are 

opposed to. 

 

In June 11, in fact just recently, about 10 days ago, June 11, 

1993, the NDP Bill to grant more spousal rights to same-sex 

couples, the Ontario government --the NDP government will 

introduce a Bill in the fall giving precedent-setting rights and 

benefits . . . or getting rights and benefits to the same-sex 

couples, Attorney General Marion Boyd, says. 

 

 In Canada, we would be the first government to be looking at 

this kind of legislation, Boyd told the Star in an exclusive 

interview last night.  (It says as well) that governments across 

Canada are going to have to start granting more rights to 

same-sex couples because courts are leading us in that 

direction, says Attorney General Marion Boyd.  Boyd, who 

told the Star last night she intends to introduce legislation 

granting some same-sex couples more rights, said the move is 

inevitable. 

 

(1715) 

 

And going back, the same article goes on to say, in April, 1992, 

the coalition released a research paper . . . and this is talking 

about the changes that are coming about and being forced upon 

the province because of their changes to the Human Rights 

Code. 

 

 In April, 1992, the coalition released a research paper 

outlining 79 pieces of legislation which 



2766 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 1993 

could be amended to provide equality to same-sex couples.  

And while Boyd would not commit herself on any issue, she 

said the government is looking at all the issues that have been 

raised by the coalition. 

 

Mr. Minister, that is pointing out some of the arguments that 

we've been raising all along, that as soon as you open the door 

a crack, it opens the demand and the rush comes through, and 

the door is pushed even wider. 

 

Mr. Minister, as I indicated a tad earlier, just in my remarks 

just a few moments ago, you indicated that the other day there 

were a number of areas where the province didn't have 

jurisdiction. 

 

But I want to . . . when we suggested that we would be raising 

amendments to the Human Rights Code regarding marriage 

and spousal benefits and adoption and when I raised the -- back 

on June 7, 1993 -- when I raised the question about what if the 

court's interpretation of the Act is different than what you're 

telling us here in the Assembly, and, Mr. Minister, at that time 

you mentioned that there had been a long and tedious process 

that you had been involved in. 

 

In fact you said, and I quote: 

 

 . . . we were at pains in the drafting process to ensure that the 

protection being extended by the code did not extend beyond 

the code, did not extend to other matters but were restricted 

to the matters in respect of which protection is given to other 

questions like race and religion and age and sex, within the 

code. 

 

 So we tried to use that same structure.  And we are confident 

in doing that that we don't have some kind of a piece of 

legislation on our hands that is going to explode into 

something else when it gets into the hands of the judiciary.  I 

think that that will not happen.  I think that the judiciary are, 

if I may use the term, relatively conservative about these 

matters. 

 

And then in response to my question what if, what if the 

judiciary goes beyond what you're saying here, you said: 

 

 And if not, we are the supreme law-making body here in this 

legislature, and if the judiciary are not reading us correctly as 

to our intention, we can go back and do it over again and get 

it right. 

 

Mr. Minister, as I indicated then, why not get it right now?  

Why not leave . . . let the Bill 38 die on the order paper?  Why 

not come back in the fall with a piece of legislation that 

basically identifies the housing and employment situation? 

 

Because, Mr. Minister, I think it may not be tomorrow, it may 

not be a year from now, but as Ontario has seen, it's been some 

eight years since they amended their Human Rights Code that a 

number of these issues 

are now being forced into the courts. 

 

And because of the amendments and because of the very 

looseness and the fact that we have sexual orientation without 

it really being defined in the Human Rights Code, the courts 

are now acting -- exactly what you said they really wouldn't be 

doing.  They would have to take the Bill and act and make the 

decision based on how they perceive the Bill and what they 

perceive the intention of the Bill to be. 

 

You have said, Mr. Minister, that you believe and you will 

make sure that this Bill doesn't go beyond what you have 

intended the Bill to do.  But I would suggest to you, sir, that all 

the guarantees in the world, all your comments in Hansard and 

my comments in Hansard, aren't going to mean a thing when it 

comes to the courts making a decision. 

 

In fact I believe you made a comment the other day as well that 

even today a number of issues are before the courts.  The courts 

will decide.  Well if the courts are going to decide, is there any 

point in us having a legislative body, a group of individuals to 

sit here and set out legislation that specifically identifies where 

we're going.  It seems to me what the courts are doing . . . and I 

almost tend to agree with the individual who called in to the 

open line this morning about the fact that there may be too 

many lawyers get involved in politics, and they make the 

decisions and legislation so complicated that the ordinary 

person doesn't know where he's going. 

 

But it would seem to me, Mr. Minister, that what we do have 

here is a piece of legislation that is just too loose, too wide 

open, too wide open.  The interpretation can become too broad.  

And as much as you would argue that it doesn't, as much as 

your colleagues would argue that it doesn't . . . and I would 

have preferred to have heard the Premier indicate what he 

really felt, rather than telling me that he had confidence in his 

Minister of Justice and the Minister of Justice was speaking 

exactly what he was thinking.  I think it would have been 

appropriate for the Premier to stand up in this Assembly and to 

let the people of Saskatchewan know how he really felt about 

these issues. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, I think what we have done is we've tried to 

lay out as clearly and concisely as we can the reasons why we 

have difficulty and why we cannot accept Bill 38 as it has been 

presented to the House. 

 

I want to, as I wrap up my comments before we get into the 

vote on the Bill . . . and as much as I would like to say we're 

going to be here until 2 o'clock in the morning or whenever we 

get out, I think we have deliberated very extensively on a 

number of the issues and I'm not necessarily interested in just 

going around in circles again.  I don't think anyone is.  I think 

we've been very clear about it. 

 

But I'd like to read a few comments made by a doctor, I 

believe, from P.A. (Prince Albert) in a letter sent to the two 

members from Prince Albert that says: 



June 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2767 

Dear Mr. Kowalsky and Dear Mr. Lautermilch:  (It says) You 

have explained to me yourself that to maintain solidarity 

within your party there is extreme pressure to vote party line 

on these issues.  I can understand that future appointments 

and political promotions would be jeopardized by standing 

against the majority in your party.  I believe it is easy to be 

persuaded by the glut of politically correct thinkers in 

Regina. 

 

 I would urge you, however, that although the short-term cost 

appears great, the long-term cost by voting against not only 

your constituents' wishes, but also against your conscience, is 

far greater.  Individual integrity and credibility are qualities 

you cannot replace once lost.  It is high time for politicians to 

risk political future for the sake of integrity and credibility, 

not to mention the well-being of the public.  This is the only 

means by which any government will regain public trust. 

 

There again, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, it brings out the 

fact that even the public in general have been asking for the 

free vote.  And your colleague, the Premier of the province, 

when asked about the free vote and the opportunity for 

members to really stand up and be counted, suggested party 

solidarity was more important.  And what seemed to me in this 

whole argument, people have expressed their views, people 

have expressed their opinion. 

 

I'm not exactly sure if I've seen any piece of legislation that has 

drawn the letters and the criticism such as Bill 38 does.  And I 

would just like to add, Mr. Minister, before I sit down and 

allow the votes to proceed, that the issues we have raised, 

we've tried to be as clear as we can, we've tried to be as concise 

as we can.  I think we have brought out the points very clearly. 

 

We will move some amendments, whether or not they're 

accepted.  We believe it's appropriate that we give a clearer 

understanding of where the Bill is going and what is intended 

by the Bill.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I want to say, Mr. Chair, to the member 

that he has certainly been successful in stating very clearly his 

party's concerns about this Bill, and as a result, this has been a 

very pointed debate and a very thorough debate.  The matters 

raised by the member are matters that have been raised before 

and that I've answered before, so I don't have to give one of my 

long-winded replies to the question. 

 

But I did want to say just . . . I want to deal with a couple of 

points, with two points raised by the member.  First of all, it is 

not correct to say that people are opposed to this.  I dealt with 

that the other day, and let me remind the Assembly what I said. 

 

The Bill deals with discrimination, pure and simple.  It 

prohibits discrimination on the ground, among others, of sexual 

orientation.  It prohibits discrimination in respect of 

employment and accommodation and 

access to public services.  And as the member knows, the vast 

majority of our citizens are in favour of those ideas; the 

member's own caucus favours those ideas, or at least a 

significant number of members in the caucus favour those 

ideas. 

 

And the concern are the outside issues.  We discussed that the 

other day, and I think that's clear on common ground.  There's 

nothing that I can do to help that. 

 

I mean people have concerns, and I can say, well it's not 

covered in the Bill.  And it's true it's not covered in the Bill; it's 

a matter of federal jurisdiction.  It's true -- it's a matter of 

federal jurisdiction.  It's a question of the charter applying, and 

that's true -- it's a question of the charter applying, but that 

doesn't seem to still the concerns that the member gives voice 

to when he raises these various points. 

 

For example, the question is raised about the experience in 

Ontario, and there is a great mishmash of court decisions going 

in all kinds of directions.  And as the member has said, there 

are a number of them working their way through the court, the 

court system. 

 

The particular case that the member was talking about is the 

Lechner case.  And the case arose not because sexual 

orientation was included in the Human Rights Code but arose 

because the code attempted to define marital status, attempted 

to define one of the ideas that the member has put forward.  

And it was in response to that definition that the Lechner case 

got onto the board of inquiry and then comes the decision that 

you can't do that. 

 

And the problem is not in the code; the problem's in the charter.  

And the charter, part of the Canadian constitution, nothing we 

here can do about it.  I mean it is there.  If it's to be amended, it 

has to be amended through the constitutional amending 

process. 

 

So the . . . I mean, the case makes my point, makes my point.  

We can prohibit discrimination but we can't define marital 

status.  If we do define it, we run square into the charter.  As to 

who can get married, we run into the distribution of 

jurisdictional powers and a matter of federal jurisdiction.  So 

there we go, around and around. 

 

The leading case, to this point, on the question is the Egan case, 

which is a very recent case, 1993, in the federal Court of 

Appeal.  And in that case, homosexuals who had lived together 

for over 40 years were held not to be entitled to a spousal 

allowance.  So you know, there it goes. 

 

That's a case with which I would think you would be very 

comfortable.  So the jurisdiction is out there . . . or the 

jurisprudence is out there and happening as we speak, but it is 

happening in the context of the charter, and that is something 

over which we have no control. 

 

I'm sorry to give such a short answer to the member's 

considerable list of points, but we had discussed these matters 

before and I think we can leave it on that basis. 



2768 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 1993 

Mr. Toth: -- Just one comment before we move on, and I 

guess just reiterating the point.  One of the problems I do have 

is the Charter of Rights and Freedoms that have been 

established in Canada and how I guess it's fairly loose and open 

to interpretation which raises us to the question . . . to all the 

challenges that are now before the courts based on that, and 

certainly it's an area that is up . . . we could be here for an 

awful long time debating that process as well.  But I think we, 

as I've indicated earlier, we have raised our points.  We have 

raised the concerns of our constituents.  And as much as we 

would like to, if we had the ability, hold the piece of legislation 

even longer, I think we've finally resolved and come to the 

point that there is a point where it's time to move on and allow 

the House to proceed, so I'll allow the Bill to proceed through 

the Assembly. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 agreed to. 

 

Clause 3 

 

The Chair: -- I have received a number of amendments to 

clause 3 of the Bill, from the government, from the member of 

Saskatoon Greystone, and from the member for Moosomin.  

I've reviewed the amendments and suggest that they be dealt 

with in the order of priority which would then see the 

government amendment being moved first. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, I move: 

 

 That section 3 of the printed Bill be amended: 

 

 (a) by renumbering clauses (a) and (b) as clauses (b) and (c); 

 

 (b) by adding the following clause before renumbered clause 

(b): 

 

  "(a) by renumbering it as subsection 2(1)"; 

 

 (c) by striking out "and" after renumbered clause (b); 

 

 (d) by adding "and" after renumbered clause (c); and 

 

 (e) by adding the following clause after renumbered clause 

(c): 

 

  "(d) by adding the following subsection after subsection 

(1): 

 

   '(2) For the purpose of dealing with any case of alleged 

discrimination pursuant to this Act, no 

ground of discrimination shall be interpreted 

as extending to any conduct that is 

prohibited by the Criminal Code'". 

 

I so move, and I'd like to speak to it, Mr. Chair. 

 

(1730) 

One of the problems that has faced us from the beginning of 

the formulation of this Bill was the question of whether we 

could find a definition of sexual orientation that would work.  

And we have not been able to do that. 

 

We have another example in the Yukon where a definition was 

used, but the definition is not satisfactory to us.  This clause 

that I am proposing be added is taken from the Manitoba 

legislation.  The purpose of it is to make perfectly clear that 

when we are protecting people from discrimination on the 

ground of sexual orientation, we are not protecting any conduct 

that is prohibited by the Criminal Code.  This was a suggestion 

that came from all sorts of people in correspondence to me, and 

I think it was worth responding.  And as I say, I have so 

moved. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, in 

dealing with this amendment, I'm not exactly sure if it deals 

with the number of the concerns that have been raised.  You've 

indicated that it just prohibits anything that would . . . the 

Criminal Code lays out as being proper and appropriate.  

Anything beyond that, if it's . . . The Criminal Code sets out 

some guidelines and any case that would come before . . . that's 

taken to court based on the Human Rights Commission, that 

would go beyond the Criminal Code, would not apply.  Is that 

what you're saying? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes that's, I think, essentially correct.  

We're trying to ensure that conduct such as pedophilia, incest, 

and non-consensual sexual or abusive conduct is not protected.  

That's what we're trying to get at there. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I move: 

 

 That clause 3 of the printed Bill be amended by adding 

immediately after clause (b): 

 

 "(c) by adding the following clause after clause (o): 

 

  "(o.1) "sexual orientation" means the preferred form of 

sexual activity an adult person may choose to 

participate in with another consenting adult person, 

whether of the same or opposite sex;"". 

 

I so move.  And I would like to speak to this, Mr. Chair. 

 

I believe that by adding the definition of sexual orientation to 

the code, what we will do is remove any ambiguity about what 

we mean when we use it throughout this legislation.  And I 

want to note that we can all agree, I think, that society is 

constantly evolving and what is unacceptable now may be 

acceptable or even arguably acceptable a few years from now. 

 

What we cannot forget is that as little as 25 years ago the 

preferred method of sexual activity amongst . . . 



June 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2769 

homosexual activity amongst males was considered a criminal 

offence.  And so things have changed considerably since then.  

What the next 25 years will bring, none of us will know.  But 

without defining sexual orientation there will not be public 

debate, simply legal interpretation.  And without a definition 

and on a broad reading of sexual orientation within the context 

of the Human Rights Code as a whole, I believe that any form 

of sexual orientation may be admissible.  Thus a definition to 

restrict or define what sexual orientation means is a necessity 

and is simply good legislative drafting. 

 

Since the Act defines such straightforward terms, Mr. Chair, 

and Mr. Minister, as age -- I mean age is defined in the code -- 

and since it actually defines what employee means, I think that 

it is incumbent upon us as legislators to define the more 

complex and potentially more controversial terms such as 

sexual orientation. 

 

This definition I believe does what the government says this 

legislation was intended to do, and provides equal rights but 

limits those rights so that they do not become special or 

excessive rights. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Now, Mr. Chair, this is . . . that's a very 

constructive suggestion and it was certainly of interest to us 

because we had looked so hard for a definition for the term.  

And so had all the other jurisdictions that have dealt with this -- 

all six or seven provinces and territories and federal 

government. 

 

And they went through the same thing we did.  It didn't seem to 

matter what kind of a definition we came up with, it created 

other problems.  So we looked at the Yukon, for example, 

which talked about -- correct me if I'm wrong here  

_- but the sexual orientation includes homosexuality, 

heterosexuality, and bisexuality.  And that sort of works, you 

know, except that it's an offensive sort of term for a lot of 

people.  It's not a comfortable term for people; we'll put it that 

way.  And it covered all the bases for sexual activity that is not 

illegal, at least that I can think of.  Now I'm one of the most 

naïve people that you're going to meet on these questions.  But 

anyway, we didn't like that suggestion and there were no other 

definitions to choose from. 

 

Manitoba had a way of expressing the idea of not protecting 

illegal activity.  So all these other jurisdictions had tried to 

solve the problem of a definition and we did too, and came up 

empty-handed. 

 

Now the member's suggestion comes as close as you could 

come to a satisfactory one, but we had two problems with it.  

First of all, the adult person . . . because to be an adult in this 

province is 18 and over, and where does that leave a 

17-year-old?  They live on their own; they could have been 

working for a couple of years; they could have a family or not, 

depending.  You know, they could have been living in 

relationships.  And if you're going to protect the 18-year 

_olds, why would you not protect the 17's?  So 

that was one problem. 

 

The second is that by the use of the term "the preferred form of 

sexual activity" there is an implication there, probably 

unintended, but none the less there that sexual orientation is a 

matter of choice.  And to put it mildly, that's a matter for 

debate.  I mean I hold the view that it is not a matter of choice, 

that it's a biological question.  And so that was the second 

objection. 

 

At the end of the day, Mr. Chair, we regret that we are not able 

to accept this, but we certainly do appreciate the effort that the 

member made in coming to grips with a very difficult problem. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I'd just 

like to add a few words as well.  Mr. Chairman, I find it very 

difficult to stand in the Assembly and actually even attempt to 

support such an amendment.  I think this is one of the areas that 

we've been discussing with and that the public in general are 

very concerned about.  We've heard a lot of debate, the debate 

taking place even in the courtroom, about the fact that adult 

individuals should have the ability to choose who they prefer to 

engage in sexual activity with. 

 

I find it as well difficult to accept the fact, and the minister has 

used the argument, well it's a biological factor and it has 

nothing to do with choice.  There was nothing in medical 

science that would indicate that homosexual activity is a 

biological factor.  It is indeed a matter of choice.  And if you 

sat down and talked to a number of people in the medical field, 

talked to individuals who have been involved in the 

homosexual community who are now actively trying to work 

with people trying to leave the homosexual practice, they 

would indicate as well as they've indicated to me.  And I think 

by allowing this . . . by putting in such a definition meaning the 

preferred form of sexual activity and how an adult person may 

choose to participate in . . . just opens up the doors and makes 

it even a lot broader than what it is today.  And I find that 

unacceptable, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The Chair: -- Before we carry on with the vote, there are at 

least eight other conversations which are taking place in the 

Chamber, none of which cause any problems.  Combined they 

cause a problem for the Chair.  And therefore I ask you, if you 

want to carry on with conversations, to do so outside the 

Chamber. 

 

The question that's before us then is the amendment, which has 

been moved by the member for Saskatoon Greystone.  I want 

to take the prerogative of the Chair to point out that in as much 

as the clause 3 has been amended by the government -- part of 

which was to reorder the various clauses -- that as opposed to 

saying in the amendment that adding immediately after clause 

(b), that that be construed as being clause (c) to make it 

consistent with the amended clause we are now dealing with. 

 

Having said that, can we take the amendment as read?  Agreed. 



2770 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 1993 

The division bells rang from 5:41 p.m. until 5:43 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Haverstock 

-- 1 

Nays 

Romanow Crofford 

Simard Knezacek 

Tchorzewski Harper 

Shillington Kluz 

Teichrob Carlson 

Goulet Renaud 

Kowalsky Langford 

Mitchell Jess 

Cunningham Swenson 

Upshall Muirhead 

Bradley Devine 

Lautermilch Neudorf 

Murray Martens 

Hamilton Boyd 

Draper Toth 

Serby Britton 

Whitmore D'Autremont 

Sonntag Goohsen 

Flavel  

-- 37 

Mr. Toth: -- I move that we: 

 

 Amend clause 3 of the printed Bill by adding immediately 

after clause (b) thereof the following clause: 

 

I'm not exactly sure, I've been trying to follow in light of the 

amendment the government brought forward, but I'll read this 

through: 

 

 "(c) by re-numbering section 2 as subsection 2(1); 

 and 

 (d) by adding immediately after subsection 2(1) the following 

new subsection: 

 

  (2) Nothing in this Act shall be interpreted as 

providing any right, privilege or status to any 

person or group of persons that is different 

from or exceeding the rights, privileges or 

status of any other person or group of persons 

in Saskatchewan." 

 

And the purpose of this amendment is to basically say that the 

status of individuals will not change from where it is today and 

that any group or individual that would come forward adding 

or demanding greater rights or privileges would not be granted 

more than what is already available to individuals under the 

present Human Rights Code. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I certainly 

understand why the member is coming forward with this 

clause, because there is at least one 

group of people opposed to the Bill who have been 

characterizing these amendments as conferring special rights.  

The answer to that allegation is simply that the human rights 

legislation does not confer special rights on anyone.  It attempts 

to ensure equal rights.  And accordingly, there is simply no 

need for the amendment that the member puts forward. 

 

It would be in that context that the courts would have to 

interpret the amendment; that is, the context that human rights 

legislation does not confer special rights but only equal rights.  

And the court, at the same time, would have to say, well the 

legislature must have meant something in passing this Act.  

And heaven knows where that line of thinking would take us. 

 

So in the end, I have to tell you, Mr. Chairman, that the 

government is not able to accept this amendment. 

 

The Chair: -- The question before the committee then is the 

amendment moved by the member for Moosomin.  And again, 

I wish to exercise the prerogative of the Chair to make such 

renumbering to this amendment as we deem necessary to make 

it consistent with the clause 3 as amended. 

 

The division bells rang from 5:49 p.m. until 5:50 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Boyd 

Muirhead Toth 

Devine Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

-- 10 

 

Nays 

Romanow Draper 

Simard Serby 

Tchorzewski Whitmore 

Shillington Sonntag 

Teichrob Flavel 

Goulet Crofford 

Kowalsky Knezacek 

Mitchell Harper 

Cunningham Kluz 

Upshall Carlson 

Bradley Renaud 

Lautermilch Langford 

Murray Jess 

Hamilton Haverstock 

-- 28 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Again, I would move 

that we: 

 

 Amend clause 3 of the printed Bill by adding immediately 

after clause (b) thereof the following clause: 

 

 "(c) by re-numbering section 2 as subsection 2(1); 

 and 



June 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2771 

 (d) by adding immediately after subsection 2(1) the following 

subsection: 

 

  "(2) Nothing in this Act shall be interpreted as allowing or 

forming the basis for a court ruling that allows legal 

recognition of same-sex marriages." 

 

And again as we've raised the point in debate, Mr. Chairman, I 

think we've raised it very adequately.  It's a way of being firmer 

in what we believe over what the proposed amendments to the 

Human Rights Code are. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, the member and I have 

discussed this question on the record in this committee 

previously.  In a nutshell the situation is that the capacity to 

marry, that is, a jurisdiction to define the capacity to marry, is 

within the federal jurisdiction under section 9126 of the 

Canadian constitution, and therefore it would be 

unconstitutional and totally ineffective for us to attempt to deal 

with it in the code.  And for that reason the government is not 

able to accept the amendment. 

 

The Chair: -- Just again, I want to get the agreement of the 

committee that we can make such renumbering in this 

amendment as we deem appropriate.  And also to point out that 

your first clause that "by re-numbering section 2 as subsection 

2(1)" is redundant in as much as that is a change that has 

already been made to the Bill. 

 

The division bells rang from 5:54 p.m. until 5:55 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Boyd 

Muirhead Toth 

Devine Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

-- 10 

 

Nays 

Romanow Hamilton 

Simard Draper 

Tchorzewski Serby 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Shillington Sonntag 

Teichrob Flavel 

Goulet Crofford 

Kowalsky Knezacek 

Mitchell Harper 

MacKinnon Kluz 

Cunningham Carlson 

Upshall Renaud 

Bradley Langford 

Lautermilch Jess 

Murray Haverstock 

-- 30 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, I move: 

 

 Amend clause 3 of the printed Bill by adding 

immediately after clause (c) thereof the following clause: 

 

 "(d) by adding immediately after subsection 2(1) the 

following new subsection: 

 

  "(2) Nothing in this clause shall be interpreted as 

requiring, allowing, or forming the basis for a judicial 

decision or quasi-judicial ruling that results in legal 

recognition of same-sex marriages." 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The member will know the position of 

the government on this issue as well.  There is an adoption Act 

in Saskatchewan which sets out in some detail the concept of 

adoption.  That Act has been around for a long time and was 

re-enacted as recently as 1989.  If we're going to address this 

question, which the present Act does not, then we should do so 

within the context of that Act.  And for that reason the 

government is not able to accept the amendment. 

 

The Chair: -- Again the Chair wants to just have the 

agreement of members that we make such changes including 

deletions and changes to the numbering to make it consistent 

with the amendments that have been made.  And that is agreed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- . . . I'm told that the member actually 

read the wrong amendment.  I think he meant to read an 

amendment to . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Does the minister have a copy of the amendment 

or want to take time to consider this matter? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I'm not certain that I do.  I'm not certain 

that I have a copy of the amendment, Mr. Chair.  I'll just . . . 

 

I have to speak, Mr. Chairman.  I was speaking to the 

amendment relating to adoptions and this is . . . we're still on 

the subject of same-sex marriages here.  And again the 

government is unable to accept that amendment for reasons that 

I stated with respect to the previous amendment. 

 

(1800) 

 

The Chair: -- I think I can safely say that the mover of the 

motion, the minister, and the Chair are agreed as to the 

amendment that is now before the House.  Again I'm going to 

put the amendment with the understanding and agreement of 

the members that we make such changes to the amendment as 

we consider necessary to make it consistent with the 

amendments that have already been adopted.  Agreed. 

 

The division bells rang from 6:01 p.m. until 6:04 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 



2772 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 1993 

 

Swenson Boyd 

Muirhead Toth 

Devine Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

-- 10 

 

Nays 

Romanow Draper 

Simard Serby 

Tchorzewski Whitmore 

Lingenfelter Sonntag 

Shillington Flavel 

Teichrob Crofford 

Goulet Knezacek 

Kowalsky Harper 

Mitchell Kluz 

Cunningham Carlson 

Upshall Renaud 

Bradley Langford 

Lautermilch Jess 

Murray Haverstock 

Hamilton  

-- 29 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, I move an amendment 0-38-3(e): 

 

 Amend clause 3 of the printed Bill by adding immediately 

after clause (c) thereof the following clause: 

 

 (d) by adding immediately after subsection 2 the following 

subsection: 

 

  "(3) Nothing in this Act shall be interpreted as allowing or 

forming the basis for a court ruling that allows the 

adoption of children by homosexuals or lesbians." 

 

And as we've indicated before, Mr. Chairman, the intent of this 

amendment is to state in the Bill the concerns that the public of 

Saskatchewan have brought forward and to bring it up very 

firm and declare very firmly the public's perception and the 

commitment that we have made to stand up for the public on 

Bill 38. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I've made the government's argument 

with respect to this proposed amendment.  One would have 

thought that question could have been addressed in 1989 if the 

members opposite had felt that strongly about it.  If there is to 

be a change in the law, it should be made within the context of 

The Adoption Act.  And for that reason, the government's not 

able to accept the amendment. 

 

The division bells rang from 6:08 p.m. until 6:09 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Boyd 

Muirhead Toth 

Devine Britton 

 Neudorf D'Autremont t 

 Martens Goohsen t 

-- 10 R 

Nays 

Romanow Draper 

Simard Serby 

Tchorzewski Whitmore 

Lingenfelter Sonntag 

Shillington Flavel 

Teichrob Wormsbecker 

Goulet Crofford 

Kowalsky Knezacek 

Mitchell Harper 

Cunningham Kluz 

Upshall Carlson 

Bradley Renaud 

Lautermilch Langford 

Murray Jess 

Hamilton Haverstock 

Trew  

-- 31 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The amendment I'm 

moving is O-38-3(f): 

 

 Amend clause 3 of the printed Bill by adding immediately 

after clause (c) thereof the following clause: 

 

 (d) by adding immediately after subsection (2) the following 

subsection: 

 

  (3) Nothing in this Act shall be interpreted as requiring or 

forming the basis for a court ruling that requires 

homosexuals or lesbians be given access to family or 

spousal benefits. 

 

And as we've had the discussion over the past number of 

weeks, Mr. Chairman, the intent of the amendment is to lay out 

very clearly what the Act is really defining as being acceptable 

behaviour and benefits that couples can apply for and same-sex 

partners. 

 

What we're saying here, Mr. Chairman, and what we want for 

the sake of the public to realize that we stand up, we've raised 

the issue.  Now the minister has continually argued that it's 

beyond his control and out of our jurisdiction in a number of 

areas, and a number of these issues are presently before the 

court.  But a lot of the court decisions that are coming down, 

Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, are being based upon 

amendments that have come forward and based on the Human 

Rights Code and how it's being interpreted and how it's being 

presented to the public as well. 

 

When you look at it, when we look at the amendment being 

presented here, I believe the amendment is very 

straightforward, it's very simple, and it's to the point and it 

reiterates the concern that the people have out there rather than 

to say no, it's beyond our responsibility.  I think if I hear the 

minister right, we are the legislators.  We are the supreme 

law-making body in this province, and it should be appropriate 

for us to indeed lay out the guidelines and the principles by 



June 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2773 

which we believe the areas that we believe in so that people 

across this province will not just take and run with the Human 

Rights Code to make all the changes that people are afraid of. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, I have, as the member 

knows, stated the government's position at great length on this 

particular point on a number of occasions.  The plain fact is 

that the amendment that is before the House does not speak to 

the entitlement to spousal benefits for same-sex partners and 

the question just simply doesn't arise.  There is no basis for us 

to amend the Act to cover something that isn't covered by the 

Act. 

 

So that's rather a shortened version of the long speech that I 

gave the other day, but the bottom line is that the government is 

not able to accept this amendment. 

 

The Chair: -- Again, I just want to get the agreement of the 

members that we can make such changes to the amendment as 

may be necessary to conform to the changes that have already 

been made.  Is that agreed? 

 

The division bells rang from 6:14 p.m. until 6:15 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Boyd 

Muirhead Toth 

Devine Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

-- 10 

 

Nays 

Romanow Trew 

Simard Draper 

Tchorzewski Serby 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Shillington Flavel 

Teichrob Wormsbecker 

Goulet Crofford 

Kowalsky Knezacek 

Mitchell Harper 

MacKinnon Kluz 

Cunningham Carlson 

Upshall Renaud 

Bradley Langford 

Lautermilch Jess 

Murray Haverstock 

Hamilton  

-- 31 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to move another 

amendment, or attempt to move another amendment, 

(0-38-3(g)). 

 

 Amend Clause 3 of the printed Bill by adding immediately 

after clause (c) thereof the following clause: 

 

 (d) by adding immediately after subsection 2 the following 

subsection; 

"(3) Nothing in this Act shall be interpreted as requiring or 

forming the basis for a court ruling that requires any action 

taken in respect of curriculum or education in 

Saskatchewan." 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, it could be construed that possibly this 

should have come a little later in the Bill, but I think it's 

appropriate that it's brought forward as this time. 

 

In laying out a number of the arguments, and one has to 

wonder where the chief commissioner of the Human Rights 

Commission is right now when we look at the whole argument 

of the educational process, and the fact that she's already 

indicated publicly that the curriculum will have to be 

developed or an educational program will have to be developed 

to alleviate the public's fears, homophobic fears. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, what we're doing here in bringing this 

forward . . . And I believe the public, in general, have a very 

deep concern about the fact that the requests and the pressure 

are going to become even stronger, adopting a format in the 

family life program within our educational system that makes 

and basically portrays the homosexual lifestyle as something 

that is a natural and normal process, which we firmly disagree 

with and don't believe is normal and natural. 

 

And therefore, Mr. Chairman, it is appropriate that we bring 

this out, trying to bring the concern of the public before the 

Assembly, hoping that the government at the end of the day 

will recognize this factor and will take a firmer stand rather 

than just going on what the minister has been basically saying 

all along -- his arguments that he's made his commitment. 

 

As we've indicated before, the minister's commitment may not 

be the next minister of Justice's commitment or the next 

government's commitment.  And I don't think those arguments 

are strong enough or good enough.  I think we need to have 

something within the Bill that alleviates the fears out there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, the member will of course 

know the position of the government on this because of all of 

the discussions that have taken place with respect to it. 

 

The mandate of the Human Rights Commission is a very 

limited mandate when we talk about educational programs.  It 

is defined in section 25 of the Act and it is restricted to 

programs designed to eliminate discriminatory practices and 

those practices are referred to in the code itself. 

 

The code does not deal with school curricula.  The choice of 

curricula is done by locally elected school boards and working 

with the department, and has no reference to the Human Rights 

Code at all.  So that the problem that the member is trying to 

guard against in the amendment simply doesn't exist.  For that 

reason the government is not able to accept the amendment. 



2774 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 1993 

The Chair: -- The question before us then is the amendment 

moved by the member for Moosomin.  And again can we have 

the agreement of the members to make such changes as we see 

necessary to make it conform to the amendments that have 

already been adopted?  Agreed. 

 

The division bells rang from 6:20 p.m. until 6:21 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Boyd 

Muirhead Toth 

Devine Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

-- 10 

 

Nays 

Simard Draper 

Lingenfelter Serby 

Shillington Whitmore 

Teichrob Sonntag 

Kowalsky Flavel 

Mitchell Knezacek 

MacKinnon Harper 

Cunningham Kluz 

Upshall Carlson 

Bradley Renaud 

Lautermilch Langford 

Murray Jess 

Hamilton Haverstock 

-- 26 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, regarding amendment O-38-3(h): 

 

 Amend clause 3 of the printed Bill by adding immediately 

after clause (c) thereof the following clause: 

 

 (d) by adding immediately after clause subsection 2(2) the 

following subsection: 

 

  "(2) the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission shall 

have no jurisdiction to conduct any hearing or make 

any ruling touching on the definition of marriage, 

spousal and family benefits, the adoption of children, 

or teaching in so far as such matters may include 

consideration of sexual orientation." 

 

Here again, Mr. Chairman, it's a matter by which we attempt to 

put a more firm commitment and identify our feelings 

regarding the whole process here and the fact that I don't 

believe it's in the power of the jurisdiction of the Saskatchewan 

Human Rights Commission to begin to hold its own hearings 

or make any rulings outside of this legislative body.  And that's 

why it's imperative that we have this amendment in the Bill, 

reiterating our stand on the issue and not allowing the 

commission then to decide that they can 

now make their own interpretations of how they view Bill 38 as 

the government are presenting it today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, the substance of this 

proposed amendment has of course been dealt with in the last 

few amendments on which the Assembly has voted.  I might 

point out to the member that the commission doesn't conduct 

hearings or make rulings as a commission.  It investigates 

complaints. And if the commission finds that there may be an 

infringement, then it acts as the complainant's lawyer to 

attempt a settlement.  And if a settlement can't be achieved, it 

acts for the complainant before a board of inquiry.  All of those 

things of course you will know.  But if you look at the 

proposed amendment in that context, then the amendment is 

out of tune with the scheme of the Human Rights Code. 

 

For those reasons, the government is not able to accept the 

amendment. 

 

The Chair: -- The question before the committee then is the 

amendment.  Again can I have the agreement of the members 

to make such changes as we see necessary to conform to the 

amendments that have already been made?  Is that agreed? 

 

The division bells rang from 6:26 p.m. until 6:29 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Toth 

Muirhead Britton 

Devine D'Autremont 

Neudorf Goohsen 

Martens Haverstock 

Boyd  

-- 11 

 

Nays 

Romanow Whitmore 

Simard Sonntag 

Lingenfelter Flavel 

Teichrob Wormsbecker 

Kowalsky Crofford 

Mitchell Knezacek 

MacKinnon Harper 

Cunningham Kluz 

Bradley Carlson 

Murray Renaud 

Hamilton Langford 

Draper Jess 

Serby  

-- 25 

 

Clause 3 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 4 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Clause 4-O-38 and 4: 

 

 Amend clause 4 of the printed Bill by adding immediately 

after clause (b) thereof, the following clause; 



June 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2775 

 "(c) by adding "including those persons of differing political 

affiliation," after "Every person and every class of persons"". 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you look at the debate that takes place in 

our province and being as we're a province where people are 

very politically astute and involved in politics, there are many 

occasions, Mr. Chairman, where unfortunately a lot of times 

politics may enter into a lot of the decisions. 

 

Because a person should stand up and choose to represent one 

party or the other on an issue, I don't believe it should be a 

matter that is an interference in their ability to do business in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

If indeed it does take place, then I would suggest in light of the 

intent of the Bill, that is discrimination and what we're doing 

here is saying that that shouldn't enter in.  Discrimination 

shouldn't be a factor in that, in a person's decision regarding 

their differing political views, on how they do business or deal 

even with government in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- This is a very serious amendment that 

the member proposes, and one that we have given 

consideration to.  In the early years of the code back in 1979 it 

was considered at the federal level for inclusion in their code 

and at least at the time that I was involved with the federal 

government, and rejected.  It's a complex matter and the 

government is not able to accept that amendment today. 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  The principle of Bill 38 as approved in 

second reading prohibits discrimination based on sexual 

orientation, family status, or on the receipt of public assistance.  

The amendment before us goes beyond the scope of the Bill in 

removing other provisions already part of the Saskatchewan 

Human Rights Code.  An amendment which seeks to add to the 

Bill something that goes beyond the scope and the intent and 

the principle of the Bill is not in order, and I would refer 

members to Beauchesne's Parliamentary Rules and Forms, 

6th Edition, paragraph 698 (1) which reads as follows: 

 

 An amendment is out of order if it is irrelevant to the bill, 

beyond its scope or governed by or dependent upon 

amendments already negatived. 

 

And for these reasons I find the amendment out of order. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, I have to accept your ruling but it 

seems to me that it must have been an amendment that was 

thought of long before we even brought it forward to the 

Assembly, just from the comments made by the minister.  And 

I think legal counsel had certainly raised some of the issues 

when we asked for his interpretation of the amendment. 

 

However, I will move on to 0-38-4(a) and: 

Amend clause 4 of the printed Bill by adding immediately 

after clause (b) thereof the following clause: 

 

  "(c) by adding ", including those persons who refuse to 

endorse or participate in therapeutic abortions," after 

"Every person and every class of persons"". 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, the reason for this amendment is the fact 

that there have been situations in this province and in other 

jurisdictions where people have been threatened or even been 

discriminated based on their moral views on this very 

important issue.  And I think if we're looking at addressing 

discrimination on the basis of housing and employment, the 

choice a person makes in their life should, regarding issues of 

values that they stand for . . . they should be able to make that 

choice without being forced to go against their best wishes.  

And that's the reasoning behind this amendment. 

 

The Chair: -- I want to also rule this amendment out of order.  

Again the principle of Bill 38 as approved in second reading 

prohibits discrimination based on sexual orientation, family 

status, or on the receipt of public assistance.  The amendment 

which has been moved by the member for Moosomin seeks to 

add another provision which goes beyond the scope and the 

intent and the principle of the Bill as agreed to in second 

reading. 

 

And again I would refer members to Beauchesne's 

Parliamentary Rules and Forms, 6th edition, paragraph 

698(1), which reads as follows: 

 

 An amendment is out of order if it is irrelevant to the bill, 

beyond its scope or governed by or dependent upon 

amendments already negatived. 

 

And for those reasons I find the amendment out of order. 

 

Clause 4 agreed to. 

 

Clause 5 agreed to on division. 

 

Clauses 6 to 14 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 15 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I wish to speak to my amendment, please, 

38-15.1.  I move: 

 

 That clause 15 of the printed Bill be amended by deleting the 

words "sexual orientation" where they appear in clause (c). 

 

I so move, and I'd like to speak to this, Mr. Chair. 

 

Section 25 of the code, in other words clause 15 of this printed 

Bill, has nothing to do with housing and employment.  And this 

amendment, when inserted into the code, removes any 

possibility that sexual orientation will be the subject of 

educational 



2776 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 1993 

programs within the school systems of the province of 

Saskatchewan.  And although the Minister of Justice has said 

that the code has nothing to do with school curriculum since it 

is the domain of the Department of Education and local school 

boards, I do believe that by this amendment we will remove 

any ambiguity with this matter. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, the government is not able to 

accept this amendment.  Section 25 mandates the commission, 

as I've said earlier, to develop and conduct educational 

programs designed to eliminate discriminatory practices, and 

that is something that we think is a valid function of the 

commission, an activity that they should continue to undertake 

and that it should apply to all of the prohibited grounds for 

discrimination. 

 

So as I say, and for that reason, the government's not able to 

accept the amendment. 

 

The division bells rang from 6:40 p.m. until 6:47 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Toth 

Muirhead Britton 

Devine D'Autremont 

Neudorf Goohsen 

Martens Haverstock 

Boyd  

-- 11 

 

Nays 

Romanow Trew 

Simard Draper 

Tchorzewski Serby 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Shillington Sonntag 

Teichrob Flavel 

Goulet Cline 

Kowalsky Wormsbecker 

Mitchell Crofford 

MacKinnon Knezacek 

Cunningham Harper 

Upshall Kluz 

Bradley Carlson 

Lautermilch Renaud 

Murray Jess 

Hamilton  

-- 31 

Clause 15 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 16 and 17 agreed to. 

 

Clause 18 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I move that section 18 of the printed Bill 

be amended: 

 

 by striking out section 18 and substituting the following: 

 "Section 47 amended 

  18 Subsection 47(1) is amended by striking out 'race, 

creed, religion, colour, sex, marital status, disability, 

age, nationality, ancestry or place of origin' and 

substituting 'race, colour, sex, disability or ancestry'". 

 

And I wish to speak to that, Mr. Chair. 

 

One of the issues that has arisen during the consultations with 

respect to Bill 38 is the question of: in what circumstances the 

Human Rights Commission would order an affirmative action . 

. . or at least it would approve an affirmative action program 

submitted by an employer.  And the House will know that that's 

how that process works.  The employer submits the plan; the 

commission considers it and approves it, or otherwise.  The 

commission has in the past, in Saskatchewan and in other 

jurisdictions, approved affirmative action programs with 

respect to persons of aboriginal ancestry; with respect to 

women in non-traditional occupations; with respect to disabled 

people; and with respect to visible minorities. 

 

This amendment to section 47 clarifies that those indeed are the 

circumstances in which the Human Rights Commission may 

order, or at least approve, an affirmative action program. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Chair: -- I'd like to make a ruling with respect to the 

proposed amendment.  The principle of Bill 38 as approved in 

second reading prohibits discrimination based on sexual 

orientation, family status, or on the receipt of public assistance. 

 

Clause 18(a) of Bill 38 provides for sexual orientation as the 

basis for the application of programs designed to reduce 

disadvantages to certain individuals or groups, affirmative 

action.  The minister's amendment removes sexual orientation 

as a basis for the establishment of such programs, and that is in 

order. 

 

The amendment, however, goes beyond the scope of the Bill in 

removing other provisions, already part of the Saskatchewan 

Human Rights Code, on which such programs can be based.  

Provisions such as creed, religion, age, marital status, 

nationality, and place of origin are being removed from the Act 

as a basis for establishing these programs.  These provisions do 

not relate to sexual orientation, family status, or the receipt of 

public assistance. 

 

An amendment which seeks to remove such provisions goes 

beyond the scope, the intent, and the principle of the Bill as 

agreed to in second reading.  This amendment seeks to amend 

other provisions in the parent Act which are not part of Bill 38. 

 

I refer members to Beauchesne's Parliamentary Rules and 

Forms, 6th Edition, paragraph 698(1) which reads as follows: 

 

 An amendment is out of order if it is irrelevant 



June 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2777 

to the bill, beyond its scope or governed by or dependent 

upon amendments already negatived. 

 

For these reasons I find the amendments out of order.  Such an 

amendment can only be proceeded with by unanimous consent.  

I would ask at this point: is there then unanimous consent for 

the amendment?  There is no unanimous consent. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I move: 

 

 That clause 18 of the printed Bill be amended by deleting the 

words "sexual orientation" where they appear in clause (a). 

 

I so move and would like to speak to this, Mr. Chair. 

 

The amendment put forward by the government goes much 

further than the one that I propose.  As with the previous 

comment that I made regarding section 25 of the code, section 

47 has nothing to do with housing or employment, and 

therefore a sexual orientation amendment should not be 

included in this section. 

 

The code as it stands provides that affirmative action programs 

may be undertaken for, and I quote: any group of individuals 

when those disadvantages would be or are based on or related 

to the race, creed, religion, colour, sex, marital status, 

disability, age, nationality, ancestry, or place of origin of 

members of that group.  End of quote. 

 

And the government's amendment means that affirmative 

action programs may be undertaken for, and I quote again: any 

group of individuals when those disadvantages would be or are 

based on or related to race, colour, sex, disability, or ancestry 

of the members of that group.  End of quote. 

 

My amendment is definitely not as sweeping as the 

government's.  The government's means the elimination of 

creed, religion, marital status, age, nationality, and place of 

origin from this section.  And one has to question what the 

implications of the removal of these terms will be. 

 

Will my amendment of simply removing the term sexual 

orientation while allowing the others to remain, including 

family status or receipt of public assistance by members of that 

group, not be a simpler and safer way to approach this clause? 

 

And what I assume that the government is trying to do with this 

amendment is to remove behaviours and personal choices as 

grounds on which affirmative action programs can be based.  

And I think this seems sensible, in fact almost too sensible, and 

I continue to wonder why it is this was not considered during 

the drafting as far as the drafting stage of this Bill was 

concerned. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The section 47 includes in it all of the 

prohibitive grounds, and clearly the Human Rights 

Commission would not approve affirmative action programs in 

respect of a number of them.  For  

example, they would not approve an affirmative action 

program with respect to a particular religion, or with respect to 

a number of other items there -- a creed, for example. 

 

What is required is, I think, a rewriting of section 47 along the 

lines of the government amendment that has just been ruled out 

of order.  So I think that what we would prefer to do is to come 

back to the Human Rights Code and to section 47 at a later 

stage and deal with the problem at that time.  So for that 

reason, we will not be accepting the amendment. 

 

The division bells rang from 6:56 p.m. until 6:57 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Toth 

Muirhead Britton 

Devine D'Autremont 

Neudorf Goohsen 

Martens Haverstock 

Boyd  

-- 11 

 

Nays 

Romanow Murray 

Simard Hamilton 

Tchorzewski Trew 

Lingenfelter Draper 

Shillington Serby 

Teichrob Whitmore 

Goulet Sonntag 

Kowalsky Flavel 

Carson Cline 

Mitchell Crofford 

MacKinnon Kluz 

Cunningham Carlson 

Upshall Renaud 

Bradley Langford 

Lautermilch Jess 

-- 30 

 

Clause 18 agreed to. 

 

Clause 19 

 

The division bells rang from 7 p.m. until 7:03 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Romanow Trew 

Simard Draper 

Tchorzewski Serby 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Shillington Sonntag 

Teichrob Flavel 

Goulet Cline 

Kowalsky Wormsbecker 

Carson Crofford 

Mitchell Harper 

MacKinnon Kluz 

Cunningham Carlson 



2778 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 1993 

Upshall Renaud 

Bradley Langford 

Lautermilch Jess 

Murray Haverstock 

Hamilton  

-- 33 

 

Nays 

Swenson Boyd 

Muirhead Toth 

Devine Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

-- 10 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, I move that the committee 

report the Bill with amendment. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

The division bells rang from 7:06 p.m. until 7:07 p.m. 

 

Yeas 

Romanow Hamilton 

Simard Trew 

Tchorzewski Draper 

Lingenfelter Serby 

Shillington Whitmore 

Teichrob Sonntag 

Goulet Flavel 

Kowalsky Cline 

Carson Crofford 

Mitchell Harper 

MacKinnon Kluz 

Cunningham Renaud 

Upshall Langford 

Bradley Jess 

Lautermilch Haverstock 

Murray  

-- 31 

Nays 

Swenson Boyd 

Muirhead Toth 

Devine Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

-- 10 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, thank you, Mr. Chair.  I would like 

to thank my officials, Madeleine Robertson and Ross Macnab, 

who has just stepped out for a moment, for being with us 

through these long sessions and assisting the committee in its 

work. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, I as well would like to extend my 

appreciation to the officials for their attendance in these 

discussions and for the information that they have presented to 

us.  I'd also like to extend my thanks to the minister, although I 

don't totally agree with the whole process and his arguments, 

but certainly we appreciate his forthrightness in coming 

forward with his arguments.  Thank you. 

The Chair: -- There being no further business before the 

committee, I want to suggest that the committee should rise, 

report progress. 

 

Before doing so, I want to take this opportunity to thank the 

Clerks who have assisted the Chair -- I'm sure I speak for the 

Deputy Chair as well -- who have assisted us both in the 

conduct of committees during the course of this session; to 

thank the pages and the other officers of the House who have 

assisted us; to thank the ministers and the members of the 

opposition who have participated in the issues before the 

committee to make the committee function as well as it has on 

most occasions; and finally to thank the members for their 

attention and for their attentiveness during these proceedings. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 38 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Human 

Rights Code 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, 

I move that Bill No. 38 be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a third time and 

passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: -- Before I make an announcement about Her 

Honour, I wish to inform the Assembly that under page 4 of the 

appendices in the Rules and Procedures, of our book, under 

photographs, it is at the discretion of the Speaker to allow still 

photographs to be taken in the House. 

 

I simply want to inform the members that during Royal Assent 

the ACFC (Association Culturelle Franco-Canadienne) have 

asked permission to take a still picture while Royal Assent is 

being done and I have given permission to do that.  I simply 

want to inform the members that that is going to occur. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Who's ACFC? 

 

The Speaker: -- The Fransaskois association of Saskatchewan. 

 

Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor is here to give Royal 

Assent. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 

 

At 7:16 p.m. Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 

to the following Bills: 

 

Bill No. 53 --  An Act respecting Natural Resources 

Bill No. 42 --  An Act respecting the Creation and Supervision 

of certain Crown Corporations 

Bill No. 85 --  An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Medical 

Care Insurance Act 



June 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2779 

 

Bill No. 86 -- An Act to amend Certain Health Statutes and to 

repeal Certain Other Health Statutes 

Bill No. 87 -- An Act to amend The Mental Health Services 

Act 

Bill No. 39 -- An Act to amend The Education Act 

Bill No. 55 -- An Act to amend The Workers' Compensation 

Act, 1979 

Bill No. 56 -- An Act respecting Occupational Health and 

Safety 

Bill No. 49 -- An Act respecting Correctional Services 

Bill No. 77 -- An Act respecting the Implementation of 

Certain Treaty Land Entitlement Settlement 

Agreements 

Bill No. 78 -- An Act to confirm an Agreement between the 

Government of Canada and the Government of 

Saskatchewan varying the Saskatchewan 

Natural Resources Transfer Agreement 

Bill No. 88 -- An Act to amend The Provincial Court Act 

Bill No. 59 -- An Act to amend The Education Act (No. 2) 

Bill No. 1 -- An Act respecting the Conduct of Members of 

the Legislative Assembly and Members of the 

Executive Council, respecting Conflicts of 

Interest and to enact Consequential 

Amendments resulting from the enactment of 

this Act 

Bill No. 90 -- An Act to protect the financial viability of 

NewGrade Energy Inc. 

Bill No. 2 -- An Act to recognize Jean-Louis Légaré/Projet 

de loi No. 2 -- Loi sur la reconnaissance de 

Jean-Louis Légaré 

Bill No. 79 -- An Act to Provide for the Division of 

Saskatchewan into Constituencies for the 

Election of Members of the Legislative 

Assembly 

Bill No. 38 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Human 

Rights Code 

 

Her Honour: -- In Her Majesty's name I assent to these Bills. 

 

Bill No. 91 -An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain sums 

of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal 

Years ending respectively on March 31, 1993 

and on March 31, 1994 

 

Her Honour: -- In Her Majesty's name, I thank the Legislative 

Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 

 

Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 7:20 p.m. 

 

MOTIONS 

Adjournment of the Assembly 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, before I move a 

motion dealing with adjournment of the Assembly, I would just 

like to make a short comment, first of all to thank all members 

of the Assembly for the hard work and diligence that was put 

into this session.  It was obviously a good session in many 

ways. 

 

I think the opposition did a good job of putting forward their 

ideas and concepts.  Members on the government side I think 

worked diligently here in the Assembly and out. 

 

I want to thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the hard work and your 

tolerance many days in the Assembly.  I want to say as well to 

the staff of the Assembly, to the pages as well as the 

commissionaires and to the Sergeant-at-Arms, we appreciate 

very much the effort that went into this session. 

 

So with that I'd also wish all of you a very pleasant summer.  

Maybe we can take a week or two with our families and do 

some of the more enjoyable things. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from 

Churchill Downs: 

 

 That by leave of the Assembly, that when this Assembly 

adjourns at the end of this sitting day it shall stand adjourned 

to a date and a time set by Mr. Speaker upon the request of 

the government, and that Mr. Speaker shall give each 

member seven clear days notice if possible of such date and 

time. 

 

I so move. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I should 

at the outset of my remarks indicate to members opposite that 

my remarks cannot be quite that brief because my pool time 

happens to be 8:05, so . . . However, Mr. Speaker, I do have 

some remarks. 

 

I do want to give members opposite and the members of the 

public our impression of what this session has been all about.  

But before I begin with those remarks, I want to join with my 

colleague, the Government House Leader, in recognizing, Mr. 

Speaker, your role in this Assembly. 

 

It's a difficult role, and from time to time we have maybe had a 

few disagreements in terms of what should and should not be 

done. 

 

I want to commend you, sir.  I want to commend the people 

sitting at the Table here, the clerks who have done a 

tremendous job, have always been readily available for advice, 

and we appreciate that.  I want to say that to the three of you as 

well. 

 

And certainly to the five pages, we've had a unique experience 

this session with the five gals as they have ministered well to 

the ministers' needs and so on, and I want to commend you for 

a job very well done as 



2780 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 1993 

well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I think I would be remiss if I did not . . . Well 

if that's how I get applause in here, I will continue in that vein 

for a little while. 

 

The security people, Mr. Speaker, I think should not be omitted 

on this; they do a very commendable job.  The janitorial staff 

has kept my office spic and span, and that is certainly a 

challenge to anyone, Mr. Speaker.  And I want to recognize 

also the cafeteria staff, and I think many of us are walking 

testimonials to the job that those folks can do for us as well . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Now the Premier's asking for 

accolades, Mr. Speaker, and I can assure you in a few moments 

he will wish he had not drawn attention to himself because I do 

have a few comments that I would like to pass on as well. 

 

Now having done the niceties, Mr. Speaker, I just want to give 

now, as I indicated at the outset, the impression that the 

opposition has had in so far as proceedings that have occurred.  

And I notice that the House Leader is already getting a bit 

nervous, Mr. Speaker.  I do not know of any regulation or rule 

that says that I cannot speak for as long as I desire to speak on 

a motion. 

 

So having done that, Mr. Speaker, I want to at the outset say 

that as a child I used to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Listen, 

you guys, I'm going to get serious here in a while, but I'm not 

going to do a panoramic view of my life.  But I do want to say 

that as a child I did have a panoramic view of a present that my 

parents bought me for Christmas, and that was one of these 3-D 

viewers -- perhaps some of you got them as well -- where you'd 

click through and everything was in three-dimensional. 

 

And I've already indicated to some of the media that what we 

have witnessed here over the last four months, since February 

25, I believe, is a 3-D approach.  But it's not certainly 

three-dimensional that I'm talking about, Mr. Minister, Mr. 

Speaker, because what I'm talking about is the three D's of 

deception, destruction, and dictatorship. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to review for you in our opinion of 

what has happened.  Mr. Speaker, in this session a majority of 

MLAs, NDP MLAs, voted to remove the rights of co-op 

members to seek justice in the courts. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- In this session, Mr. Speaker, a majority of 

MLAs, NDP MLAs, voted to eliminate freedom from arbitrary 

search and seizure in several new laws that have been passed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this session the NDP government passed laws 

against the will of the people and dismissed the democratic 

aspirations of our citizens. 

Mr. Speaker, in this session we witnessed a Premier and his 

government break every single promise he ever made, 

destroying the trust of the people of Saskatchewan in the 

political system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this session we have witnessed a cabinet in 

disarray, bouncing from resignation to shuffle, to excuse and 

complaint. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this session we have watched as minister after 

minister stands in imitation of the member from Riversdale, 

denying any responsibility for government in this province, 

denying any responsibility for any duty to the people for what 

is happening to our economy, our political system, and indeed, 

Mr. Speaker, to our society.  We have seen a government go 

into business with people alleged to have connections to 

organized crime and then refuse to answer any question of 

substance about that questionable partnership, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have seen ministers with economic portfolios, including the 

Premier himself, boldly state that the Canadian Federation of 

Independent Business represents no one, that the Saskatchewan 

Chamber of Commerce represents no one, that the construction 

association represents no one.  We have seen, Mr. Speaker, 

ministers of Health, both of them, claim the people of 

Vanguard have no idea what they are talking about, the people 

of Leader, the people of Eston and on and on.  None of the 

people have the intelligence to understand their own health care 

needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need to acknowledge that this session has seen 

a government unwilling to listen, unwilling to bend, and 

unwilling to be responsible for anything other than the partisan 

fortunes of the NDP.  Indeed, Mr. Speaker, this session we 

have witnessed an orgy of patronage appointments, of massive 

salary increases to political appointees, of moving political 

hacks into various departments and Crown corporations, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Further, in this session we have witnessed a redefinition of the 

phrase, open government, as the NDP claims anything that 

could cast dirt on its opponents is the only thing that can or 

should be open.  Mr. Speaker, we have seen, as the Premier 

abandoned the statements and the advice of the Gass 

Commission, of Justice Estey . . . and if anyone that did not 

seem to mouth the interests of the political party of the NDP . . 

. Mr. Speaker, we have sadly even watched and as 

once-respected NDP MLAs have converted from earnestly 

seeking more open and accountable government, and instead 

have turned to restricting the Provincial Auditor, becoming 

apologists for secrecy, and putting up walls of rhetoric 

justifying why certain various secretive policies should be 

supported. 

 

(1930) 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that one objective that I would have 

in the next few moments is that when this House does finally 

adjourn . . . 



June 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2781 

An Hon. Member: -- Oh, no. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- And the Premier says, oh no, not yet.  What I 

want, Mr. Speaker, is for the Premier to walk out of here with 

his ears ringing, not bell ringing, Mr. Speaker, but some 

admonition and some reminiscing of the promises that he made 

to get elected. 

 

Mr. Premier, through you, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to tell the 

Premier why he's sitting in that chair.  You are sitting in that 

chair because of what trust and confidence the people put in 

you depending on your promise; depending on your promise, 

fully cognizant and aware of the $14.2 billion debt at that time 

of the election in October of '91. 

 

Mr. Premier, along with the dictatorship that has been 

characterized in this session . . . has also been made . . . by the 

deception that I mentioned before and the destruction -- the 

three D's, as it were.  And I'm just going to lead you through a 

few of the whoppers that you told prior to 1991 election. 

 

Mr. Premier, in 1991 you promised the people of Saskatchewan 

no new taxes.  In fact you promised to reduce taxes by 

eliminating the PST (provincial sales tax).  That's what you 

said.  Mr. Premier, this was a promise you knew full well that 

you couldn't keep.  You knew that you wouldn't be able to keep 

that.  And what have been the results, Mr. Premier?  Mr. 

Speaker, higher PST, higher income tax, higher gas tax, higher 

property tax. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, as a result of this man's and this 

government's policies, we now have the highest total tax 

burden in all of Canada.  And jobs and growth and hope, Mr. 

Speaker, are draining out of this province.  They're draining . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  I would like to ask 

members to please come to order and let the member have his 

say.  Order, order. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The Premier does 

take this rather hardly, but we will continue.  Mr. Premier, I'm 

saying to you that it is because of this betrayal that the people 

of Saskatchewan are turning their attention elsewhere, and 

that's why you're heading in the polls in the direction where 

you're heading. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there's another whopper that I want to draw 

the public's attention to.  You promised in that '91 election -- 

and the reason why you're sitting there is -- that you said you 

would eliminate poverty, Mr. Premier.  Remember that?  You 

said -- and I'm going to quote you -- you said, and I quote:  

we're going to tackle poverty, we're going to put an end to food 

banks; nothing else will do.  End quote, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well what have you been doing on that promise, Mr. Speaker?  

I'll tell you what you've been doing.  There are now 68,000 

people in this province in the food bank line.  That's 12,000 

more than when 

you took office, Mr. Premier.  That's your record, that's your 

legacy -- 12,000 more in the food banks than when you were 

elected on the promise that you would eliminate poverty. 

 

Someone has once said, who's wiser than all of us in here, that 

the poor shall always be with us.  You said you were going to 

eliminate that, Mr. Premier.  You said that you would eliminate 

poverty. 

 

I can find another whopper that was told in the NDP campaign 

promise graveyard that I found, and that's . . . said back in 

April, 1991.  You stood in this House, sir, and you said, and I 

quote: to preserve and to protect our rural way of life . . .  

 

Mr. Speaker, continuing on in this quote: . . . this, Mr. Speaker, 

means a commitment to the future of our small towns and 

family farms; not words, but a commitment, solid programs.  

New Democratics have that commitment.  End quote of the 

Premier. 

 

Well, Mr. Premier, I guess the people are asking you now: 

what programs were you talking about?  Were you talking 

about your program to destroy GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program)?  Were you talking about your program to close 

down 52 rural hospitals?  Were you talking about your program 

to close rural service centres?  Were you talking about your 

program to close SaskPower offices?  To cut teaching 

positions? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- To cut the bus routes. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- To eliminate bus routes -- exactly.  Which one 

of those programs fulfils your promise, Mr. Premier, and I 

quote again, "to preserve and protect our rural way of life" as 

you promised, Mr. Chairman . . . or, Mr. Premier.  That's what I 

asked, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I don't know if we're going to have to start calling you burger 

king or not, but you served up a few more whoppers. 

 

And I want to make one more quote.  And I quote again: New 

Democrats would continue the fight to restore social programs 

such as the dental and drug plans to their former place of 

leadership in Saskatchewan.  End quote.  You said that, Mr. 

Premier.  That's your quote. 

 

You also promised never to close hospitals.  You closed 52 of 

them.  And here's what you once said about education funding, 

Mr. Premier.  And I quote again, Mr. Premier: Mr. Speaker, 

don't let any government tell you that they don't have enough 

funds for education.  The money is there.  End quote. 

 

Do you remember that, Mr. Premier?  That is exactly what you 

say, and now you're trying to say, where is it? 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Will the Premier and the 

Government House Leader please come to order.  I'm sure 

you'll have lots of opportunity to speak later on this evening . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well let the hon. member speak.  I 

don't want to warn the Premier again.  I don't want to call the 

other member to order either. 



2782 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 1993 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Me 

thinketh the Premier protesteth too much, as the saying goes.  

But I guess when it hurts, it hurts. 

 

I'm going to quote once more for you, Mr. Premier.  See if you 

can remember this one, and here I quote: 

 

  . . . partisan people, party people, and defeated MLAs and 

candidates ought not to serve on (government) boards. 

 

 If we don't succeed in (this) and continue to appoint party 

hacks . . . then I've gotten nowhere. 

 

End quote of the Premier while in opposition. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Graham Taylor, Eric Berntson . . . 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Eric Berntson, Graham Taylor, who else?  

Who else?  Now, Mr. Premier . . . Mr. Speaker, I thought I had 

the floor. 

 

The Speaker: -- I would ask the hon. member to address his 

words through the Speaker and not through somebody else.  

Address your words to the Speaker; ignore the other members 

please. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I'll address my words through you, Mr. 

Speaker, to the Premier, and that is what I want to do now, Mr. 

Speaker, because the big difference between our party that did 

those things that he says . . . and he can get the list of our 

political patronage appointments, which happened as part of 

the political process, and under the Blakeney government, 

under Thatcher's government, it has been the law of the land, as 

it were. 

 

We never, ever were elected on the promise that we wouldn't 

do that, sir, and that is where the people of the province take 

umbrage with you -- never, ever.  You were elected on those 

whoppers.  You were elected on the whoppers that you would 

never do it.  That's why the people put their trust in you, and 

that's why they feel so betrayed. 

 

Because having said . . . I'm going to have to repeat this again, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

 . . . partisan . . . people, party people and defeated MLAs and 

candidates ought not to serve on (government) boards. 

 

 If we don't succeed in (this) and continue to appoint party 

hacks . . . then I've gotten nowhere. 

 

Now the Premier's coming up with our list of political 

appointees. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Well I guess they've gotten nowhere. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- That's exactly right. 

So having made that promise, Mr. Premier, where's the count 

right now?  About 50 or 60 former candidates and high-profile 

party people you have handed out appointments to in spite of 

that promise, in spite of that promise.  And I say to you, Mr. 

Premier, and this is where the people are backing us again, they 

know full well now that when you were making those promises 

and saying anything to get elected, that they put their trust in 

you because they thought there would be something different. 

 

They weren't happy with us, were they?  No, that's why we're 

sitting here as a small cluster of 10 people.  We paid the price.  

And they thought that they were not buying a pig in a poke; 

they thought they were buying a gentleman's promise that he 

would keep.  And I'm saying to you, you never had any 

intention of keeping those promises because you wanted that 

chair that you're sitting lower and lower and lower in as I 

continue on my remarks, Mr. Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- But in spite of that, Mr. Speaker, there is 

some good that has been accomplished in this session.  We 

have seen, Mr. Speaker, for the first time since 1981 an 

opposition that does not share the view of the member for 

Elphinstone that the role of opposition is to make the province 

ungovernable.  We never set out to do that, as members 

opposite did in 1990.  We have been, in my humble opinion, 

and some members of the public may disagree, but I think we 

have been a fairly reasonable opposition.  We have gotten work 

done and we have passed laws and we have agreed with certain 

ones as long as they were in the best interests of the people. 

 

But when it came time to oppose . . . and the people in rural 

Saskatchewan and urban Saskatchewan from co-op members to 

whatever group there was, we have stood up for them and we 

have said to you, whoa up, come to your senses; listen to the 

people.  We saw that today in Bill 38.  You're not listening to 

the people.  You're not listening to the people. 

 

The big issue last year on publicly funded abortions, 63 per 

cent of the people said, we don't want it.  You didn't listen to 

people.  You're not listening to people. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that we have seen an opposition that 

has worked earnestly with limited resources to provide 

meaningful input and, Mr. Speaker, to provide alternatives, 

alternatives.  Because . . . and the Premier in his excitement 

and his eagerness to get on his feet says another whopper.  

Well, Mr. Premier, when I said that we have made alternatives 

and brought them forward, it is on record right now that this 

opposition, small as it is, limited resources as we have, we have 

come forward with 200 amendments, 200 reasonable, 

well-thought-out amendments. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, amendments as an 



June 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2783 

alternative to your dictatorial approach where you're willing to 

do what is necessary to have your way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over 200 amendments have been presented to the 

various Bills.  And sadly, the government has seen in each 

case, except the only very insignificant ones, we've seen that 

they have not seen fit to accept any of those. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have private members' Bills, we brought 

forward motions, we brought forward questions of serious 

purpose, and I think that has been the hallmark of the official 

opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to those things, we have developed 

new methods, new methods that facilitate the work of the 

Assembly.  Now I know to the Government House Leader this 

doesn't mean anything and to the Premier this doesn't mean 

anything, but we tried to facilitate the operations within this 

legislature. 

 

But we have done that, including the new Estimates process -- 

new Estimates process -- where we work in this Assembly and 

we go to committee outside of this Assembly and work 

coincidentally and at the same time to make this operation 

more efficient, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I have to say here that the government was 

accommodating and the government did cooperate in that 

process, and I think that's one of the reasons why we're going 

to be getting out of here hopefully around the 8 o'clock mark.  

Otherwise it could have dragged on for another week or so. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, indeed we have, in my opinion, accepted the 

responsibility of being in opposition.  And I want to speak just 

a minute on the responsibility of opposition.  Because, Mr. 

Speaker, in our opinion, opposition is not just a series of new 

releases.  Opposition is not what you say in a news conference 

or what you say in a speech.  Opposition, in other words, Mr. 

Speaker, is not just words; it is action. 

 

(1945) 

 

Mr. Speaker, only action can testify to the validity of the 

opposition.  Action alone verifies the conviction.  I would say 

to you, Mr. Speaker, that it is the only authentic form of 

self-expression.  When the official opposition, Mr. Speaker, 

told the rural communities we would fight the ill-advised and 

ill-planned NDP initiative to close 52 hospitals, we went into 

action.  We helped to organize rallies.  We helped to organize 

petitions, and we were helpful in forcing the government to 

hold off its legislative agenda until the most of the rural 

communities had an opportunity to speak out.  That's action, 

Mr. Speaker, and that is what we did. 

 

Now what I want to do is spend one moment examining the 

member from Saskatoon Greystone on this issue.  She issued 

statements.  She talked to the media, but I submit to members 

of this legislature, she did nothing else.  When it came time to 

do something 

about it, that Liberal member voted time after time after time 

with the NDP government to hurry the Bill through so that 

people would not have time to organize their resistance.  That 

is what she did, Mr. Speaker; every time she sided with the 

government. 

 

When she spoke to the rally outside of the legislature, Mr. 

Speaker, that opportunity would not have been there for her 

had it not been for the opposition party, this opposition party 

opposing the fast track that the NDP were trying to force in this 

legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- And do you know what?  She voted with the 

government every time on that issue.  Every time she voted 

with them.  And I'm going to say to you and to the people 

listening, that is not action; that's acting.  That's all it is, 

political acting.  That's taking advantage of a unique situation 

and position to say nice things but do none of the difficult, and 

sometimes, quite frankly, unpleasant work that is required by 

an effective opposition.  And, Mr. Speaker, this opposition is 

proud to have helped rural Saskatchewan on this issue through 

our actions.  And our actions do speak more loudly than 

whatever news release that member can ever put up. 

 

To be in opposition takes work, and there's a duty.  And I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, that this official opposition ends this 

session confident that it has honoured that duty and will 

continue to do so until the time comes a short . . . which maybe 

seem like a long time, but a short two years from now that we 

will . . . once again we will be trading places with members 

opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, whether flying 

around the world on a don't-worry-be-happy tour or being 

involved in Dwain's world or cancelling fair tenders to do 

business with union bosses only or gathering together the 

fossils of decades past, the NDP, Mr. Speaker, has reduced 

government to something less than an august and respected 

institution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we hope to change that very soon indeed, Mr. 

Speaker.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 7:49 p.m. 

 

 

 


