




















































Hansard: June 03, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2173 

 June 3, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This is to the 

Hon. Legislative Assembly.  The petitioner of the University of 

Saskatchewan Termuende farm of Lanigan support against the 

closure of the Termuende farm: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to show its overwhelming support 

in efforts to save the Termuende Research Farm, a definite 

asset to the beef industry of Saskatchewan, from closure this 

fall. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are people from Humboldt, Lanigan, from 

St. Gregor, from Fulda, from Middle Lake, Muenster; from 

Drake, Saskatchewan; from Lockwood, Saskatchewan; dozens 

and dozens of petitioners. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 

present a petition as well this afternoon.  And I'll just read the 

prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are from Stoughton, 

Saskatchewan, and from Viceroy, Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I also have petitions to present to the 

Assembly.  And I'll read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that in view of the 

NDP government's intention to unilaterally change legally 

binding agreements regarding NewGrade Energy Inc. that 

your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation 

introduced to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate 

governance and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have several 

petitions to present, Mr. Speaker, and I will read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray 

that your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to defeat any 

legislation introduced to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. 

corporate governance and financing arrangements. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions come from Regina.  There are 

quite . . . from Admiral, Bracken, Eastend, Shaunavon, and on 

through down into the south part.  Mr. Speaker, they represent 

quite a broad spectrum of the province.  I would so . . . 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have 

petitions to present today.  I'll read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions come from Alida, Redvers, Antler, Wauchope, 

Bellegarde in the south-east corner of the province, and a good 

number from  Regina Churchill Downs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm happy to 

present petitions today on behalf of people from the Lipton 

area and also from Davidson, Kenaston, Dysart, and Wynyard.  

The prayer reads as follows: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 As is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And I table them now. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have several 

petitions that is a pleasure for me to table this afternoon.  And 

as your request, Mr. Speaker, I'll just read the prayer. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this one page is full from Kenaston in my own 

constituency.  And the next page is all Kenaston.  And then the 

other three pages are all from Redvers.  It looks like they're all 

Redvers, Mr. Speaker -- Carievale, in that area; yes, the Revers, 

Carievale area. 

 

With pleasure I table these now, Mr. Speaker. 



2174 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1993 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also have the 

privilege to lay before the Assembly this afternoon, petitions 

based on a prayer that my colleagues have read out which I will 

also read. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the numbers of pages here that I have come from 

Regina, Regina, Regina, an entire page from Lipton, Mr. 

Speaker, and also from Saskatoon, and I notice also a number 

of signatures from Martensville. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to lay these on 

the Table this afternoon. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too want to 

present some petitions to the Assembly.  The prayer says: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And they are generally from Regina with some from Zehner. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

Mr. Speaker, members of the Legislative Assembly, it is my 

great honour to introduce to you today a very, very special 

guest to the province of Saskatchewan who is seated in your 

gallery, sir.  He is the ambassador of France to Canada, His 

Excellency Monsieur Alfred Siefer-Gaillardin.  And I'd ask the 

ambassador please to stand and to be recognized, sir. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- His Excellency is accompanied by 

Monsieur Claude Berlioz who is the consul-general of France 

in Edmonton.  He's seated beside him.  There is Mr. Berlioz.  

Welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- This morning the ambassador met 

with the ministers of Agriculture and Food, and Education, 

officials of the Department of Economic Development, and I 

believe, sir, a courtesy call with you, Mr. Speaker.  The Deputy 

Premier had the privilege of hosting the ambassador at a 

luncheon 

today, and it's going to be my pleasure to meet with them and 

discuss matters of mutual interest later this afternoon.  And 

after that, he will meet with members of the Association 

culturelle franco-canadienne de la Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you will know and all members know, France 

and French business people have a very special and important 

role to play in Canada but in the province of Saskatchewan.  

We have investments of French companies and people, and of 

course the importance of that is something which the province 

of Saskatchewan very much values.  I want to welcome His 

Excellency to the province, hope that he has found his visit and 

will find it informative and -- if I may use this term as well -- 

somewhat entertaining in your very busy schedule.  Thank you 

very much.  Bienvenue.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to join 

with the Premier in welcoming the ambassador to Canada.  It's 

on behalf of the official opposition we welcome you here and 

hope that you have a good visit with Saskatchewan.  And in the 

past few weeks we've had a good opportunity to meet with the 

ACFC (Association culturelle franco-canadienne de la 

Saskatchewan) people, and I hope you have a good visit with 

them also and welcome.  Thank you. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Merci, M. le président.  Je voudrais présenter à 

vous et à la Chambre aujourd'hui, ça me donne un grand 

privilege et un plaisir de présenter M. Alfred Siefer-Gaillardin, 

l'ambassadeur du France.  Il est ici aujourd'hui parmi nous.  Il a 

rencontré ce matin avec le Ministre d'Agriculture.  Il est aussi 

accompagné avec M. Claude Berlioz qui est le conseil général 

à Edmonton.  M. Siefer-Gaillardin, l'Ambassadeur, est ici à la 

Saskatchewan pour essayer d'améliorer les relations entre le 

Canada et la France et en particulier avec la Saskatchewan.  

Puis ça nous donne un grand plaisir de l'accueillir ici dans la 

Saskatchewan et à la Chambre aujourd'hui.  Je voudrais 

demander à tous mes homologues dans la Chambre de 

l'accueillir chaleureusement ici aujourd'hui.  Merci. 

 

(Translation:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce to you and to the Assembly today, it is a privilege 

and a pleasure for me to introduce Mr. Alfred Siefer-Gaillardin, 

ambassador of France, who is here with us today.  With him 

also is Mr. Claude Berlioz, who is the consul-general in 

Edmonton.  Ambassador Siefer-Gaillardin is here in 

Saskatchewan in an attempt to improve relations between 

Canada and France, and particularly Saskatchewan.  It gives 

me great pleasure to welcome him to Saskatchewan and to the 

House today.  I would ask all members to give him a warm 

welcome here today.  Thank you.) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce 

to you and through you to the rest of the 



June 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2175 

Assembly, 30 students from the Cut Knife Elementary School 

sitting in your Speaker's gallery with their teachers, Len Dupuis 

and Ken Cornish; chaperons Marion Robertson and Anita 

Veikle; and the bus driver, Kevin Beatch. 

 

I'm very pleased to welcome them here because this is a long 

drive from Cut Knife and I hope that they are enjoying their 

stay in Regina.  I will be meeting with them for photos at 2:30.  

And I would like the members of the Assembly to welcome 

them here and I hope you enjoy your visit. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, on 

behalf of my colleague, the member from Canora, it gives me a 

great deal of pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all 

the members of the House 22 grade 8 students from the 

Preeceville School who are seated in you east gallery, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And they are down here today from Preeceville and they're 

accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Lorne Plaxin, as well as 

their chaperons, Walter Blotski, Karen Johnson, and Nick 

Bellous, and their bus driver, Elgin Amy. 

 

And I will be having the pleasure of meeting with them later on 

for photos and refreshments.  And, Mr. Speaker, I'll ask all the 

members of the House to offer them a warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you and to other members of the 

House Mr. Zhonghua Tang who is the secretary of the Chinese 

embassy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Tang arrived in Canada for his post in 1992.  

He had been serving four years as the Bureau of International 

Co-operation, State Education Commission of China.  

Speaking English as a second language, Mr. Tang is 

specifically in charge of western Canada affairs at the 

education section of the Chinese embassy in Ottawa.  Along 

with Mr. Tang, is Wie Wong, a student at the University of 

Regina. 

 

Could you please stand up and we'll give you a warm welcome 

in this House. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, it's my pleasure to introduce to you and through you 

to all members of the Assembly some grade 6 and 7 students 

from Ecole Ross School in Moose Jaw who are seated in the 

west gallery today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I'm especially pleased to introduce these students because it's 

the first time in several years that we've had visitors from Ross 

School.  These students, Mr. Speaker, are accompanied today 

by their instructor, Mme. Corbert, and I will be meeting with 

them for a 

photo at 3 o'clock.  At 2:30, Mr. Speaker, they will be quietly 

leaving the galleries to take part in a half-hour tour of the 

legislative buildings and I look forward to meeting them at 3 

o'clock for photos. 

 

I'll ask all members to join in welcoming these visiting students 

from Ross School in Moose Jaw. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure today to 

introduce to you and through you to my colleagues in the 

legislature three separate groups of people.  The first is a friend 

very, very dear to my heart.  She's seated in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker.  Her name is Jeanette Britton.  She farms in Craven, 

and I taught with her for 15 years in Pilot Butte school.  She is 

accompanied today by her friend and relation, Mary Craig, who 

is visiting here from Scotland.  So I would ask all members to 

join me in welcoming them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: -- And seated in the east gallery, Mr. Speaker, 25 

grade 4 students from Pilot Butte School, where Jeanette and I 

taught together.  They are accompanied by their teacher, Marj 

Gross, and their bus driver, Mrs. Ruth Betteridge.  I can't see 

where they are but I'm looking forward to seeing them right 

after question period. 

 

And also, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my colleague, the member 

from Swift Current, and also seated in the east gallery, 41 grade 

4 students from St. Patrick's School in Swift Current.  They are 

accompanied by their teachers, Lenzena Zanidean, Maureen 

Hapke, and their chaperones, Suzie Berg and Camille Hannah.  

So I would ask all members to join me in welcoming these 

groups to the east gallery. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce 

to the Assembly through you a constituent of mine sitting in the 

west gallery.  Mr. Jerome Warrick is a delegate for 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and very interested in agricultural 

policy.  I had the pleasure of meeting him this morning.  I'd just 

like the House to welcome him today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 

introduce to you and through you to the Assembly, a number of 

individuals who are seated in the west gallery.  Representing 

Pine-Park Church of the Nazarene, Jason Boyd; Ernest Budd 

from the Evangelical Free Church; Steve Weir from Calvary 

Baptist; Harold and Charlene Lutzer, Community Impact 

Saskatchewan; Amie Manz from Saskatchewan Natural Law 

Society; Mervin Cockerill, Big Sky Free Methodist; Donelda 

Morrison, Faith Baptist; Edna Kramer, Faith Baptist; and Cathy 

Wilson, Hillsdale Alliance, as well as Ron Stickel, and I 

believe there are a few others who have come to observe the 

proceedings today in relation to their 



2176 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1993 

concerns regarding the Saskatchewan, their favourite province.  

Would you join me in welcoming them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, clearly the House 

has a lot of guests today, and I think this is the last introduction 

for the day.  To show you not only do we have a lot of . . . 

many guests, we have many interesting guests and almost 

comprising an aspect of the United Nations, because my final 

introduction to you, sir, and the members of the House, are four 

guests in your gallery.  And just a background word about 

these people. 

 

Last summer, while on a concert tour of the Ukraine, the 

Yevshan Ukrainian Folk Ballet Ensemble concluded exchange 

agreements with professional Ukrainian dance companies. 

 

Three ballet masters and choreographers from the Ukrainian 

cities of L'viv and Ternopil, have been in Saskatchewan, as a 

result, for the past three months working with the Yevshan 

dancers and have conducted a number of workshops with many 

other Ukrainian dance groups throughout the province of 

Saskatchewan.  These have all been coordinated by Dance 

Saskatchewan. 

 

It's coming to an end, and these three young Ukrainians are 

going to be going back home to the country of Ukraine, and I'd 

like them to stand as I introduce them to you.  There is first of 

all, Mrs. Nina Pyrehova, from Ternopil; Mr. Tadei Ryfiak, and 

Mr. Taras Vanivsky, from L'viv.  They are accompanied by 

Mr. George Zerebecky, multicultural consultant for the 

Saskatchewan Education, Training and Employment 

department. 

 

I'd like to thank them for their contributions to the province of 

Saskatchewan, and ask all members to welcome them.  Thank 

you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Before I call oral questions, I just want to 

remind our guests in the galleries that they are not to participate 

with anything that happens on the floor -- either your positive 

response or negative. 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Purchase of Video Lottery Terminals 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the minister responsible for gaming.  Mr. Minister, throughout 

our questions on the gaming industry and video terminals you 

have insisted that the only agency involved has been the 

Saskatchewan Gaming Commission.  And because the Gaming 

Commission is a quasi-judicial body you cannot answer 

questions of substance, questions regarding the proposals, 

questions regarding the security report and so on. 

 

You have repeatedly stated that these matters were handled by 

the Gaming Commission and the Gaming 

Commission only, Mr. Minister, and there was no involvement 

by the minister's office or any other political office. 

 

Mr. Minister, let me ask you today:  have you and your 

predecessor ministers or any other office of government ever 

been involved in a video lottery terminal processing in the 

bidding process? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- The answer, Mr. Speaker, is no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, we have received copies of 

letters that prove conclusively that you personally have been 

directly involved, a previous minister was directly involved, 

and the Premier himself is directly involved.  I warn you we 

will be releasing these letters to the media immediately after 

question period.  But before we go any further, I give you 

another chance to answer. 

 

Has your office and the Premier's office been involved in 

evaluating the various VLT (video lottery terminal) proposals? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

member opposite that we have been above-board with respect 

to the tendering process on VLTs.  I want to say that this is the 

72nd question that came from the member opposite, and the 

answer still remains the same. 

 

There was a panel of the Property Management Corporation, 

the Gaming Commission, Economic Development, and 

Finance, who did an analysis of the proposals put forth by the 

groups who wanted to be involved in selling to the Gaming 

Commission, video lottery terminals.  They were the people the 

Gaming Commission were responsible for short-listing and 

ultimately responsible for putting the short list to cabinet. 

 

That, I say to the member from Morse, is to the best of my 

knowledge the process that took place.  I can tell you that I was 

not personally involved in the proposal calls nor do I believe 

any of my colleagues were.  And if you have information 

contradictory to that -- which I don't believe the member can 

have because it's not there -- he should put it before the people 

of the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, would you provide details of 

that information that you have just stated to us, would you 

provide the details and table them in this Assembly for us all to 

see that that is the involvement of the people in the 

government.  And we want to have that observation made to 

this Assembly.  Would you provide that and table those 

documents 



June 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2177 

for us, please? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, this is now 

answer 73 to the same question, so let me respond to this.  If I 

want, the information that I have with respect to the member's 

question, I could pass a blank sheet of paper across to him, but 

I don't think that would serve the purpose of this line of 

questioning. 

 

What I say to the member is, and I've said to him before, that if 

he has any information pertinent to this particular issue, that he 

should table the documents.  And I look forward to him tabling 

the documents he says he has, after question period. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, while we do not 

know all of the players involved in the process, we have 

received copies of correspondence that indicate the following, 

Mr. Minister.  We know that you have been personally 

involved.  We know that the previous minister, the Minister of 

Labour, has been personally involved.  We know that Mr. Ron 

Clark, the deputy minister to the Premier, on the direction of 

Premier, has been involved in a detailed way, including 

meeting with proponents . . . In fact in a letter dated April 20, 

1993 Mr. Clark says: 

 

 I am familiar with a proposal from Thunderbird Gaming Inc. 

as well as the assessment process.  I can assure you that the 

process was rigorous and comprehensive. 

 

He goes on to speak about "our analysis".  Those are his words, 

Mr. Minister -- "our analysis of the bids". 

 

Mr. Minister, once again, in addition to the Premier's office, 

what other departments, agencies, and political offices have 

been involved in this process, and why have you made every 

effort to cover up this involvement? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, quite clearly the 

member has little to put before the people of this province, or 

he would have tabled it much sooner. 

 

I want to say to the member opposite that the process that we 

outlined, the people who did the analysis with respect to the 

bids that were submitted by Thunderbird, by GTECH, by the 

other corporations, was done by an intergovernmental group of 

people who have worked for this government for a long time.  

They were people who worked for the Property Management 

Corporation, for the Gaming Commission, for the Department 

of Finance, for the Department of Economic Development.  

And clearly someone within government has to do an analysis 

of the proposals to supply the electronic gaming equipment. 

 

Now I think, Mr. Speaker, that you will agree with me that it 

would be inappropriate for government to go 

ahead on the purchase of electronic gaming equipment without 

doing an analysis.  And clearly the government is going to do 

an analysis in order to be able to short-list the proposals that 

were put before this committee.  And I say to you, Mr. 

Member, that that is the process that we used.  It is a very 

appropriate way to handle a purchase of this kind.  And I've 

said to you before that this is the process. I've answered this on 

many, many occasions.  The answer today is the same as it was 

last week and it's the same as it was the week before that and 

the same as it was the week before that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, now that it is 

apparent that there has been political involvement at the highest 

level in this process, including the minister's office and the 

Premier's office, and now that the fact has been revealed, will 

you today do the right thing and open the entire mess up to full 

public scrutiny?  Will you do that today, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, let me say again to the 

member from Morse, I have outlined in detail the process for 

selection of the short-listed companies.  We have never hid 

that.  We think it's a process that was appropriate and that will 

serve the people of Saskatchewan well. 

 

You have to this date read nothing into the record that would 

indicate any inappropriate action by any member of cabinet or 

Executive Council or by any individual employee of the 

Government of Saskatchewan.  I say to you, Member from 

Morse, you're looking in the closet for skeletons that aren't 

there.  This government doesn't operate the way your 

government operated prior to '91.  This government will 

operate in a fair and an open way. 

 

Our analysis and our decision as to which companies we 

purchase from will be based on sound technology that they 

have to offer.  And I say to you that the process is fair and you 

know that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, all along you 

have given us the assurance that there has been no political 

involvement in the evaluation of the four proposals, and 

therefore you said there was no reason to release the details of 

the proposals or the question of the integrity of the process. 

 

Mr. Minister, now that it has been proven that political offices 

have been involved in the evaluation process, will you today 

make public the proposals that were made, and will you make 

them public so that Saskatchewan taxpayers can see that they 

got the best possible value for their $20 million?  Will you do 

that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



2178 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1993 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, let me say that it is 

becoming more and more clear that the member's line of 

questioning, the member for Morse's line of questioning, 

appears to be not whether or not we buy sound technology, not 

whether or not we get a fair price, but it appears to me that he 

may be representing someone with a vested interest in this 

particular deal, perhaps one of the companies who never were 

short-listed and who never won the tender.  I ask the member 

for Morse, is that what you're doing?  Are you lobbying on 

behalf of any particular company that didn't have the 

technology or didn't have the ability to supply the proper 

equipment to the Government of Saskatchewan?  Is that what 

you're all about, Mr. Member? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, if you truly 

believe that your government made the best choice in awarding 

the video lottery terminal contracts, Mr. Minister, if you are so 

certain that the choice you made was done for the public good 

and no political reasons, then why don't you simply make all 

the bids public and let the people of Saskatchewan decide? 

 

The people of Saskatchewan deserve to know why you gave 

$20 million of their tax money to an American company with 

alleged Mafia connections.  They deserve to know why you 

picked that company over all the other companies, including 

one Saskatchewan company.  What are you hiding, Mr. 

Minister?  Will you provide all of the details, proposals, and 

the content of those detailed proposals to this Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, let me say to the 

member opposite, that it is becoming more and more clear that 

his presentations in this legislature are on behalf of one of the 

companies who didn't pass the grade when we were putting the 

short list together for the procurement of the video lottery 

terminals. 

 

I want to say to the member opposite, when this deal is 

complete we're going to table the evaluation.  We'll put that 

before the people of Saskatchewan and we'll allow them to 

have a look at it.  We have nothing to hide. 

 

I want to say to the member from Morse that we have chosen 

the best technology.  It was done on a rating system that was 

fair and that was open.  And I just say to the member from 

Morse, instead of protecting the interests of one of your 

friends, and one of the corporations that you appear to be 

representing, why don't you support the government in buying 

the proper technology so we could . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I think the government 

members should allow the minister to be heard, rather than, in 

chorus, yelling with him. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Minister, if you're going to bring gambling into this province, it 

must be done in a way that instils the highest possible public 

confidence.  It must be done openly, honestly, so Saskatchewan 

people know they are getting the best possible value for their 

money.  And so that they know that choices are not being made 

for political reasons. 

 

Mr. Minister, you have absolutely done nothing to instil such 

confidence.  First you cover up the security report.  Then you 

cover up the facts that there has been no political involvement 

and at the highest levels -- and I'll present that to the Assembly 

and to the media later -- all the way up to the Premier's office.  

You say -- now you are covering up the proposals -- you still 

have nothing to hide, Mr. Minister.  You aren't acting like a 

man that has nothing to hide.  Remove the mystery.  Remove 

the doubt and open this entire mess that you have created up to 

full public scrutiny.  Will you do that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, let me say to the 

member from Morse what I've told him in this legislature 

before.  Gaming industry in this province will be run clean and 

above-board or there will be no industry in this province.  And 

I give him that commitment. 

 

I'm going to tell you what the gaming industry is going to be 

different from.  It's not going to be like GigaText in the 1980s 

where you blew five and a half million dollars on technology 

that nobody thought would work, including the guy that sold it 

to you.  We're not going to be buying computers that are 

overpriced and are not able to do the job.  We're going to be 

buying, at a fair market value, solid technology.  And we're 

going to introduce this into the video lottery terminal program 

in this province.  And we're going to assist through that 

program the rural hotels who are in such desperate financial 

straits.  That's what this government is about. 

 

I want to say to the member for Morse, this is not a GigaText 

and this is not a Trinitel and this is not a Joytec, this is not a 

High R Doors; this is going to be based on sound, honest 

business practices. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, at the 

beginning of the questioning I asked you the question whether 

there was any political involvement, and you said no.  Okay? 

 

Mr. Minister, it is our information that the Saskatchewan 

proposal involved a guarantee of 300 jobs in the city of Regina.  

Our information is also that the Saskatchewan proposal carried 

a financial guarantee by a subsidiary of the world's largest 

computer corporation, IBM.  Our information is that 

Saskatchewan proposal offered the identical technology as you 

approved in awarding the contract to American firms, so there 

is no technical basis for their refusal. 



June 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2179 

We know of the political involvement in the process, Mr. 

Minister.  Since you refuse to release the competing proposals 

to let us see for ourselves, at least clearly explain why you 

turned down 300 jobs for the province of Saskatchewan.  

Would you do that today, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, what I will say to the 

member for Morse about the procurement of these video lottery 

terminals is this.  Clearly you're representing the interests of 

Thunderbird Gaming who happened not to win the contract.  

That's very clear.  That's where you've got your information 

from. 

 

And if you want to know why they weren't chosen, I'll tell you, 

Mr. Member.  It was because they had no proven technology.  

They demanded the purchase of every video lottery terminal 

from their corporation.  We decided in terms of security that 

we would purchase from more than one company. 

 

So I say to the member for Morse, before you come into this 

legislature making wild accusations based on half-truths and 

innuendo, put the past aside.  Put the Conservative government 

of the 1980s beside.  Because we're not doing GigaText here, 

we're not doing High R Doors, and we're not doing Trinitel.  

What we're doing is business based on sound business 

practices. 

 

So I say to the member for Morse, Supercart is finished.  Get 

yourself out of the past administration and into the 1990s 

where government acts like a business. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to ask the 

minister responsible for gaming another question. 

 

The word disreputable means having a bad reputation, Mr. 

Minister.  If you want me to read news story after news story 

after new story about your gambling partners, I will do so.  

And these stories clearly establish GTECH has a bad 

reputation, Mr. Minister. 

 

The Saskatchewan proposal has a brand-new, fresh . . . no 

scandal, no mob connections, no indictments, no investigations, 

Mr. Minister, and besides they're prepared to put 300 jobs into 

the province of Saskatchewan plus hundreds more. 

 

If, as you claim, you want a clean gambling industry in our 

province, why would you not go with a firm that was totally 

clean and guaranteed in every way and at no risk to the 

taxpayer, Mr. Minister? 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  Will the 

government members please just calm down the noise a bit so 

we can hear the question from the member.  There's just too 

much noise on this side of the House when the question is 

being asked. 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  If, as you claim, 

you want a clean gambling industry, Mr. Minister, in our 

province, then why don't you go with a company that has that 

reputation?  The question I have is, what huge carrot caused 

you to abandon my Saskatchewan people in view . . . Mr. 

Speaker and Mr. Minister, abandon my Saskatchewan people 

in view of getting, in view of getting . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I'm going to stop the 

clock in question period until the government members simply 

come to order.  That's fine.  I'll stop the time in question period 

and we'll continue.  If the Premier comes to order, we can start 

question period again.  We'll stop the clock. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  This is about the sixth or seventh time 

that I've noticed the member from Humboldt has intervened 

during this question period.  I ask the members to please stop 

the clock if I'm interrupting from now on. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, the 

Saskatchewan proposal was brand-new, fresh, no scandal, no 

mob connections, no indictments, no investigations.  Mr. 

Minister, what huge carrot caused you to abandon my 

Saskatchewan people under these circumstances?  Would you 

give us the answer to that question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, let me say this 

to the member from Morse. He referred to a bad reputation, and 

he should know all about it because he sat with an Executive 

Council that made decisions that gave governments all across 

the world a bad reputation.  I tell you we're changing that in 

this province.  We're going to buy technology based on sound 

business practices. 

 

I say to you this.  Your friends at Thunderbird . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  No, do not stop the time.  I 

want to say to the member from Maple Creek that I've heard 

him at least a dozen times during this question period 

interrupting.  And I've just admonished other members and I 

ask him to abide by the same rules. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 

from Morse, Thunderbird Gaming's proposal commanded an 

absolute monopoly in terms of the purchase.  And if you're not 

aware of that . . . I'm sure they've told you that.  We determined 

that it was wiser -- the intergovernmental committee 

determined it was wiser -- to purchase from more than one 

company because of the possibility of bad technology, and we 

wanted to buy technology that had a proven track record.  And 

that's what we intend to do. 

 

And I say to the member from Morse, when we 



2180 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1993 

finalize this agreement, we will be concluding a deal that will 

be done in the best interest of the people of Saskatchewan, and 

it will be technology that has a proven track record, and it will 

serve the people of this province well. 

 

And I just want to say in closing . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Proposed Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the Minister of Labour.  Mr. Minister, once 

again we see you saying one thing in this House and another 

thing when you get outside of this House. 

 

Mr. Minister, over the past few weeks we have raised all kinds 

of concerns about Bill 55 and 56, and they're not just our 

concerns, Mr. Minister.  These concerns have been coming 

from both large and small employers, both the public and 

private sectors, the chamber of commerce, Canadian Federation 

of Independent Business, SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association), SARM (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities), and the SSTA 

(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association). 

 

But you've stood in this legislature and refused to listen to any 

of those concerns.  Yesterday though however, Mr. Speaker, 

the minister when speaking with a reporter said, I'm not sure 

we did a proper job on those two Bills.  Well, Mr. Minister, we 

finally agree on something, because I don't think you did a very 

good job either. 

 

Mr. Minister, now that you've added your own doubts to the 

doubts of thousands of Saskatchewan people, will you now 

agree to withdraw those two Bills. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No indeed.  The members opposite 

will have the opportunity to make their views known later on in 

the afternoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, once 

again your government is refusing to listen and is bull-headedly 

pushing forward with legislation that is going to cost employers 

millions of dollars and make us even less competitive with 

other jurisdictions like Alberta. 

 

Mr. Minister, your government's taxation policies have already 

created thousands of jobs in Alberta and now it seems that the 

Associate Minister of Finance, who wants to be the new 

tourism officer and economic development officer for 

Medicine Hat, agrees with that. 

 

Mr. Minister, why don't you do one thing for this Assembly 

and one thing for the province of Saskatchewan and try and 

protect jobs in this province for a change?  Why don't you 

withdraw those 

two Bills that are certain to drive thousands of jobs out of this 

province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There is not a scintilla of evidence 

that the amendments to the WCB (Workers' Compensation 

Board) or the occupational health and safety will drive a single 

job out of the province.  There is overwhelming evidence that 

if we don't do it, it's going to cost lives and it's going to cost 

injuries. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And there's 

overwhelming evidence that no one supports you in your bid, 

Mr. Speaker.  The Saskatchewan Construction Association 

doesn't want these two Bills.  The Prairie Implement 

Manufacturers Association do not want these two Bills.  The 

Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, SUMA, SARM, SSTA, 

Saskatchewan hospitals association -- those are just to name a 

few, Mr. Minister, of the associations and groups, business 

groups around this province that do not agree with you. 

 

Mr. Minister, there's no shame in admitting that you're wrong.  

Mr. Minister, don't let your political agenda take precedence 

over the protection of jobs in this province.  Withdraw those 

two Bills.  Do your homework.  Bring back two more 

appropriate Bills at later date, Mr. Minister.  Will you do that 

for us today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Progressive employers as well as the 

democratic institutions which represent them, the trade unions, 

all agree that if we are to succeed, we must do so in 

partnership.  Management and labour must be working together 

in partnership. 

 

That cannot happen if workers are left unprotected and are 

subject to needless injuries, which is the current situation.  I 

know the party that allowed the Shand tragedy to occur cannot 

be accused of compassion or caring about workers.  This 

government does, and we're going to see that this changes.  

And you'll get your opportunity to make your comments this 

afternoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Well it sounds very much like trained seals.  

It's been not a very good day for question period today. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 38 



June 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2181 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 38 -- An Act to 

amend The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I am 

again pleased to stand in my place to make a few comments 

and address the motion, the Bill that's before the Assembly, the 

piece of legislation that is going to redefine the definition of the 

Human Rights Code, reopen the discussion and debate.  And in 

my opinion and the opinion of many people across this 

province -- and a number of residents of the province have 

taken the time to come to the Assembly to observe the 

proceedings because of their concerns -- it's going to open the 

door to a specific group in our society and giving them an 

avenue whereby they can make greater and greater demands 

and put more pressure on public bodies such as government to 

implement their desires. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we first started discussing Bill 38 and the 

discussion that's taken place . . . And certainly the pressure has 

been on governments for years.  It was on our government.  It's 

been on the provincial government of the day, the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) Party.  In fact over the past number of years 

at their own provincial conventions, they have had resolutions 

on the floor asking that they change the Human Rights Code, 

demanding that they change the Human Rights Code.  And as I 

said the other day, one has to wonder why you would really, if 

all we're interested in is housing and employment, why indeed 

we would open up the doors and open up the debate on the 

Human Rights Code rather than bringing in a specific piece of 

legislation to address those issues if indeed discrimination on 

that basis is taking place. 

 

And as I indicated the other day . . . and I'm just going to read a 

couple comments into the record.  If we go back to November 

13, 1992 and the appointment of Donna Greschner as the 

human rights commissioner and the news release of her 

appointment, shortly after being appointed to the position she 

made this comment and I quote.  She said she would ask: 

 

 . . . Justice Minister Bob Mitchell to add sexual orientation to 

the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code as a prohibited ground 

of discrimination. 

 

And then in response on December 11, 1992, the Justice 

minister and -- I again quote: Justice Minister Mitchell said the 

government wanted to introduce an amendment -- that's a quote 

from the Leader-Post, Mr. Speaker -- introduce an amendment 

outlawing discrimination generally, rather than against any 

specific group.  And, Mr. Speaker, the quote ends with these 

headlines: this suggestion outraged gays.  End quote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we've been standing in this Assembly and 

debating, and as many residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan have brought this issue to the forefront, brought 

their concerns to our caucus, raised the concerns, I'm sure, with 

the Premier, with the Minister of Justice and with all of his 

colleagues -- in fact I dare 

say there isn't an MLA (member of the Legislative Assembly) 

sitting in this Legislative Assembly today that doesn't have a 

folder full of letters and submissions made by people who have 

been concerned about the piece of legislation -- and one thing 

that has always come to the forefront, that Saskatchewan 

residents are fair and Saskatchewan residents are more than 

willing to see to it that individuals are treated fairly, and that 

individuals, regardless of race, religion, nationality, sex, creed, 

or colour, are not discriminated against. 

 

And I'd like to . . . and they've gone so far as to suggest even 

individuals who would have a homosexual tendency should not 

be discriminated against on the basis of employment and 

housing.  And I'd like to just read a few lines from a letter I 

received, basically bringing out that point. 

 

 As persons, homosexuals deserve the same care, compassion 

and dignity as every other human being;  and I also believe 

that when their basic human dignity is violated the full 

weight of the law should be used to protect them.  What I fail 

to see is why special legislation is needed to accomplish this, 

since present Canadian law fully recognizes homosexuals as 

citizens and persons and provides equal protection for all.  

Persons our present laws discriminate against are the unborn 

and this legal inequity does need to be changed,  but no such 

inequity exists for homosexuals.  Therefore I fail to see why 

special legislation is needed for homosexual persons. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think when we take a look at the Human 

Rights Code, the Canadian Bill of Rights -- and the Minister of 

Justice in his second-reading speech very eloquently talked 

about the Human Rights Code and the implementation of the 

Bill of Rights, both here in the province of Saskatchewan, and 

by the former prime minister, Mr. Diefenbaker, a resident and 

native of this province, when he was the Canadian prime 

minister -- and everyone will agree that over the years our 

Canadian Bill of Rights have always recognized that people 

have the right to freedoms -- the freedom of expression, the 

freedom to voice their opinions, the freedom to worship freely, 

the freedom to employment, freedom to housing.  In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, I just want to read a few of the rights that we as 

Canadian citizens enjoy: 

 

 It is hereby recognized and declared that in Canada there are 

have existed and shall continue to exist without 

discrimination by reason of race, national origin, colour, 

religion, or sex, the following human rights and fundamental 

freedoms, namely:  the right of the individual to life, liberty, 

security of the person, and enjoyment of property and the 

right not to be deprived thereof, except by due process of the 

law; the right of the individual to equality before the law and 

protection of the law; freedom of religion; freedom of 

speech; freedom of assembly and association; and freedom of 

the press. 



2182 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1993 

And it would seem to me, Mr. Speaker, that that statement 

includes everyone. It doesn't leave anyone out.  I do not believe 

that by specifically adding the words, or the term, sexual 

orientation, is really necessary because I believe everyone is 

covered under the Charter of Rights and Freedoms and the Bill 

of Rights that our Canadian constitution and parliament has 

established. 

 

We also have a guarantee of rights and freedoms. 

 

 The Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms guarantees 

the rights and freedoms set out in it subject only to such 

reasonable limits prescribed by law as can be demonstrably 

justified in a free and democratic society. 

 

And again it brings out some of the freedoms that I just 

reiterated a minute ago. 

 

Every citizen of Canada has a right to vote in election for the 

members of the House of Commons or its Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

 Every individual is equal before and under the law and has 

the right to the equal protection and equal benefit of the law 

without discrimination and, in particular, without 

discrimination based on race, national or ethnic origin, 

colour, religion, sex, age, or mental or physical (ability) . . . 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the minister has argued on numerous 

occasions that by changing our specific charter really would 

not make a difference in the major scheme of things. And 

maybe that's true. 

 

Because I believe it was just the other day there was a ruling 

came down in British Columbia and it was pointed out that the 

ruling was based on the charter of rights, the Canadian Bill of 

Rights, and really not specifically related to the British 

Columbia charter of rights. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's fair and that's fine.  But I would suggest to 

you, as I have heard over the past number of days and number 

of weeks, that any time any province . . . and a number of 

provinces have changed their charters -- what you do is just 

open the door for another avenue for legal argument. 

 

And I think we have seen, even in this Legislative Assembly, 

the arguments that can take place.  And there isn't a lawyer 

sitting in this room, if you give them a particular point or 

clause or motion to argue, will argue the same point.  They'll 

all see something different in it.  They'll all have a different 

interpretation. 

 

And it would appear to me that what we have before us in this 

present Bill, in this piece of legislation, indeed, as has been 

brought to my attention, brought to the attention of my 

colleagues, leaves sexual orientation and family status wide 

open for interpretation by the courts.  And by bringing this 

piece of legislation forward, Mr. Speaker, we indeed give the 

courts the avenue, in fact we put the responsibility of the 

decisions that should be made by a legislative body, elected by 

the people to represent the people, in the hands of a few 

appointed by a few.  And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that is wrong. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if it is true the legislation before us today is only 

ensuring that all people are being protected against any 

discrimination regarding housing and employment, as I've said 

the other day, why such a rousing second-reading speech given 

by the Minister of Justice regarding this piece of legislation?  I 

believe that it's very obvious that this is not the case since the 

members opposite gave the minister a standing ovation for his 

efforts. 

 

And as the minister has indicated on a number of occasions, he 

gave the speech because he obviously was not sure that what he 

is bringing forward in the legislation is really going to stand, so 

he's trying to make his points very clearly.  Yet at the same 

time I would think he would admit that anything we put down 

in legislation, as I indicated just a moment ago, is open to 

challenge, especially challenge in the court. 

 

The minister has said, on separate occasions, that Bill 38 will in 

no way affect the adoption of children, the teaching of 

homosexuality in our schools and the like.  But that is not what 

Bill 38 states.  Instead the way in which Bill 38 is presented 

cannot be acceptable because there are far too many loopholes 

that have yet to be tightened up. 

 

I believe what Bill 38 does, is become very loose  In fact, 

instead rather than tightening up and establishing what the 

criteria are and what the terms mean and laying out what we as 

Canadian citizens and residents of Saskatchewan have built our 

society around, instead of establishing some sound moral 

factors and fibre and guidelines that this nation has been built 

upon, I believe Bill 38, Mr. Speaker, indeed goes a little further 

to just opening up the doors to groups even beyond the 

homosexual community to demand greater what they call rights 

without . . . but they forget their responsibility as Canadian 

residents. 

 

That is why my constituents are afraid of, Mr. Speaker . . . that 

is what my constituents are afraid of, Mr. Speaker, and these 

concerns are very valid ones. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in fact there are states, specifically Colorado and 

Oregon, who have repealed similar legislation because these 

laws were being used to challenge much more than just 

discrimination against housing and employment.  In fact I 

believe it's the state of Massachusetts is also dealing with the 

question. 

 

(1500) 

 

A number of states . . . What I'm saying, Mr. Speaker, there are 

a number of states who did open up their charters, who did add 

the word "sexual orientation," who are finding that it's created 

more problems for them and are now asking the people for 

their views on it.  And what they found, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

views 



June 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2183 

of the residents and the voters in each and every one of these 

states, to a resounding degree, have said: that's not good; we 

don't believe in it; remove those terms, and if indeed there is 

discrimination in certain areas, bring in specific legislation.  

And that's what we're seeing happen today, and I believe it will 

continue to happen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let's iron out the details here so the same thing 

doesn't happen in Saskatchewan.  As Bill 38 stands, the same 

will be true in this province if this legislation is not tightened 

up and revised. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a brief concerning this very issue was given to 

you by a gentleman named Elwood Larson . . . pardon me, Mr. 

Speaker, it was given to the Premier and given to the Minister 

of Justice.  But I'm sure many people across the province have 

seen that article.  And it states, and I want to quote: 

 

 The third reason I oppose homosexuality in the Code is that 

homosexual practises violate conventional Saskatchewan 

morality . . . I am sure that you would agree with me that last 

month's vote in the state of Colorado which denied the 

granting of special rights to homosexuals, was not an attack 

on homosexuals, it was not vicious, nor negatively 

right-wing, rather it was an expression by the ordinary and 

average citizen of Colorado affirming common conventional 

morality in the area of sexuality. I am sure that you would 

also agree with me that the citizens of Saskatchewan, given a 

similar opportunity, would also affirm their commitment to 

traditional sexual morality. We often hear the old saying "you 

can't legislate morality".  In a sense that is true.  On the other 

hand, however, it is also true that there is no value-neutral 

legislation.  Every piece of legislation from school-zone 

speed limits to corporate tax laws can be considered 

legislated morality.  In this sense, it is necessary for the good 

and protection of the public, to guide society's behavior by 

the legal imposition of values and morality.  The question for 

our purposes in the matter of sexuality is: whose morality 

will be legislated?  It (will) . . . be devisive at best, and could 

not be considered reasonable under any circumstances, to 

force the vast majority of Saskatchewan citizens to affirm the 

chosen sexual lifestyle of a tiny minority that according to 

common conventional morality follows deviant and abnormal 

sexual practices. 

 

This is just one of the many letters that we have received 

regarding the information that has been presented on Bill 38. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to look at another letter, and this 

comes from a doctor in the province of Saskatchewan.  And the 

doctor is raising a number of points that he had taken the time 

to review the comments made by the minister, Mr. Mitchell, in 

his comments and I believe even a letter that -- the Minister of 

Justice -- that he had sent in response to 

his letters. 

 

And there's three points that this individual, this doctor in the 

province here brings out, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, he says 

number one he says in referring to the Minister of Justice: 

 

  . . . "whether or not homosexuality is a matter of choice or 

not is an issue still to be determined (definitely) . . . in the 

medical or scientific community.  In any case it is not a factor 

for the purposes of deciding whether human rights protection 

is appropriate." 

 

 Consider this argument.  When one observes and studies 

demographics of homosexual individuals, one commonly 

comes across the fact that the majority of homosexual males 

had poor if not dysfunctional relationships with their fathers 

during their childhood development.  It has therefore been 

suggested that homosexuality develops out of a need to 

replace or restore that lost father/son relationship in males.  

This draws us to conclude that homosexuality could be a 

symptom of a psychological deficit or illness.  By 

"protecting" such individuals in our Human Rights Code, this 

legislation will actually contribute to the illness rather than 

promote healing. 

 

On a second point and again referring to the minister, he says, 

regarding the minister: 

 

 You state . . . "homosexuals say that discrimination does, in 

fact, occur and that some of them do lose jobs for no reason 

other than their sexual orientation." 

 

 My response to (that) . . . point is simple.  You are taking the 

word of the self interest group at face value and are changing 

legislation to accommodate them.  I am no lawyer but the 

implications here are incredulous.  Is there no questioning of 

the validity of these claims? 

 

And I would ask the minister and I would ask the government, 

if indeed people have lost a job or been forced out of housing 

due to discrimination based on their sexual orientation, why 

doesn't he release some of the information to the Assembly.  

How many cases are there before the Assembly?  How many 

cases have actually gone before the Human Rights 

Commission?  It would seem to me, Mr. Speaker, that there are 

many other cases -- cases regarding labour and employment -- 

that have nothing to do with the sexual orientation of an 

individual and that indeed the discrimination based on sexual 

orientation is very minute, if at all. 

 

Thirdly, a statement by the . . . 

 

 You state that there are grounds of discrimination included in 

the human rights code not based upon innate characteristics, 

-- example marital status,  religion. Therefore is 



2184 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1993 

not unusual to include homosexuality in the human rights 

code. 

 

 This is a reasonable point. However, the main distinguishing 

factor with the gay community is that they not only want 

tolerance, they want public endorsement of their behaviour.  

In other words they are imposing their lifestyle and morality 

on our society.  There is presently a strong push to see 

homosexuality taught in our education system, enforced in 

our churches through penalities for wrongful dismissal, and 

endorsed in our legal system through an effort to redefine the 

family. 

 

 This proposed legislation is one step closer to validating all 

of the above gay community agendas.  For example, if 

homosexuality is included in the human rights code this is all 

the fire power our educators need to rationalize teaching it to 

our children as an acceptable (lifestyle) . . . 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, even the chairman of the Human Rights 

Commission has suggested that people may need to be 

educated to the fact that it is not right to discriminate against 

homosexuals.  And, Mr. Speaker, we're not arguing whether it's 

right to discriminate or not.  We don't believe discrimination is 

right.  But we don't also believe we should be condoning the 

lifestyle of individuals. 

 

In addition I am surprised the NDP government does not want 

to listen to people on this issue, and I believe the minister has 

had phone calls, letters.  Who knows how many?  I am sure he 

has had many people across the province of Saskatchewan take 

the time, not only to request and maybe . . . and no doubt if he's 

probably visited with many individuals, and I would strongly 

suggest that the group that have been speaking out and 

representing the moral side of this issue have been far greater 

than the individuals who would be demanding the changes that 

we are presently considering. 

 

Considering that it is highly sensitive, one would think the 

voice of the people should certainly be heard.  Unfortunately I 

believe this is not the case, and the minister and the 

government have certainly indicated to the official opposition 

that it is their full intent not to pull the Bill or not to let it die, 

but to push it through this Assembly, through this House before 

the House adjourns. 

 

It reminds me, Mr. Speaker, of the GRIP (gross revenue 

insurance program) debate.  It reminds me, Mr. Speaker, of the 

debate that has taken place on health.  It reminds me, Mr. 

Speaker, of the debate we're taking place regarding NewGrade.  

And I'm also reminded of the fact that, Mr. Speaker, on the 

plebiscite on abortion, the government also indicated that they 

would not heed the wishes of the people of Saskatchewan.  

And that just called for the defunding of abortions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not only has the Minister of Justice said 

go ahead and get your 100,000 signatures -- we're not going to 

listen anyway -- but they have also denied a . . . Mr. Speaker, 

not only has he said that, he's also denied a free vote in this 

House.  He's basically said to everyone on his side of the House 

. . . and I believe the minister would argue that everyone is 

fully supportive.  And one would have to question whether 

they're supportive because of the fact that they've been coerced 

and led to believe that this is nothing at all -- this piece of 

legislation is nothing at all -- or the fact that members have just 

at times sat back and just wondered whether it really pays them 

at all to really speak out and voice their constituents' concerns 

because I know many constituents across this province 

represented by NDP members have been talking to their 

members.  Mr. Speaker, the government is denying its 

members the opportunity to truly represent their constituents, 

and this is not acceptable. 

 

Legislation like Bill 38 has been attempted in other places, Mr. 

Speaker, and direct parallels can easily be made.  Mr. Speaker, 

I just want to make a few comments regarding the education 

process and a couple points brought out by the natural law 

society of Saskatchewan.  These amendments in Bill 38 will 

not mean that sexual orientation will be taught in schools as an 

acceptable alternative lifestyle -- that was a point I believe the 

minister raised in response to some questions that we brought 

forward.  The responses to that comment from the minister was 

this: 

 

 This unfortunately is not the goal of the homosexual 

movement as experienced on a global scale.  In Canada, 

Winnipeg's "Gays for Equality" coordinator, Chris Vogel 

says: . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, there have been lots of quotes in the media over 

the past number of years, and I believe we will see them 

continue.  And in fact I believe that they will even come in a 

more steady stream than we have seen today as this group of 

individuals make greater demands on society to accept their 

lifestyle. 

 

Another comment, it says: 

 

 Key Canadian leaders of the homosexual movement in 

Canada attended the 1993 "Washington March".  The 

steering committee hammered out a platform of homosexual 

rights and demands, and approved it unanimously.  Following 

a preamble, under the heading: 

 

  Education/Students :the platform called for schools to 

"offer culturally inclusive Lesbian, Gay bisexual 

programs and information on abortion, AIDS/HIV, 

child care and sexuality at all levels of education." 

Also, it said "campus offices and programs to 

address Lesbian, Gay, bisexual and transgender 

students' special needs should be established and 

discrimination against homosexuals should be 

ended in all programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's fair and it's fine and it's acceptable for 



June 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2185 

the minister to say to us and to attempt to tell us that all his 

legislation will do is prevent discrimination, will not allow for 

the educational programs, will not allow for the demands of 

marital status, will not allow for adoption.  And, Mr. Speaker, 

as we've seen taking place, this group of individuals have used 

whatever means possible to demand greater acceptance and 

access of their lifestyle by the public. 

 

Take for instance the situation in Ontario and what has 

happened to their education system because of similar 

legislation.  Mr. Speaker, my constituents do not want 

homosexuality taught in classrooms, and I doubt many others 

do either.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, if you looked across this 

province, it would be interesting to note how many parents are 

choosing to spend the extra dollars to send their children to 

private schools or to Christian education schools or even to 

teach them at home because they feel the public system hasn't 

listened to their voice. 

 

Can the minister really assure my constituents that sexual 

orientation programs will not be left to determine the meaning 

behind a phrase such as: the commission shall develop and 

conduct educational programs designed to eliminate 

discriminatory practices related to sexual orientation?  Yes, I 

say he can, if he changes the legislation to do so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, families want assurance that this will not happen 

in Saskatchewan and they deserve to have their minds rest at 

ease on this issue.  They want a statement in the Bill that says 

homosexuality is not being endorsed as a lifestyle.  And 

restrictions preventing a gay lifestyle by being promoted in 

schools or extending adoption rights and spousal benefits to 

homosexual couples should be in the amendments proposed in 

Bill 38. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also a letter all members of this Assembly 

received from Mr. Bernakevitch regarding Bill 38 states . . . 

and a couple comments he made.  And I think they're very 

appropriate and very sound.  He says: 

 

 General and specific restrictions should be placed on the 

extent of protection given to homosexuals.  For example the 

homosexual lifestyle should not be promoted in any manner 

through school curriculums or by giving homosexual couples 

benefits accorded to heterosexual couples i.e., private 

adoption, spousal benefits. 

 

He also goes on and says: 

 

 Consideration should be given to amending other legislation 

to allow them to be operative notwithstanding the 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Code. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I wholeheartedly agree. 

 

(1515) 

 

If, Mr. Speaker, Bill 38 is truly before this Assembly 

today only to ensure no discrimination based on housing or 

employment, then why is this law being enshrined inside the 

Human Rights Code?  Why not a specific Bill dealing with 

these two issues? 

 

The members opposite . . . In fact the Justice minister has 

stated that discrimination on these grounds -- sexual orientation 

-- is happening today to individuals in this province.  They talk 

of studies proving this, yet nothing has been supplied to 

members to prove this point. 

 

The minister says there is nothing in Bill 38 that changes the 

traditional definition of who can be considered as married.  Yet 

Bill 38 is quite open to the interpreter even on this point.  Mr. 

Speaker, even the term sexual orientation is vague, undefined, 

and open-ended which, as I've argued before, opens many 

doors for those in our society who are unfortunately 

pedophiles. 

 

Presently this is being examined in the House of Commons as 

well on a debate that's taking place.  And Mr. Tom Wappel, an 

MP (Member of Parliament) in the House of Commons, the 

Liberal MP, studying to the pedophile group said: 

 

 if we do not define what we are talking about, it may very 

well be for example that pedophiles will claim that is merely 

their natural sexual orientation with which they were born; 

therefore they should not be persecuted for it. 

 

 Of course we're not talking about persecuting pedophiles.  

We're talking about protecting innocent children.  I made no 

bones about the fact that sexual orientation shouldn't be in the 

charter, but if it is going to be then let's know what the heck 

we're talking about and let's define it, and not the Supreme 

Court some 10 years from now. 

 

And that was December 1992. 

 

Mr. Speaker, families must have their say.  Another submission 

made to the Minister of Justice states, and I quote: 

 

 All societies distinguish between what is tolerable behaviour 

and what is not.  Those who fail to conform to society's 

expectations are disciplined or excluded.  This is why 

Canadian society and law regularly discriminate against 

smokers, impaired drivers, drug abusers, criminals, illegal 

aliens, the visually impaired, those afflicted with highly 

contagious diseases, etc.  Similarly, smaller groups within 

Canada established standards for admission and do not treat 

all Canadians equally.  Unions won't protect non-union 

workers.  Sororities won't accept men.  Universities won't 

admit D students.  Sports teams exclude the unskilled.  

Churches require their membership to affirm certain beliefs.  

Corporations require workers reaching 65 years to retire.  In 

each case, (Mr. Speaker) there is some form of acceptable, 

even 



2186 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1993 

essential, discrimination.  Remove the right of a society or 

group to have standards of admission and to exclude some 

people from membership -- example, to discriminate -- and 

the group (will) . . . soon cease to exist. 

 

And yet another comment from REAL Women (Realistic, 

Equal, Active, for Life Women), and this is what they state: 

 

 Historically, the courts and civil rights authorities have 

applied three criteria to provide special protected status to 

disadvantaged minority classes.  This criteria consists of an 

established history of economic, educational, and cultural 

discrimination; immutable group characteristic; and political 

powerlessness.  However, on none of these grounds can the 

homosexual claim discrimination. 

 

Talking about economic, educational, and cultural criterion: 

 

 Homosexuals as a class do not suffer economic hardship.  

(That's one of the arguments that has been placed before this 

Assembly.) Marketing studies indicate that homosexuals are 

both highly educated and affluent.  The average household 

income for homosexuals is $62,000 Canadian; and the 

average household income for lesbians is $41,000.  Four 

times as many homosexuals have post secondary education 

than the general population; and almost three times as many 

lesbians have post secondary education.  Homosexuals have 

significant influence in the arts as well as in other cultural 

areas. 

 

And that study was just taken recently.  I believe it was a 1991 

study. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is clear that there are opposing points of view 

on Bill 38 and I believe Bill 38 as it is written does not address 

most of the concerns voiced by organizations and families 

today.  Therefore I believe something needs to be done.  I 

believe it is imperative that we take our place in this Assembly, 

and I would invite many members on the government side of 

the House who haven't spoken yet to stand up and let us know 

what they really believe and where they really stand on some of 

these issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we do live in a great country.  We are very 

fortunate individuals.  We can be thankful for the heritage that 

has been passed on to us.  We live in a nation that was built 

upon principles, built upon the Judaeo-Christian values that 

established guidelines for this country to live within, for the 

individuals within this country to live within. 

 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, with those guidelines, with those 

principles, and with those freedoms, and with those rights, 

comes responsibility.  We as Canadian citizens and residents of 

Saskatchewan not only have many rights, but we have the 

responsibility 

to respect those rights and the rights of other individuals.  That 

means respecting the rights of the homosexual community as 

well.  And, Mr. Speaker, not one group has any specific extra 

or additional rights, or I do not believe that they do have nor 

should they have, over any group. 

 

And therefore, Mr. Speaker, it is imperative that we stand up 

and represent . . . we stand for values in our society.  Because 

what I see, Mr. Speaker, taking place in our society, taking 

place in this great nation, is we have endeavoured to assimilate 

every cultural identity and group within this nation and within 

the world to the point that we have basically watered down the 

principles and ideals that this country was established on.  And 

any group and any person is welcome to come to Canada and 

call it their home; but I believe we should respect the values 

and laws of our nation, just as I would respect the values and 

laws of any other nation if I were to move and make it my 

home. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I find it very difficult, in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, it is impossible for me to support the Bill that is 

before this Assembly.  And I therefore move at this time, 

seconded by the member from Maple Creek: 

 

 That the Bill not now be read a second time, but that the Bill 

be read a second time six months hence. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- The question before the Assembly is an 

amendment moved by the member from Moosomin, seconded 

by the member from Maple Creek, that Bill . . . I assume we're 

referring to Bill 38.  I believe that in the motion we need to 

have that.  Because the motion doesn't indicate anything else, I 

would send it back to the member and make that correction. 

 

The question before the Assembly is Bill 38 moved by the 

Minister of Justice and the amendment moved thereto by the 

member from Moosomin and seconded by the member from 

Maple Creek: 

 

 That Bill 38 not now be read a second time, but that Bill 38 

be read a second time six months hence. 

 

I find the amendment in order and the debate will continue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It has been quite a 

while since the introduction of this Bill to the Assembly.  And 

as you are well aware, and the rest of the folks will be, this 

issue was predominant on the minds of many people for a 

considerable length of time before the introduction to this 

Assembly. 

 

Opposition to this Bill and to Bills like it have gone on 

throughout society on a national and on an international basis 

for a long time now.  So the issue is 



June 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2187 

not a new issue and no matter what happens in this Assembly, 

the issue won't go away.  Whether it be positive or negative, we 

will continue to live with it because issues of morality are 

issues that go along with our lives for as long as there is 

mankind. 

 

The fundamental question, I guess, that we have to ask of 

ourselves as people elected to represent the people of 

Saskatchewan is: how will this Bill affect our lives here in 

Saskatchewan?  Will it affect our lives in a positive or a 

negative way?  Or would there be some middle ground of 

compromise that would sufficiently suffice the needs of all? 

 

And as always is the case, Mr. Speaker, it is very, very difficult 

to find middle ground on moral issues.  I guess that's why our 

leader decided that he would say to those of us in his caucus 

that he felt that this was the kind of issue where he wouldn't 

impose his personal feelings on us in any way, shape, or form.  

He therefore said to us that he was releasing us from our 

responsibilities as a caucus and that we would have the 

independence to vote according to our conscience, as we saw 

fit. 

 

Realizing that some of the members of the government side 

might also have some problems as individuals, and realistically 

so, because there are bigger numbers of them than there are of 

us, he suggested to the government some weeks back that they 

should also consider this approach. 

 

I still believe that this would be a good idea for the government 

members, although at this point I realize, having heard all of 

my other colleagues speak on this issue, that it is rather 

unimportant for us as an opposition because it does seem very 

positively so that we are in fact united in our thinking to a large 

degree. 

 

We have some personal differences on how the morality of the 

Bill will affect our society.  But in general we oppose the 

direction that the Bill can be taken, not its intent by the 

minister, because obviously he is an honest man of integrity 

who has stated publicly inside this House and out, that he 

intends to only do so many things with this Bill and that all 

other things are not intended to be done. 

 

Unfortunately he and his government have to admit and have 

done so, both inside this Assembly and outside, that other rules 

in our society will supersede what is written in this particular 

piece of legislation. 

 

The Human Rights Code in the constitution of our country, the 

Human Rights Code of our province, those are kinds of pieces 

of law that supersede all others.  And a notwithstanding clause, 

even though that that is the legal definition of an easy way to 

negate all other things that have been written or said, that 

cannot apply against the rules that are written in those 

superseding laws. 

 

And that concerns me deeply, Mr. Speaker, because we have 

seen examples, direct examples of very simple civil law in our 

province of late, where it fact 

rulings have been made by the courts stating emphatically that 

building codes and other regulations of our province are 

superseded by the Human Rights Code. 

 

(1530) 

 

The art gallery situation that was brought up in this Assembly 

that has gone through the court systems just this past week or 

so is a clear example.  And I know that the minister will shrug 

his shoulders and try to shrug it off and say, that doesn't matter, 

you'll have to come up with more examples; one probably isn't 

enough.  Well there will be others.  There will be all kinds of 

others, and there are many already. 

 

But there is no object to my presenting a whole litany of points 

of proof because this example makes the point quite clearly and 

does the job as best it needs to be done, because the reality is 

there.  The reality, Mr. Speaker, is this: that no matter what law 

the provincial government writes and puts into force, no one 

will take it as being the final law of rule on any issue that falls 

under the category of control by the human rights Bills, be they 

federal or provincial. 

 

So the reality is that on this moral issue, no matter what the 

minister writes into this law, it is a law that really has no 

control over restricting anything but can only increase things.  

And I think the minister knows clearly what I'm saying even 

though that that is a somewhat vague way of terming it.  No 

matter how little he wants this law to do, he can't stop the 

magnitude of the effect of the law as it is applied through the 

Human Rights Code. 

 

Once the law is written, even if it had a title and simply one 

sentence saying, we now allow this discrimination to be 

considered, that's all it would have to say to open the total door 

the minute that the title of the Bill was named as being 

something in the direction of homosexuals or lesbians or the 

gay community or any kind of generality even thereto. 

 

And the minister will know full well, Mr. Speaker, that this is a 

fact of life in our legal system that has been developed through 

the democratic parliamentary process that we in this province 

and this country work beneath.  So simply by opening the door 

with a simple, basic, fundamental statement and passing it into 

law, there is no limit on how far this Bill can be carried by the 

court system. 

 

That is the frightening part of the Bill.  The intention of the 

minister may be as pure as the white driven snow and yet it 

won't be his ideas that will restrict how the Bill will be used by 

others.  And so I guess we have to go into this Bill in an 

attempt to convince the minister beyond a shadow of a doubt 

that even amendments could not in any way help this Bill to 

become what he has said he intends it to be.  His best intentions 

cannot be served because they are overruled by the human 

rights Bills. 

 

No matter how well-intended, no matter how powerful this 

man might be in government, he cannot 



2188 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1993 

stop in our present process the ability of the courts to have the 

final say in our judicial system and our system of lawmaking.  

That's the way it's set up. 

 

And I think it's probably safe to say that it's a good thing that 

we have this kind of a system, although there are days when it 

is very frustrating.  Because I know the minister intends well. 

He want to stop a form of discrimination against a particular 

small group of people, and that is admirable.  However if in so 

doing he offends the needs and the freedoms and the rights of 

many other people, then it is not fair and it cannot be done. 

 

We used to be told that in our democratic process we have the 

right to say and do anything that we please so long as it does 

not infringe on the freedoms of other people to say and do what 

they please.  So you can do in society, in a free system, 

anything that you please because it's a democratic, free country, 

so long as you don't take the rights of others away by what you 

do. 

 

And that's what this Bill does.  This Bill helps to give the rights 

to a minority but takes the rights of the majority to limit the 

right away from the majority. 

 

And if we're going to be called discriminatory for doing this 

and taking this position, we have to live with that.  Because 

quite simply this question and this issue of moral importance 

cannot be solved by this Assembly.  The only way that this 

issue could be properly addressed and properly handled would 

be through the constitution of the country, because it is where 

the superseding law is written and under which authority that 

law is enforced. 

 

And so you see, Mr. Speaker, we are on what I suppose you 

might call an impossible mission.  Because no matter how 

intent the minister is to write this Bill right, it would not be 

possible for him to do it because he can't control what he wants 

to do within the jurisdiction that he represents.  He is not a 

powerful enough person in our country to be able to 

accomplish that because he's sitting in a provincial Legislative 

Assembly, and the only Assembly in this country that can pass 

the needed kind of rule that he wants is the federal parliament. 

 

That can only be done through that association and through that 

vehicle under the terms of our constitution, which would 

require an agreement of almost all of our provinces.  We've 

seen what a fiasco it was last fall when people tried to get 

changes to the constitution for many other reasons.  So the 

odds of being able to do this kind of a change in society fairly 

and equitably is almost next to impossible at this time. 

 

As soon as we write legislation, Mr. Speaker, that is impossible 

to control we are creating a nightmare for everyone around us.  

But I think that the minister has determined to make this 

legislation into law.  I think that everything that I have said 

probably will not be listened to. After all nine of my colleagues 

have already spoken to the issue and so I guess the only thing 

left is to try to bring forward onto the record as many of the 

arguments from other people as we can, 

 to follow up with the things that I have said about my opinions 

about the legal perspective. 

 

In so doing perhaps we can lay a strong-enough case in debate 

so that the minister will attempt some kind of moderation of the 

Bill with amendments even though it is an act of futility 

because we know full well that the law will overrule it.  We 

have to at least I guess go that far as to try to get those 

amendments into place so that the superior courts who no 

doubt will rule on this legislation in time as time goes by . . . 

and I'm absolutely convinced that there will be challenges from 

both sides in one way or another, on this piece of legislation to 

the higher court systems. 

 

So we have to I guess lay some ground work that can be taken 

into consideration when these things progress to a future date.  

As such I'm going to quote from some of the correspondences 

that we've had and try to lay some ground work so that people 

who must make decisions as time goes by will have an idea of 

the intensity of the debate that occurred. 

 

I have here what is simply called, an "Opposition to Bill 38 -- 

Human Rights Code Amendments."  And it's termed, "Some 

Questions for the Government -- Installment # 1."  And it gives 

a footnote that it's to be used in conjunction with a binder and a 

summary. 

 

I will attempt to make comment on each of the points that are 

brought forward in this presentation in order to apply it directly 

to the debate on the Bill: 

 

 1) Homosexual activist groups made presentations to you in 

April. 

 

Now of course this was a presentation made, Mr. Speaker, to 

the government. And I will try to pick out the proper names 

where I find them in here and substitute them for the members' 

seats or their ministries and hopefully I'll catch them all 

without blurting them out. 

 

 They demanded . . . re-definition . . . extension of benefits . . . 

(see A-1) . . . (and I'll bring that up later).  This legislation is 

but the first of their demands.  This is nothing but a formal 

legislation of the homosexual agenda of one of your fringe 

special-interest groups.  Will you be "open and honest" with 

the people of this province and admit exactly what you are 

doing and let them decide if they support your agenda?  Will 

you drop the charade of "only want equal rights", "would 

never promote homosexuality in any way"? 

 

Obviously, Mr. Speaker, the writer of this presentation doesn't 

believe that the agenda will stop at the points that the minister 

is presently covering, or claims to be covering in this 

legislation.  And that is his first point, which is backed up by 

some of the other material that we will put forward later. 

 

Under no. 2 it says: 

 

 You talk about "equal rights". The homosexual 



June 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2189 

activist groups pushing classify "spousal benefits" as "equal 

rights" (see A-2).  They already HAVE "equal rights" -- they 

want the treatment received by the traditional family, the 

building blocks of our society.  Is your idea of "equal rights" 

the same as those pressuring you to pass this bill?  Should 

homosexual "couples" be allowed the same benefits as those 

who are married? or those who legitimately constitute a 

family? 

 

I guess that question is fairly clear and obvious, Mr. Speaker.  

The writer is simply asking the government to explain to the 

public what their position really is, on a definition of family 

and who should have, as a family unit, what rights in our 

society. 

 

The proposition of pensions being paid to like-sex married 

partners is something that hasn't been debated only in this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker.  It has been debated through our 

national Assembly and I am also aware that it has been debated 

in the American system of government as well. 

 

And it is clearly a difficult question for many people to decide 

where the line should be drawn.  And obviously because of that 

trouble and that confusion, some have said we should erase all 

lines and simply turn society loose to come up with any kind of 

settlement for any people whatsoever. 

 

I don't think that society can possibly survive if we allow that 

to happen.  To explain myself further, to allow all of the lines 

of defining who represents what in our society simply cannot 

allow us the freedom to go on with a fair and democratic way 

of life in our country, much less a fair distribution of wealth or 

a reasonable distribution of rights or powers. 

 

In passing, I'm presuming that the point will be brought up 

further in this debate, presented by these people, that the 

adoption of children is to many people a very, very important 

issue.  And that's one of the key issues that I myself have to 

dwell on. 

 

Somehow having two gentlemen adopting children and raising 

them as a family unit doesn't come real easy for me to accept.  

Somehow -- I don't know why and I have never been able to 

explain this either to myself or anyone else -- if two ladies were 

to adopt a child and were going to raise that child as a family 

unit, somehow that seems easier to accept.  And I expect it's 

because ladies are more easily identified with the mother 

figure, and suppose therefore that it's easier for me to accept 

that in my mind. 

 

But if it's not right for the gentlemen, then it should not also be 

right for the ladies.  And so I philosophize in my mind that you 

have to draw the line excluding both from being able to adopt 

children in our society. 

 

(1545) 

 

I'm quite convinced though, Mr. Speaker, in all honesty that 

this not only will happen in our province . . . or that it will 

happen in our province, that it will happen in our society.  But I 

do believe that the reality of this not being a workable situation 

in very many circumstances will end up having become a rule 

that will be acceptable that won't be used very often.  And I 

guess maybe there is, you know, some hope that the reality of 

the world will come to pass irregardless of whether we make 

laws or not. 

 

I should get on with this though, Mr. Speaker, so that we get 

these points across.  It goes on: 

 

 Mr. Premier, you refused to legislate this agenda when you 

were Justice Minister in the 1970s.  Why are you doing it 

now? (And it refers again to A-2 which we will present later.)  

Will you stand up on your feet and make a statement of 

principle about where you stand?  Or are you going to "duck" 

this issue just like you did the abortion issue?  Where does 

the Premier stand?  The people of this province look to the 

Premier for leadership and, dare I say, moral guidance.  

Where do you stand? 

 

And quite frankly I guess, Mr. Speaker, that seems fair to me 

that the Premier should be asked to give his position on this 

issue.  And at the same time as I pass there, I would say I think 

it is probably proper for the Premier to take an initiative and to 

allow his members the right to a free vote. 

 

It goes on to no. 4: 

 

 You (the NDP gov't) have already said that you have no 

policy against "homosexual adoptions" (see A-5). 

 

Now here they have the name of the independent member, and 

it goes on: 

 

 . . . supports your amendment.  This amendment is simply 

another step towards homosexual "groupings/couples" being 

treated as if they were a family and adopting children.  Will 

you admit that part of your intention with this Bill is to make 

it easier for some "couples" to adopt children in this province, 

something the vast majority of people would be very much 

against? 

 

And I guess that's probably an observation, Mr. Speaker, that I 

too would have to support as a fact because of some of the 

investigative work that we have done in my constituency 

through questionnaires and through the asking of people on the 

telephone and in personal conversations where they stand on 

this issue.  The questionnaire that we put out in our 

constituency came back very strongly opposed to the 

homosexual community having the right to adopt children.  So 

that observation I would have to concur with as result of that 

polling that we did. 

 

No. 5 says that: 

 

 This Bill is very controversial within your own caucus.  Our 

opposition to your bill -- and the public's opposition to your 

Bill -- is not 



2190 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1993 

"political" but on principle.  It is reported that "many gov't 

MLAs and some Cabinet Ministers are strongly opposed" to 

this bill. 

 

I don't know if that's true or not, Mr. Speaker.  This is simply a 

statement that's here, and I'm sure that government members 

will respond to that.  It says "see A-7, A-13," which I suspect 

are supposed to confirm this particular proposition. 

 

 Are you going to ignore this widespread and very deep 

opposition to your ill-advised agenda? or listen to the very 

reasonable objections of the people, even those within your 

party, caucus and cabinet. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, my personal opinion about that statement 

would simply be that if the Premier would turn his entire 

caucus loose to have the right to a free vote on this moral issue, 

he could quite easily answer all of these questions that are 

raised in this particular paragraph. 

 

No. 6 goes on: 

 

 You, Mr. Justice Minister, were considering a "general ban 

on discrimination" (A-7).  But then you backed off because 

the homosexual lobby "became outraged" (A-13).  Will you 

admit the folly of this whole "ban discrimination" cry as it 

applies to the immoral sexual conduct? (see L-1, L-11, . . .). 

You as Justice Minister are going to "ban discrimination", 

which is simply "making choices"? The very purpose of our 

legal system is to "discriminate" between behavior which is 

socially acceptable/beneficial and that which is socially 

destructive -- between good behavior and bad behavior. 

 

 How can you "ban discrimination"?  I know you in the NDP 

don't like to make choices, especially the right choices, and 

maybe would like a law to ban "thinking, choosing . . ." in 

this province, but are you going to outlaw the thinking people 

of this province from "making decisions"? 

 

Well that's simply a question that the writer has posed, Mr. 

Speaker.  And having put it on the record, I will allow the 

Justice minister to respond when he makes his final 

deliberation. 

 

 7) Your new Human Rights Commissioner -- obviously a 

political appointee, obviously a special-interest activist 

(leader of "Yes" side of 1991 abortion-funding plebiscite . . .) 

-- has called for you to amend the Code immediately without 

waiting for the upcoming public review process and public 

consultation (see A-9) . . . You admitted that this was a "very 

controversial" issue.  Why not let this issue be reviewed with 

. . . the regular review process . . .? Why not let the people 

decide? 

 

And I guess what isn't written there, Mr. Speaker, is 

probably a suggestion that we go to some sort of a vote, a 

plebiscite, with a bit of a campaign I suppose by the people 

who are for the issue and those against the issue, and quite 

frankly I would see nothing wrong with that on a moral issue if 

the government really has genuine concerns about whether or 

not the people want a particular action to be taken.  And 

obviously with all of the correspondence on this issue, there 

must be some doubts that have been cast in the government's 

minds. 

 

Without a doubt this is the issue that has brought in the most 

mail, the most pieces of material and information of any that 

I've seen in this particular session of the Assembly.  And so 

with that and having all of that material as evidence of the 

concern, I suggest that the government might have considered 

going more to the people in the deliberation of how to handle 

this Bill. 

 

 8) The papers are reporting that you are receiving "pressure 

from voters who believe homosexuality has no place in the 

Code". Your ill-advised scheme was shelved last spring 

because of resistance within the NDP caucus (A-11). "Many 

gov't MLAs and some Cabinet Ministers strongly opposed" 

this Bill (A-13).  You are well aware of the public opposition 

to this Bill.  Our office mail is at least 50: 1 AGAINST this 

Bill (L-P 02/20/93). Yours, I am sure, is much higher than 

that.  Surveys (even in NDP ridings, like Swift Current) are 

revealing opposition in the neighbourhood of 95 to 5 (I guess 

it is), (E-16)! (I guess that) Many of your Members are 

receiving opposition in the range of 70 to 1 -- and some have 

stated that they have not received ANY support for your bill.  

And you say that your gov't "is determined to pass this bill". 

That you "simply have to do this". (A-42)  Why will you not 

listen to this massive and overwhelming show of opposition 

from the people of this province?  Why are you so intent on 

"legislating your morality" or should I say "immorality" on 

the unwilling people of this province. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that that paragraph is something that I 

couldn't personally prove the numbers in.  But I can say that the 

figures that I have gotten from my own questionnaires that 

have come back do very closely substantiate these numbers.  

They're not exactly the same, but they are close to a 90 per cent 

opposition directly to this Bill. 

 

And so in general, I would have to say that I concur with the 

findings of the surveying that these people have done.  And of 

course I would just throw into the mix that one member has 

told me, from the other side of this Assembly, that he has heard 

no support from his constituents for this Bill. 

 

 9) The Premier has been quoted as saying "There is a 

monetary consideration" involved with this issue (A-11).  

Would the Premier kindly stand and explain what he means 

by that? 



June 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2191 

All I can say about that paragraph, Mr. Speaker, is that I too 

would await that explanation.  I have absolutely no idea in 

my mind what the Premier could have been talking about in 

terms of a monetary consideration with regards to this Bill 

that might be described as positive or negative in any way.  

So I will await the Minister of Justice or whoever speaks to 

this issue in conclusion, and hope that they will address this 

and explain to us what exactly was meant by there being 

monetary considerations. 

 

 10) The Justice Minister has said, "If you take this issue 

directly to the people . . . they believe it is not fair to 

discriminate on ANY grounds." (A-13)  If you believe that, 

sir, why will you not put this question to the people of this 

province and let them decide?  If you are so confident that the 

public feels this way, then why not let them say it -- and have 

solid support for your claims and your legislation? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, obviously we can sort of mix things up in a 

paragraph like this in terms of confusing the thoughts of one 

group of people as compared to another. 

 

Most people, it is true in my mind, I believe, don't want to 

discriminate against other folks.  And this whole issue of 

discrimination befuddles me something awful because I have 

never known a person in my community to be fired or turned 

away from a job, not to be hired or in any way at all even 

singled out because of their sexual preference.  I have 

absolutely had no experience in this area at all.  I have never 

known a person who has been claimed by others to be of the 

gay community.  I have never known a case of where they have 

been dismissed on those grounds whatsoever.  There just is not 

any background of this in our community and throughout the 

area where I live. 

 

I suspect that some of the people I know are probably gay.  

And if they are, it doesn't seem to make any difference because 

I don't particularly know who they are.  I would say by their 

lifestyle that it would appear that way.  It has made absolutely 

no difference to me or to anyone in our community how these 

people are treated within the structure of our society.  They 

come and go as they please.  They work in our community.  If 

they have problems, they are certainly never ever identified to 

me as problems relating to sexuality. 

 

I want to go on, Mr. Speaker, with the next paragraph here. 

 

 The Justice Minister has said that "there is no middle ground" 

on this issue (A-13). We believe that to be accurate.  The 

public obviously believes that. However your MLAs continue 

to hold to the line, "We would never promote homosexuality 

in any way." . . . "We would never oppose traditional family 

values or the traditional family" . . . but support this 

legislation that directly undermines those values.  Will you 

inform this House and the 

public which side your gov't has come down on -- the 

homosexual activists' side or on the side of the majority of 

Sask. residents, who hold traditional values?  It can't be both 

ways -- which way is it going to be?  You said during the 

abortion debate that you "personally opposed abortion", but 

then voted to vote this horrifying procedure with taxpayers' 

money.  Now you are up to the same tactic with this issue. 

 

And I don't think I'll respond to that paragraph very much, Mr. 

Speaker, because obviously the decision by the government to 

fund abortions is a fact of life that was made legal in the last 

year's Assembly.  And those people who are against it probably 

are still against it, and those who are for it are probably still for 

it.  And I don't know though that issue really has a whole lot to 

do with homosexuality.  Some people I think probably run the 

two issues together, but in my mind they shouldn't really be 

mixed, although again I will admit that a lot of folks seem to 

think that the two go together. 

 

(1600) 

 

No. 12 here: 

 

 Many, many people and groups concerned that this 

amendment "legitimizes an immoral lifestyle".  Even a 

number of your MLAs and Cabinet Ministers apparently are 

concerned about this. 

 

And it's got: 

 

 (A-18).  Your homosexual lobbyists EGALE say that this 

amendment will "legitimize our lifestyle" (A-38).  To amend 

the Code to create a new "protected minority" class for 

homosexuals is to say their behavior is no more morally 

objectionable that being a black person or being of East 

Indian descent . . . To amend the Code like this is to publicly 

declare that the homosexual lifestyle is normal, is not morally 

objectionable, is not to be regretted, . . . (Why would you 

amend the Code to prevent clearly immoral, socially 

destructive behavior?) Is that not, Mr. Minister, protecting an 

immoral lifestyle?  Is that not gov't sanctioning 

homosexuality?  This is a very real concern that people have.  

Many people are concerned about this.  You cannot just 

"brush it off" and treat it as unreasonable. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the writer makes a point with several 

questions.  And here again, I would challenge the minister to 

make note of these questions and to clarify his position and the 

position of his government in answer to those questions. 

 

 13) I have a newspaper clipping here from the North 

Battleford Telegraph here that says when "Your MLA . . ." 

leaflet was dropped in North Battleford, the people were not 

upset at those who produced the flyer, but at the gov't! 

(A-20).  They were "outraged to believe that their gov't 



2192 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1993 

 would introduce special rights for homosexuals".  As people 

phone in to this province's open-line talk shows, they are 

OUTRAGED, Mr. Minister, not at those who oppose this 

amendment, but at your GOV'T who would dare to legislate 

the agenda of fringe special-interest groups over the 

opposition of the public. (Insight No. 10, p. 1)  Sir, the people 

of this province are outraged at YOUR GOV'T.  How will 

you respond to that? or does the will of the people not count 

under NDP Rule? 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, the paragraph in question raises questions 

that I can't answer for the government and so I will again refer 

them to the minister and hope that as he takes notes here today 

that he will respond to these questions and explain the 

government's position on these issues. 

 

 (14) Mr. Justice Minister, you have repeatedly said that this 

amendment only affects the 3 areas of "employment, 

accommodation, and receipt of public services" (A-20).  This 

amendment will entitle homosexuals ALL the protections 

offered in the Code to all the other legitimate minority groups 

protected in the Code.  This amendment applies to many 

more areas than just those three -- publications, public 

statements . . . Look at the categories in Code.  Even the L-P 

noted that it will "outlaw publications affronting the 'dignity' 

of homosexuals" (A-42).  Will you admit that? And will you 

apologize to the people of this province for misleading them 

as to the effect of this amendment? 

 

Now this gets to the legality of the question, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the legalities of whether or not this legislation can in 

fact, once it's passed, limit the things that will result from the 

writing of this legislation.  Can this legislation in fact, once it is 

put into law, have any chance of limiting the activities that the 

Human Rights Code would make an enforcement on? 

 

And this is the real challenge of this Bill, because obviously the 

writer of this document is sharing the view that I have that the 

Supreme Court and the constitution of our country, the rights of 

individuals under the Human Rights Code, those things will 

supersede any legislation in our province and will in fact give 

more to people than the legislation is originally written to give.  

Once that legislation opens the door, it allows decisions to be 

made. 

 

 (15) Mr. Minister, you said as late as mid Feb. that this bill 

was "just being discussed in cabinet and caucus."  One of 

your Cabinet Minister's assistants said in Feb./93, "No such 

bill has even been written up yet"  (A-20).  However, some of 

your MLAs have admitted that the issue for this Leg. session 

had been fully discussed, settled and voted on in January!  Is 

that not telling the people of this province something that is 

contrary to what really was going on?  You had this Bill all 

ready to foist 

upon the people last year at this time.  How could you make 

these claims? 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can't comment to that paragraph 

either, other than to say to the minister that I guess the question 

has been raised and asked.  Dates have been supplied to you 

that seem to contradict one another, I guess, is probably the 

way to put it.  And so I'll challenge the minister to explain that 

to the people of Saskatchewan in his follow-up report later 

probably today. 

 

 16) A spokesman for the homosexual activist group EGALE 

said that this amendment will be a "statement publicly in the 

Human Rights Code that validates 'sexual orientation' -- 

homosexuality -- as being a natural and normal behaviour in 

society . . .  a positive starting point . . ."  That this will be "a 

step leading to wider acceptance of homosexuality"  (A-22). 

 

 They say that your amendment will "legitimize their 

lifestyle" (A-38).  Your activists have admitted, and have 

been very open about, the effective message sent by this 

amendment.  Those who oppose the amendment have 

recognized the same message being sent (and oppose the 

amendment for that reason).  You say that your Gov't "isn't 

promoting homosexuality or redefining family" (A-38).  Are 

you afraid to admit to the public the message that this 

amendment will send?  Are you ashamed to admit what the 

homosexual activists freely admit and desire?  That is exactly 

the message this amendment sends.  You said, yourself, that 

"there is no MIDDLE GROUND" (A-13).  Will you take 

your stand in this House?  And reveal to the public which 

side you have chosen?  And admit the message that this 

amendment will send? 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this paragraph the writer explains 

his feelings about the message that the Bill sends, not so much 

in the words of the legislation but in the perception that the 

public will have of the legislation.  And here again perception 

is a very important part of life. 

 

And I have to concur with the writer that perception will be 

developed from this legislation, and I do believe that that 

perception will be to promote homosexuality not only as 

existing in our society but as being a more acceptable way of 

life in our society.  And there is no need for me to go on further 

with my personal views here, Mr. Speaker, because it is fairly 

self-explanatory, I think, to the general public. 

 

Number (17) goes on: 

 

 Mr. Minister, the Human Rights Commission and the CBC 

tried to create a large controversy over the leaflet "Your 

MLA . . ."  Your MLAs are calling this "hate literature" etc., 

etc. . . .  Is the Minister aware that there was only three 

complaints out of a total distribution of over 



June 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2193 

200,000 leaflets (A-424, 26)!!? 

 

And here again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the question is that of the 

writer and I will not make further comment other than to ask 

the minister to respond to those numbers which appear to be 

three complaints out of 200,000.  And when he makes his 

comments perhaps he will refute that number or confirm it. 

 

 (18)  Your special interest groups have written a letter (A-32) 

to all MLAs that talks at great length about "the 

concentration camps of Nazi Germany . . . the resurgence of 

Neo-fascism . . . hysterical and vulgar tone . . . outright lies" 

and your MLAs appear to agree with the claims of these 

people.  Will you admit that your gov't, your MLAs subscribe 

. . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  I understand the 

member to be quoting from a document.  The member in his 

quotes has used a word that we do not use in this Chamber, and 

by virtue of the fact that it is a quote makes it no more 

acceptable.  So therefore I want to caution the member in the 

use of words even if they are quotes, in this Chamber. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My apologies to 

the Assembly.  I read through it so quickly I didn't delete it as I 

should have. 

 

I won't go back.  I'll just start where I was, as I am quoting 

from number 18: 

 

 . . . these who are forcing this amendment, have BEFORE 

this amendment passes, is it not likely that they could use this 

amendment to silence those who disagree or publicly 

disagree with their sexual behaviour?  What happens to 

freedom of speech . . . or freedom of religion . . . in this 

province? 

 

I say again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that in this paragraph the 

writer makes certain accusations, and asks certain questions 

that only the government members can answer for themselves.  

I certainly could not in my capacity attempt to answer the 

questions that have been asked in this paragraph, and so I will 

again challenge the minister to answer to those accusations 

when he makes his deliberation on this Bill in his conclusion. 

 

Under no. 19: 

 

 Mr. Minister, your gov't says, and said in the press release 

announcing introduction of Bill No. 38, that The Charter 

REQUIRES that you amend the Code (A-36). Are you aware 

that The Charter does not mention sodomy, homosexuality, 

as a "fundamental right and freedom" anywhere?  It does not 

mention such practices anywhere . . . See INSIGHT No. 10, p 

1; (E-22).  Are you aware that when the Charter was being 

debated in the Special Joint Committee on the Constitution in 

1981 . . . see Insight No. 10, p 1 . . . the Committee actually 

VOTED AGAINST including a resolution by 

your friend Svend Robinson to include protection of "sexual 

orientation" in S-15 of the Charter? 

 

Here again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can only refer this to the 

Minister of Justice for his interpretation and comments, and 

allow him an opportunity to respond.  Because having read the 

paragraph, the statements have been made from this point of 

view and it requires now that he defend the actions of his 

government and of his allies. 

 

Under no. 20: 

 

 You have repeatedly said that because the Federal gov't was 

making this change, that somehow this compelled you to 

make this change provincially (A-36; E-5).  Are you aware, 

sir, first of all that the Federal gov't can NOT make you 

amend our provincial Code, have not called upon you to 

change the Code . . . and most importantly, will NOT amend 

the Canadian Human Rights Act to "protect 'sexual 

orientation'" (see A-44) as you say?  There will be no such 

amendment federally!  And you are not in any way required 

to make one provincially! 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I have to agree with that paragraph and that 

point made under that paragraph.  I can't for the life of me see 

how the federal government is in any way responsible for the 

legislation that is before this Assembly.  In fact I don't think 

that it is, and I don't think that it has ever tried to be. 

 

Now we have seen an example of pressure through the 

constitution having pressured governments in provincial 

jurisdictions to pass legislation with regards to French school 

boards, and so there is precedence for federal governments 

making that kind of pressure on provinces.  However when that 

has happened, it has been very public, very easily identified 

and without question, known by all.  There is absolutely no 

record that I am able to find of any federal pressure in this area 

on this particular issue.  So I leave that again to the minister to 

respond to. 

 

(1615) 

 

 21)  The Member from Riversdale said on (I guess it's the 

third month, the 22nd day, 1993) that your gov't "welcomes 

genuine dissent and contrary opinions . . . We don't know 

whether all the solutions that we advance are the correct 

ones, and need the input of everybody involved" -- Hansard, 

03/22/93.  Do you stand by that rather bold statement?  Do 

you really "welcome genuine dissent and contrary opinions . . 

.?  Do you welcome the concerns of the Official Opposition 

in this province and, even more importantly, the "genuine 

dissent and contrary opinions" expressed by the people of this 

province?  Will you listen to these concerns, these objections, 

these contrary opinions, . . .?  or will you just "blast through" 

this Bill in the face of such? 



2194 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1993 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I too would be interested in hearing 

some of the back-benchers of the government side in a context 

of being free to express their opinions without party constraints 

or restraints.  I believe that in order for any back-bencher to 

speak on this issue with any kind of relevancy or any kind of 

credibility, first the Premier would have to stand in his place 

and declare publicly on Hansard that he was releasing the 

members of his caucus from his powerful political grip, and 

that there would be no political repercussions or any kind of 

reprimand whatsoever if any individual in his back benches 

were to say something contrary or dissentive with regards to 

the Bill and the way it's being handled. 

 

Obviously if a back-bencher were to speak on this issue 

without that assurance from the Premier, everyone in this 

province would know very well that that member weren't 

expressing his true, free opinions and might in fact feel 

pressured to say something very much opposite to what he 

personally believes or what he holds true and near and dear to 

his own moral convictions. 

 

And so I do challenge the Premier to allow the members of the 

back benches the freedom to speak openly and to show dissent 

to the Bill if in fact there is some, and we have every reason of 

course to believe so.  And we believe that there is even some 

evidence having been presented by the individuals who have 

presented these documents that have been shown in the past 

few months to record that such dissension does in fact exist 

among the back-benchers and doesn't allow them of course the 

opportunity to speak out. 

 

 22) You have often boldly stated that your Gov't is "honest, 

open, accessible and truly accountable gov't" -- Hansard 

12/06/91.  What better time than now to prove that?  Listen to 

the opposition of the people of this province.  Let the people 

decide.  Will you not call a province-wide referendum vote 

on this question and let the people decide?  At the VERY 

LEAST, will you not let your MLAs vote the will of their 

constituencies on this issue, without party discipline . . . ? 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, I guess is more or less a repeat to the 

last paragraph and a reaffirmation of this necessity to break 

away from party discipline. 

 

 23) When this same question was raised when you were in 

Opposition, you, the NDP, said that "a more comprehensive 

updating of the rights code is needed", that "a process of 

reviewing the code and current operation of the commission 

should be developed, and THE PUBLIC should be involved."  

You said, "LET THE PUBLIC DECIDE after the process 

what rights should be entrenched and what shouldn't."  (L-P 

07/06/89)  Why have you changed your position?  Is it 

because your gov't is now in the hands of special interest 

groups that are dictating your agenda?  "Let the people 

decide"! 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is simply a challenge to the Premier and 

his government to again go to the vote, to the people, or to do 

some kind of a referendum to in fact, I guess, simply rule the 

province on the basis of what the majority wants, rather than 

minorities.  And we do, I would remind the government, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, live in this province where supposedly the 

majority rules.  After all most of the members of this 

government sit in their seats because they claim that right as a 

result of a democratic vote where the majority of voters 

expressed a wish to have them in that seat.  If that were not 

true, obviously we would not want to have them there.  And of 

course we abide by that rule of democracy where the majority 

rules, and this paragraph again challenges the government to 

allow the majority of the people of this province to express 

their view and to have their view the one that is listened to, 

rather than the view of the minorities. 

 

 24) During the 1991 election campaign, the Member from 

Riverside said that "he was in favour of expanding human 

rights, but ONLY at a speed with which THE PUBLIC 

FEELS COMFORTABLE" -- L-P 09/28/91. 

 

And L-P I think refers to the Leader-Post. 

 

 Are you firmly convinced that "the public feels comfortable" 

with your Bill No. 38?  How would/do you do that?  Or have 

you decided that, now in gov't, you don't have to listen to the 

people of this province any more? 

 

I don't think I will respond to that in my personal words, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, but that paragraph of course should be left to 

the government members to respond to, and I'm sure that the 

Minister of Justice will do that. 

 

 25) During the 1991 election, a candidate stated his personal 

views on the homosexual issue, views that the media and the 

now-gov't members found controversial . . . even, 

objectionable.  A spokesman for homosexual lobbyists 

EGALE said then that "If he (I won't say the name, even 

though this person is not in the Assembly) had made his 

remarks in any province that 'prohibits discrimination on the 

basis of sexual orientation', he'd be arrested" -- S-P 09/28/91.  

Is that the intent of the gov't with this Bill?  To "arrest" those 

who have personal objections to the homosexual lifestyle?  

Do you subscribe to such statements by the spokesman of 

EGALE?  Is it possible that this amendment could be used by 

certain groups or individuals to silence, or "arrest" certain 

other groups or individuals that have honest, personal 

objections to the homosexual lifestyle?  Can you guarantee us 

that this amendment will NOT be used in such a way? To . . . 

(in pursuit, rather of) those who do not accept the "gov't's 

morality"?  Is that not a very serious concern that those who 

oppose this amendment have? 



June 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2195 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was not really aware of those 

circumstances having happened, but obviously they are 

documented and can be checked by those who take an interest 

in this sort of thing, and I'm sure that they will be.  I hope that 

the Justice minister will respond and give the government's 

position on that very important point.  And I think it's 

extremely important to know just how far this Bill is going to 

allow people to go in determining what kind of penalties there 

will be for offences or accusations of offences. 

 

Under no. 26: 

 

 Even though then-Federal Justice Minister Kim Campbell 

introduced the "outlawing discrimination on the basis of 

sexual orientation" amendment that the homosexual lobby 

had demanded, your friend Svend Robinson (NDP MP 

Burnaby-Kingsway) was angered because it included a 

heterosexual definition of marriage.  He and the rest of his 

activist friends wanted MORE -- they called the legislation 

that was introduced (that basically assured them what they 

wanted) "a significant step BACKWARDS" (A-44).  That, 

Mr. Minister, is a classic example of how those pushing the 

homosexual agenda are never satisfied.  This amendment you 

are preparing to force in provincial law is but the FIRST 

demand of Sask.'s homosexual lobby (A-1).  Just like your 

friend Svend, they will want MORE.  They will not be 

satisfied.  Will you acknowledge that this particular issue 

("sexual orientation" legislation) is part of a broader and 

much more encompassing agenda?  That this Bill could 

"open the door" to the rest of the homosexual lobby's 

demands? 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, here I guess in this final paragraph 

of this particular document, the writer has indicated that he 

feels that this legislation is simply a process of opening the 

door to many more things to come. And I think if you recall in 

my opening remarks I indicated that I felt that there was a very 

strong possibility that in fact that's what this Bill would be 

doing -- that it would be opening the door to many more things 

that will be out of our control and out of the scope of the 

Saskatchewan legislature to handle or to bring back into the 

realm of their jurisdiction and to be able to have a chance to 

control or put some kind of a limit on how far these things go. 

 

And I think it's very important, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that all 

laws have a starting point and an ending point.  We must not 

simply have laws that clearly open the door to allow whatever 

should flow through happen.  There has to be limits on how far 

things can go, especially in a Bill that opens the door to so 

many moral issues.  And again I will refer you back to things 

like adoption of children or the teaching of homosexuality in 

the school system. 

 

I think for people with children it is extremely important that 

they know what the educational system will allow and what it 

will not.  If this particular Bill 

were to allow the teaching of homosexual as a normal and even 

preferred, perhaps, lifestyle, even a promoted lifestyle in our 

school system, I'm sure that there would be many more people 

who would be very much perturbed with this Bill. 

 

Many say that they don't feel that that's going to happen 

because they've had the assurances of the Minister of Justice 

and from the Premier that in fact the Bill is not going to do 

that; it's not written in there.  However if it turns out that the 

Human Rights Code takes precedence and rulings that we have 

heard rumoured about things that are happening in other 

jurisdictions turn out to be in fact true, then we have a very 

serious, serious problem on our hands.  And in fact these things 

will happen whether the minister likes it or not, once he passes 

his Bill. 

 

And I think quite honestly, in very simple terms, that this is 

wrong.  I don't believe that this lifestyle should be taught in our 

schools as a part of our curriculum, and I will stand there on 

my personal morality of what we should do or not do in our 

school systems. 

 

I think there's one more point that needs to be clarified in this 

Assembly, and that of course is the stand of some of our church 

groups.  I received a call some time back now from a person 

who claimed to be a member of the Roman Catholic Church 

and who said that he felt that the Church, having made some 

statements about the Act in question and about the gay agenda, 

he felt that they had been taken out of context and that they'd 

been misinterpreted.  And because of that, he supplied me with 

a statement from his Church, and he encouraged me to read to 

the Assembly the letter and to make comment on it as we go 

through it. 

 

And that way, of course, the whole wordage will be here.  And 

for those people who feel that the media may not have 

interpreted things right, they can simply read it for themselves 

and make their own interpretation. 

 

(1630) 

 

This is dated on March 22, 1993.  It's the "Saskatchewan 

hierarchy statement regarding proposed amendments to the 

Human Rights Code of the province of Saskatchewan 

concerning sexual orientation." (And it says:) 

 

 Dear Catholic People of Saskatchewan, 

 

 The Provincial Government has introduced legislation to 

amend the Human Rights Code of Saskatchewan, to prohibit 

discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation.  This is 

causing some discussion and concern among our people and 

citizens of the Province.  We, your Roman Catholic Bishops 

and Abbot, wish to contribute to this debate by restating 

some of the traditional teachings of the Catholic Church on 

human sexuality, for the benefit of our own people and, we 

believe, for the good of all citizens. 



2196 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1993 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to point out just for those 

who might be curious, I am personally not a member of this 

Church, so I'm not espousing something of my personal faith 

and getting into that area.  So let that be known.  It goes on: 

 

 We believe that human sexuality is a God-given gift.  The 

Roman Catholic Church teaches that sexual activity finds its 

lawful and laudable physical expression in the marriage state 

open to giving life.  All sexual activity outside marriage 

therefore is immoral.  We encourage and promote the 

understanding and practice of chastity for all persons, 

whether they be of heterosexual or homosexual orientation. 

 

 The Roman Catholic Church teaches that all human beings 

are created equal and therefore that, in justice, all individuals 

should be treated equally.  The new Universal Catholic 

Catechism states:  "A significant number of men and women 

exhibit basic homosexual tendencies.  They do not choose 

their homosexual condition, which is a trial for most of them.  

They must be accepted with with respect, compassion and 

sensitivity.  Every mark of unjust discrimination towards 

them is to be avoided." 

 

 Our traditional Catholic moral teaching continues to 

distinguish between sexual orientation and sexual behaviour.  

When we speak of sexual orientation we mean a preference 

or an inclination towards either heterosexual or homosexual 

relations.  Sexual activity between homosexuals remains 

morally unacceptable, since it is an activity which goes 

against the principle given earlier in this letter, namely, that 

sexual activity is to take place within a marriage open to 

giving life. 

 

 We hope this statement will remind people of the Church's 

teaching regarding human sexuality and responsible sexual 

activity.  Further, we hope this statement and your 

discussions will contribute to our society having the best 

possible laws that will not only protect the individual rights 

of all citizens, but also promote the common good. 

 

 With prayerful good wishes. 

 

And it was signed by several archbishops, bishops, and people 

from around the province of Saskatchewan within the structure 

of the Catholic Church. 

 

Having read that, Mr. Speaker, I want to summarize that in all 

fairness to the Roman Catholic Church, some people who 

wrote and spoke of what this letter had said, did in fact take it 

out of context and they did in fact misinterpret what was in the 

letter.  And I think that in fairness to them, those who did that 

should apologize to the Roman Catholic Church. 

Even though I'm not a member of that organization, I feel that 

they should not have been treated as having taken one side or 

the other.  They should have had their letter written in its 

entirety and shown to the public in complete context and not 

having it split and divided and broken up into small segments. 

 

With that I'll simply say that in general I think I agree with 

their position.  They're saying they don't want to discriminate 

against folks, and I think that's commendable and a reasonable 

approach to life.  They say that they don't promote it and I say 

that I have to agree with that position. 

 

And for the most part, whether people want to misconstrue this 

letter as being for or against . . . And I've heard both sides of 

that argument already from people in our society.  Some say 

this letter promotes the homosexual Bill.  Others say that it 

does not do that; in fact that it warns against it. 

 

I say that it has taken a position of explaining both sides of the 

issue, of taking a position against discrimination and of hating 

the sin but loving the sinner. And no matter what everybody 

else's interpretation is, I will go so far as to say that I personally 

support what the letter says in my own personal philosophy and 

in the philosophy that I believe that the Bill should be intended 

and written to bring out. 

 

Having said all of those things on behalf of some of the people 

who have written to me, Mr. Speaker, I obviously can say in all 

truth to you that I've only touched the surface of the material 

that I have with me and that has been presented to me that 

people have asked me to deliver to this Assembly and to put on 

the record. 

 

Again, obviously if I were to do that, we would be here for 

many, many hours.  It might even take days.  And quite frankly 

I don't think my voice will last that long.  And while I'm feeling 

a little weary at the moment, I have to assure you that being 

weary is worth the effort in order to bring this message to 

Hansard and to the people of Saskatchewan through this 

vehicle on behalf of those who have presented the material to 

me. 

 

But again, here I think is coming the time when I should 

conclude my remarks and say to you that I hope the 

government and the Minister of Justice will take this debate 

and these arguments seriously.  I hope that he will realize that 

his Bill is one that cannot win.  No matter which direction he 

hopes that it will go, it's going to go the opposite way. 

 

It cannot possibly happen, with the things that have happened 

in our judicial system with regards to the Human Rights Code, 

it cannot happen that this piece of legislation can serve the 

purpose that the minister has outlined so very clearly that he 

wants to serve.  Simply helping to take away discrimination is 

not where this Bill can end.  It is absolutely impossible for this 

Bill to work as the government wants it to work. 



June 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2197 

I hope they'll take that seriously, take it to heart.  Perhaps they 

have to withdraw this Bill altogether if they want to serve the 

true needs of the province.  I know that would offend some 

people in the gay community, but I don't think that we are 

serving their purpose by irritating all of the rest of the people in 

society to the point where they in fact might be tempted to 

discriminate even more in a revengeful kind of a mood. 

 

And having said that, Mr. Speaker, I say I have to oppose this 

legislation.  I have to vote against it, and I have to ask the 

minister to strongly, strongly consider removing this piece of 

legislation from the Table altogether.  Take it off the Table.  

Tear it up.  Try some other direction.  Work on the human 

rights end of law at the provincial level and at the federal level.  

Go to where you can actually help people, and take 

discrimination away without opening the door to making a 

moral issue into something that can't be controlled. 

 

With that I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I rise 

in my place today to enter this debate and to speak briefly on 

Bill No. 38.  I have looked forward for some time now to 

speaking on this Bill and making my position clear. 

 

I'm not opposed to the intent of the Bill.  I believe in the intent 

of the Bill, which is in part to protect all individuals in our 

society from discrimination, regardless of their race, their 

gender, their marital status, or their sexual orientation.  I do not 

think that anyone could find fault with that, with the intent of 

the Bill. However, the addition of sexual orientation as a 

protected ground is not one that I can consider without holding 

it up against my own personal religious values.  I have done 

that, Mr. Speaker, and I want to take a few minutes to tell you 

where my concerns are. 

 

On the one hand, it is clear that this legislation is intended to 

protect people from being fired or denied housing or denied 

access to public services.  These are not special rights but are 

equal; they're equal for all.  And surely they are basic, 

reasonable freedoms that are fundamental to any democratic 

society. 

 

However, despite my support for our government's aim for the 

elimination of discrimination, I find myself unable to vote in 

support of this legislation.  I have spent considerable time 

addressing this issue and examining the foundations for my 

religious beliefs and I have come to the conclusion, Mr. 

Speaker, that for me the Scriptures contain within them the 

guidelines for any of us who wish to follow an acceptable 

lifestyle in the eyes of God. 

 

And certain choices in our lives fall within those guidelines and 

others do not.  I believe that homosexuality is a choice that is 

not acceptable in the light of what the Bible has to say.  And I 

think it very 

unwise and improper for anyone to be involved in any 

homosexual activity of any kind. 

 

I know, Mr. Speaker, there are many studies on the causes of 

homosexuality.  And I haven't read them all but I have read 

some of them.  And one study will say that the individuals are 

born that way and have no choice in the matter at all.  And 

other studies, Mr. Speaker, show to me just as convincingly 

that homosexuality is a learned behaviour.  I take the position 

that, for now at least, the studies have been inconclusive. 

 

And let me say once again that I believe personally that 

homosexuality is a choice that's wrong according to the 

Scriptures.  I know, Mr. Speaker, that some individuals do not 

believe in or care what the Scriptures say.  But, Mr. Speaker, 

we as a nation and as a province, and as individuals especially, 

would be wise to read and obey what's written in them. 

 

I also realize that we don't all interpret the Scriptures the same 

way.  I realize that.  But as a member of this legislature I feel 

bound to uphold the principles of my religious beliefs, and I 

can only give my full support to legislation which does not 

interfere with those principles. 

 

In this case, I have concerns.  My fear is that we will be 

sending the wrong signal out to society, that we think 

homosexuality is as an acceptable alternative as 

heterosexuality.  This is where my religious beliefs come into a 

conflict with this legislation.  I know that we cannot legislate 

true morality.  I know that.  But at least we could encourage it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don't think either that this legislation is going to 

satisfy the homosexual community.  I know this legislation has 

been passed and in place for several years in other provinces.  

And I would like to point out that it has not satisfied the 

homosexual community in those provinces.  It hasn't been 

enough and it hasn't gone far enough. 

 

And I predict, Mr. Speaker, that this legislation will not be 

enough.  And they will lobby and continue to ask for more, so 

that even the perceived good that we would do would with 

intent . . . or that we would intend to do with this legislation 

will in fact be minimal at best. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I come to the conclusion that I cannot support 

this Bill.  My lack of support is not for what is in the Bill, but 

it's for what is not in the Bill.  I could and I would support 

legislation that with the kind of protection that we have now 

only if it was crystal clear in the Bill that we as legislators do 

not consider homosexual conduct to be equally acceptable as 

heterosexual conduct is.  Without that statement I think that we 

convey a perceived acceptance of homosexuality.  And I 

believe it will be or at least could be, perhaps I should say, used 

as a stepping stone to acknowledging marriages of the same 

sex and spousal benefits, etc. 

 

Now the different sides of this debate have to be 



2198 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1993 

carefully weighed by individuals.  The Bible clearly states that 

discrimination, harassment, verbal abuse, and of course 

physical abuse is also wrong.  So actually I support the intent 

of the Bill. 

 

And I would like to have provided this protection, but I have 

had to weigh the good that we intend to do with the Bill against 

what it will be interpreted as doing.  And I believe the message 

that it will be interpreted as is the wrong message that we 

should be sending out and a message that I can't be part of. 

 

(1645) 

 

As I have said earlier, I haven't made this decision easily or 

lightly but I find now today that I cannot support this Bill.  I 

don't want to vote against my colleagues and vote against my 

government, so I will be abstaining.  And I believe I have made 

my reasons clear.  Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- The member from Arm River wishes to speak.  

I would want to remind him that he must address his remarks 

clearly to the amendment and only to the amendment, since he 

has already spoken to the main motion. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Firstly, Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to comment on the member from 

Nipawin making a stand in this legislature.  I just wonder how 

the Premier is going to handle this.  The member has to say that 

he's going to . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member is out of order 

already.  The member has already spoken to the main motion.  

This amendment . . . Beauchesne is very, very clear.  

Beauchesne is very clear on this that an amendment of a 

six-month hoist, the member must only speak to the 

amendment, as to why the Bill should not be read now but 

should be read six months from here. 

 

I know the member from Rosthern wants to get up and say why 

could the member from Nipawin speak?  Because the member 

from Nipawin has not spoken to the motion before us.  Why is 

the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- To say to Mr. Speaker, that's not what I was 

going to say, precisely not. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Yes, perhaps I 

should have started out a little differently.  The reason why I 

want to comment on the member of Nipawin's remarks is 

because we want to give this here government just exactly what 

our amendment says: six months to think about this.  And that's 

exactly what all my remarks are going to be talking about, but 

no matter what I'm saying -- whether it's a repeat of anybody's 

been saying, no matter what I'm talking about -- but it's going 

to be as the amendment says, Mr. Speaker. That's why we want 

time for the people to get their senses, to think clearly like the 

member from Nipawin has. 

He's thought clearly, and I'm saying that the Premier should 

pull this Bill and give six months thinking as the amendment 

says, and then we would let people like the member from 

Nipawin be able to stand to his . . . and maybe he'll think over 

the next six months that a free vote is best.  Maybe that's what 

he'll think.  The Premier may say to himself, six months is the 

right thing to do, and then the people don't have to abstain 

because there's many members, Mr. Speaker, I'm sure on that 

side that feel the same as the member from Nipawin. 

 

There's these things that we must think about, Mr. Speaker, 

over the next . . . if we could have this Bill pulled for six 

months, not introduced, or go into committee, or brought back 

into second reading for another six months, is this reason:  

we've done everything we possibly could, Mr. Speaker, to 

bring to the attention of this government and to the Minister of 

Justice of the reasons why this Bill should be pulled. 

 

We've brought in the voices of . . . I guess speaking on behalf 

of thousands of people of this province.  We're saying to the 

minister, Mr. Speaker, that if he would just listen to these 

people and listen to what we've brought forth, listen to the 

mistakes that the government members have been saying, that 

perhaps they would have a different outlook on this. 

 

There's only a small percentage of people in Saskatchewan that 

have been asking for this here Bill 38, very small.  And we 

don't understand, Mr. Speaker, why the minister couldn't pull it 

for six months and think this over and wonder why he's 

discriminating against over 90 per cent of the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan.  There's probably only, Mr. 

Speaker, approximately 3 to 5 per cent at the very most in 

North America that belong to the gay society, or are gay 

people.  And in Saskatchewan we feel that it's approximately 3 

per cent or less. 

 

So what the minister's doing . . . and maybe he could think it 

over.  And he's not been doing much thinking in the last couple 

or three months about it, but maybe when all this pressure's 

come on from different church groups, different individuals . . . 

there's been many groups other than church groups have 

brought their request to the Minister of Justice to pull this Bill 

and sincerely pull it, and they are sincere about this. 

 

And if he would think about it, maybe he should be listening to 

the 97 per cent of the people in the province of Saskatchewan.  

Why discriminate against them?  Mr. Speaker, to the minister, 

why would he want to discriminate against the other 90 per 

cent-plus?  That's what's going on -- discriminating to them. 

 

And he could maybe look over in the next six months, Mr. 

Speaker, and look the Bill over very carefully.  Because I 

haven't showed it to a lawyer.  I haven't had any comment from 

any lawyers other than it's the poorest-drafted Bill they've ever 

seen.  So if it's a poorly drafted Bill, poorly put together, then 

why shouldn't he be looking at it and bringing it back in in a 

different manner. 



June 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2199 

The Minister of Justice has even made the motion . . . or made 

the statement -- sorry, Mr. Speaker -- has made the statement 

that perhaps the Bill could have been brought in differently like 

some of the states in the United States have where it looks after 

people, the gay society, the people that are homosexuals or 

lesbians . . . that he says the main part of this Bill is only to talk 

about giving them a place to live and ensure their place of a job 

in the workplace.  So maybe that's the legislation he should 

have brought in and he wouldn't have had all this problem in 

Saskatchewan.  He wouldn't have had this uproar. 

 

There's now close to 50,000 signatures on a petition for a 

plebiscite, Mr. Speaker.  And they'll soon be over the 100,000 

mark and we'll have to bring it to a vote.  So why wouldn't, Mr. 

Speaker, why wouldn't the minister want to pull this Bill to see 

what the people say when they get a chance to vote. 

 

Because I'm sure that this government, even though they've 

been pretty high-handed in their legislation and their 

government Bills they've brought down, but something as 

serious as this . . . This is not money.  This is not talking about 

the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) Bill and the 

money that it cost the farmers.  It's not talking about the 

upgrader Bill that could cost millions of dollars for people.  

This is not that.  This is talking about people's lives, and it's 

very important, Mr. Speaker, when we're talking about lives.  

This, Mr. Minister, is not a money Bill.  It's talking about the 

lives of the people of Saskatchewan, and 90 to 97 per cent of 

the people are not in favour of what you're doing. 

 

The now Premier used to be the Attorney General, and I can 

remember, Mr. Speaker, when he listened to the people back in 

the early '80s when . . . and I'm sure he will again, I'm sure he 

will again.  He'll think about this over the next six months if he 

listened to our amendment. 

 

There was a Bill in this here House to change the age of 

consent, from 16 down to 12, and the government of the day 

then laughed at us.  But the Premier, the then Attorney General, 

stood to his place in this House and said: the people of 

Saskatchewan have spoken.  There has been too many letters, 

too many requests, I therefore pull that Bill. 

 

And that is why it's very important the amendment that the 

member from Moosomin brought in today, that we pull this 

Bill for six months.  No more readings on it so heads can think 

and think clearly, think it out, listen to the people, have the 

vote.  If they get their hundred-and-some-thousand signatures, 

that's what important, is to listen to the people.  Surely, when 

it's not money matters . . . We're not talking, Mr. Speaker, on a 

six-month delay affecting the budget or affecting their deficit.  

It's not affecting them at all.  We're talking about a Bill for the 

lives . . . affecting everybody in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I want you to think very carefully, Mr. Speaker.  I want the 

minister and the Premier to think very carefully what they are 

doing.  I do not want to have lesbian or 

homosexual teachers teaching my children in school, and I 

want you to think about that over the next few months if you 

listen to our amendment.  I do not want, I do not want them, 

under any circumstances if . . . we may now, in this province, 

have teachers teaching our children but we do not know, the 

children don't know, whether they are homosexual or lesbians 

or heterosexual.  They don't know. 

 

But when this Bill comes forward they'll be making themselves 

known and I absolutely will never allow . . . I'll leave the 

province before I would ever have any of my children or my 

grandchildren ever be taught by a homosexual or lesbian 

teacher. 

 

Now they may not even push their thinking onto those children, 

but what would happen and what I want you think about -- the 

members opposite are grinning from your seats -- is to 

sincerely think about what it is going to do to our young people 

in this province.  Think very carefully instead of grinning from 

your seats, that what you're going to do when your child . . . 

you all got children or grandchildren, everybody, pretty near 

everybody over there. 

 

Think carefully that if they have a lesbian or homosexual 

teacher that the lifestyle you're going to have your child grow 

up in.  They're going to grow up in a new era in Saskatchewan 

where, even if they're taught at home that that is not the belief 

that we believe in, they will say: oh, mom or dad or grandpa or 

grandma, you are wrong.  My teacher is a homo or a lesbian 

and so therefore it must be all right. 

 

That's the most important thing that we're doing wrong, is 

having teachers . . . that is the most . . . you know, the adult 

world, if they have lesbians in the workplace, they can take 

care of themselves.  But you people are not thinking about our 

little children in this province of Saskatchewan and the future 

of their lives and their families. 

 

And I ask very sincerely, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of 

Justice and to the Premier, and I see that they're very serious 

about . . . I'm talking about and some of the front row are 

grinning and laughing as if I don't know what I'm talking about.  

And I'm only speaking because I have the same right, Mr. 

Speaker, to speak about this here Bill being delayed six months 

as the sincerity of the member from Nipawin, and I have that 

right.  And if you'd only listen to us and listen to the other 90 

per cent of the people in the province, you'd find out that 

there's what people think.  They are completely going against 

the lifestyle of the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

They made promises in the election, Mr. Speaker, many 

promises, and they've broke nearly every one of them.  And I 

don't know why this is the . . . and that's all pertaining to 

money.  I don't know why this has to be the one that they want 

to keep. 

 

They promised the gay society that they would bring this Bill 

forward; nothing can stop them.  But they also made other 

promises and they broke every one of them; every last promise 

you made was broke.  You've 



2200 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1993 

raised the taxes, you've done everything . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member is getting way 

off-base.  Order, order.  The member must get back to the 

amendment as to why the Bill should be not read now but six 

months hence. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, it's very easy to say what I was 

saying and I knew that probably somebody would want to set 

me down.  But it's very easy for me to say, Mr. Speaker -- if 

you'd just give me a moment to connect it -- it's very easy that 

they should be thinking about all the promises that they broke 

and how it affected people and why they should be thinking 

about this Bill for the next six months . . . of what they did in 

the last year and a half -- what . . . they broke every promise. 

 

They broke every last promise, and they should be thinking 

about that.  They broke promise after promise, and they should 

be thinking . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It's got a lot to do 

with it because maybe the member from Moose Jaw, Mr. 

Speaker, could use his head and think it out for six months and 

talk to other members of your caucus, talk to other members of 

your caucus that agrees with the member from Nipawin.  Think 

it out very carefully.  You need six months but maybe some of 

the members need longer than six months. 

 

I think that if the now Premier, Mr. Speaker, would just give 

the people a chance for a free vote, it . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- The member from Moose Jaw Palliser, just 

tone down a bit and let the member from Arm River have his 

say.  You're louder than what he is.  If you want the floor, then 

get up and speak. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As I just was 

saying, if the members opposite . . . I think, Mr. Speaker, that it 

would take maybe some members longer than six months, but 

I'm sure if the Premier and the Minister of Justice would give a 

free vote and say you're on your own, that they would probably 

have this Bill defeated now or it would be pulled.  And that's 

why they need six months, or maybe even more for some, and 

less for some. 

 

But six months would let their heads think it out, and you 

would have the vote and be able to think this out and do the 

right thing for the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

You are doing the wrong thing.  You are hurting many people.  

You are hurting me.  Why should I, Mr. Speaker, why should I 

be discriminated upon, and hundreds of thousands of more 

people like me?  Why should you discriminate upon my rights?  

Why should I have to have the homosexual and gay society 

have special rights? 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  It now being 5 o'clock, this House 

stands recessed until 7 p.m. this evening. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 


