




















































Hansard: May 04, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1425 

 May 4, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 

again am going to present a petition regarding the proposed 

230,000-volt power line from Condie near Regina to Queen 

Elizabeth power station in Saskatoon.  And I'll read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that the Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to do the 

following: 

 

 1. Order SaskPower to facilitate the production of non-utility 

generated power in areas of increased demand, namely 

Lloydminster and Meadow Lake.  Several companies in this 

area have applied to generate power.  Allowing non-utility 

generation of power in this area will make the construction of 

the power line and it's attendant $42 million expenditure 

unnecessary. 

 

 2. Order the Minister of the Environment to undertake a 

complete environmental assessment including public 

hearings. 

 

 3. Order SaskPower to ensure that there is a full and complete 

compensation package for all affected landowners. 

 

 4. Order SaskPower to table in the legislature a complete 

economic analysis by an independent auditor that proves the 

economic benefits of the proposed line. 

 

 5. Order SaskPower to table in the legislature a review of all 

national and international studies on the effects of electric 

and magnetic fields on humans. 

 

 6. Further order SaskPower to cease and desist all planning, 

surveying, or preparation for construction of the Condie to 

Queen Elizabeth 230,000-volt power line on any of the 

proposed routes until all other points in this petition are 

honoured. 

 

And the signatories are from Dilke, Grandview, from Pense, 

Hanley, Saskatoon, Imperial, Neilburg, Lloydminster, Allan, 

Dinsmore, and throughout the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much.  Mr. 

Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you and through you to 

members of the Assembly 10 grade 8 students from Boucher 

School in Prince Albert.  They are accompanied by teacher 

Terri Hiebert and chaperon Steve Kasyon.  I'll be meeting with 

them a little later for 

pictures and drinks.  And I ask you again to give a warm 

legislative welcome to the students and the folks from Boucher 

in Prince Albert. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Legal Actions Against Government 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is for 

the Minister of Justice. 

 

Mr. Minister, as you know, this session the opposition has 

continued its effort to facilitate the work of the Assembly by 

providing all ministers written estimate questions rather than 

taking a lengthy time in the House.  For the most part I want to 

say that this has been a very cooperative process and most 

ministers have been forthcoming in their answers. 

 

However, Mr. Minister, there is one set of standard questions 

that the government House business office has indicated will 

not be answered and they have to do with the legal actions 

against the government, and you are refusing to provide such a 

list. 

 

Will you explain that refusal to the Assembly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I think that, Mr. Speaker, that we'll deal 

with that matter during estimates.  We simply had no way of 

collating the information in the way that the opposition have 

requested in their written questions.  But we are of course 

prepared to answer any questions with respect to any action or 

anything like that that the members may have, during the 

estimates of the Department of Justice. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Well, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, one of 

the questions we asked was: for each of the departments, which 

of the departments had a legal action in the framework of the 

estimates that we asked?  And we are probably suggesting to 

you that there are so many people taking your government to 

court that it would be very lengthy and probably a costly 

process to put this all together.  But I think it's in the interests 

of the people of the province of Saskatchewan that they know 

what's going on.  And we want to have those answers provided 

from every department, not only the Department of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — And so we will, Mr. Speaker.  It just 

wasn't possible to collate that information.  Some of these 

actions have been going on for years and years; some are 

recent.  Every department and agency of government's involved 

in it, and we just simply couldn't collate the information and 

make it available to the opposition as you've requested. 

 

But we're not trying to hide anything, and we'll answer any 

questions and provide any information that we have to during 

estimates, as we always do. 



1426 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1993 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Well, Mr. Minister, I want to ask you the 

question.  We're suggesting that perhaps you didn't want to 

have the information provided early enough so that we could 

ask questions about the various problems that the government 

is having.  And also we're probably going to find out that 

there's some embarrassing ones that you need to deal with. 

 

For example, will you confirm this very day one Jack Messer 

has you in court over some flies that are apparently bugging 

him.  Is it not true that your SaskPower appointee is trying to 

obtain financial compensation from the people of 

Saskatchewan for his insect problem? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, it is true that Mr. 

Messer has an action against his neighbour for a nuisance 

caused by what he . . . alleged nuisance caused by flies that are 

arising from a dairy barn, and the Department of Agriculture 

has been named as a co-defendant in that.  That was at a 

pre-trial hearing yesterday and of course all parties continue to 

try to arrive at some suitable settlement without going to court.  

But if not, it will end up as a lawsuit. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, I want to 

know, is it a buggy problem for you, the fact that Jack Messer 

is suing you and you are being represented by one Don 

McKillop in the Department of Justice?  What I would like you 

to confirm is that Jack Messer is actually suing you over a 

permit given to his neighbour.  Will you confirm that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, it is true that there is 

an alleged nuisance occurring.  I think the member opposite 

must realize that this is not an action that was taken against our 

government, that it's been started . . . I think it's been going on 

something like 13 years. The problem and the lawsuit was 

started before we came into office. And certainly Mr. Messer 

has the same right as any other citizen to seek redress in the 

court for problems that he believes he has. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Minister, he is suing the neighbour and 

yourself over a permit given to his neighbour under the 

livestock pollution control Act.  Will you also confirm that the 

minister that gave that permit was none other Jack Messer 

himself when he was minister of Agriculture.  So that what we 

have is a former minister trying to get compensation from the 

taxpayer for something he himself did.  Is that not correct?  

Will you confirm that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well I believe it is true that in 

1974 when the original permit was issued, that it was signed at 

that time by the then minister of Agriculture, Mr. John Messer.  

I believe the member opposite was also associate minister of 

Agriculture, so 

probably has dealt with this issue in his term as minister as 

well.  And it now continues in my term as minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Minister, did I hear you correctly say 

that the minister at the time when the order was signed, giving 

permission for this farm under the livestock pollution control 

Act, was in fact Mr. Messer himself? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — That's what you heard.  And the 

original permit that was issued to this dairy barn was signed by 

Jack Messer back in 1974, I believe.  The owner of the barn has 

changed as some circumstances have changed.  There has been 

an allegation of a problem there for 13 years, and through part 

of the period when the member opposite was the minister of 

Agriculture as well.  And that continues on. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, wouldn't you 

think that was a bit of a conflict of interest, a person who has lit 

up his yard and pulling the flies in by the thousands, and is also 

now suing the government for potential removal of that facility 

so that he can have some personal comfort?  Isn't that a conflict 

of interest, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — I don't believe that Mr. Messer has 

any . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order.  It's very difficult to hear 

the minister.  I just ask members to just tone it down a bit. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, I see no conflict of 

interest.  I think Mr. Messer has the same rights as any other 

citizen.  Just because he happened to have been minister of 

Agriculture a number of years ago does not, is not . . . I don't 

think he . . . he does not now hold that portfolio.  If he was the 

current Minister of Agriculture, it would be a conflict of 

interest, but he's not and I think the courts will rule on that.  We 

don't believe that he has a case, but that is certainly Mr. 

Messer's right to go to court and seek redress, and that's what 

he is doing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Farm Income Problems 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Minister of Agriculture.  Mr. Minister, you campaigned on 

a promise to help Saskatchewan farmers and protect farm 

families.  That was your main campaign.  In fact you began 

your term of office by putting a moratorium on farm 

foreclosures until a solution to the farm debt crisis could be 

found.  You promised that.  You promised it very clearly. 

 

Mr. Minister, what solutions have you found by this 



May 4, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1427 

time?  Net farm income is forecast to drop by as much as 68 

per cent this year to a record low of $5,000.  Your government 

by its own admission has turned ACS (Agricultural Credit 

Corporation of Saskatchewan) into nothing more than a 

collection agency.  Farm families are in more trouble than 

they've ever been. 

 

Mr. Minister, where are the solutions you have promised?  Or 

was this promise just one more example like health care tactics 

. . . (inaudible) . . . and so on?  Can you tell us that, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, we did attempt to 

address the debt issue.  We had a committee that . . . we had a 

voluntary moratorium which we got cooperation from all 

parties involved.  We came up with a six-year leaseback 

program which certainly is not the answer to all the farm 

problems but it's within our resource as a province as a solution 

that will help some farmers in that area.  It's, I think, an effort, 

the best effort we could make. 

 

As to the income problem, I again would remind the members 

opposite that they voted against a third line of defence from the 

federal government, which is what we feel is needed to get us 

through this transition period.  And we're working to help the 

farmers to the best of our ability and the best with the resources 

that we have to work with. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Speaker, of course my next question is 

to the minister.  That's the same answer as I expected to get 

from you — an absolutely a nothing answer.  You don't want to 

admit what your problem is.  You took the GRIP (gross 

revenue insurance program) away from farmers.  We're talking 

about . . . my first question was talking about cash flow for 

farmers, and you took the . . . your Premier took it away from 

us as a result of your government breaking down its own 

contractual obligations.  You're the ones that threw out the '91 

GRIP.  The average net income will drop under $5,000. 

 

Now listen very clearly; I said that the first question.  You get 

off of that.  Have you no compassion at all for farmers that 

can't get their crops in this spring for the lack of cash?  Now, 

Mr. Minister, tell us what your solution is, instead of blaming it 

on someone else. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, it's been curious that 

the members opposite, after talking about GRIP for 35 straight 

days last year, have not once mentioned it in the House this 

year.  It is not, I think, a total surprise. 

 

I have here an article from Western Report on the GRIP 

problem in Alberta, which is basically the GRIP design that we 

had in Saskatchewan that was introduced by the members 

opposite.  And it's entitled, "A pig in a GRIP."  This is "A pig 

in a GRIP."  Ernie Isley is saying: . . . that the GRIP program in 

Alberta has accumulated a $400 million deficit.  Four 

hundred million dollars, and remember Alberta has half the 

acres that Saskatchewan has. 

 

He also goes on to say: 

 

 . . . that Ottawa was asking . . . In 1992 he says, the 

federal-provincial allocation for Alberta of $250 million fell 

$131 million short. 

 

And they go on to say: 

 

 . . .that they have a team of auditors . . . Alberta Auditor 

General Donald Salmon is not at all happy with GRIP and 

has assigned a team of accountants to make sense of it. 

 

That's a program that we changed . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To the same 

minister.  Of course we haven't had too much chance to talk to 

you about the GRIP program, but that's coming.  That's last 

year's.  We've been too busy on trying to help the people save 

their hospitals in this province. 

 

Mr. Minister, you have abandoned Saskatchewan farm 

families.  You have strictly abandoned them.  Just like you 

abandoned rural health care in this province.  In many cases 

you're hitting the same people twice.  And you don't seem to 

care.  If you do care, you don't show that you care. 

 

Mr. Minister, it's very clear that if you have an income of 

$5,000 a year, your family's not going to do very well.  Now 

you as a minister have a much bigger income than that.  Do 

you not feel sorry and want to do something about the farm 

families that have only a $5,000 income?  Many of these 

families are able to survive because they've got second jobs.  

So what did you do?  You closed 52 hospitals, and all over this 

province there are towns that are going to be hurt because 

another farm family is out of a job.  Why are you picking on 

farmers? 

 

And given your government's pathetic job-creation record, it's 

pretty doubtful a lot of these new jobs will be springing up in 

rural Saskatchewan.  And on top of all that, Mr . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order.  Does the member have a question? 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Speaker, yes, I'm coming very quickly 

to my question.  On top of all that, now these families will have 

to live with the knowledge that if one of them has an accident 

on the farm they're going to have to go a lot farther to get a 

hospital to take care of them. 

 

Mr. Minister, Mr. Minister, what are you doing to counter these 

problems and to counter the vicious attack your government is 

having on farmers in rural 



1428 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1993 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, it's curious the 

members opposite claim to be very concerned about the 

farmers.  This is day 47 of the session.  It's the first question 

we've had dealing with farmers in this session. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, we are concerned 

about farmers.  There's no denying the serious problem that's 

out there.  We have been talking to the federal government for 

third line of defence.  We have been . . . I've been meeting with 

farmers across this province on a strategy for what the future of 

this province is. We've got a committee working with farmers 

to try to develop a program that will replace the GRIP program, 

a farm income support program that will be adequate.  And we 

continue to work for the farmers. 

 

We don't have a billion dollars or two for the immediate cash 

solution that these farmers need, and we know that.  And we 

know that farmers are having a very hard time going into this 

session this spring. 

 

But I think the members opposite, having voted against the 

third line of defence and played politics with other issues when 

they're in the forefront and then after 47 days to say, what are 

you doing about farmers, I think rings fairly hollow. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Speaker, the way the minister talks as 

if that's the reason why he's not helping farm families, because 

we don't happen to bring it up in the legislature.  What a joke, 

Mr. Speaker.  What a joke. 

 

We're talking about rural Saskatchewan hospitals, and he says 

he didn't help farmers because we didn't bring it up in the 

legislature.  That's no excuse whatsoever. 

 

I know how much you like to get a hold of the old NDP (New 

Democratic Party) blame thrower.  You like to get it going.  

You want to blame it on somebody else all the time.  You 

always blame it on the feds, everybody else. 

 

The fact is, the fact, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, you are the 

government that gutted GRIP last year and that's why 

Saskatchewan farmers will be going into a spring seeding with 

no cash or very little cash.  Do you realize, Mr. Minister, that 

the average farm is going to be $45,000 less cash because of 

you gutting GRIP in the last session?  And that's why there's 

only $5,000 out there. 

 

Mr. Minister, what are you going to do to make up for this 

shortfall?  Somebody's got to make up the shortfall — the 

5,000 to the $45,000.  What are you going to do as government 

and the new Minister of Agriculture — the one that's got the 

new portfolio — to straighten this mess out?  What are you 

going to do to help the 

farmers with their shortfall? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, we will do our best 

to straighten out this mess.  It won't be with a flawed GRIP 

program that the member opposite was part of putting in, that 

was flawed from the beginning and was a disaster not only for 

the farmers but for the provincial government.  And as the 

other provinces, as Manitoba, have also given notice to get out 

of this program, and it was . . . I think that's the first step 

towards fixing this problem is getting out of a fundamentally 

flawed program.  And, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to work 

with our very limited resources to do the very best that we can 

to protect our farm families and rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Speaker, thank you.  Mr. Minister, you 

know that's just an old rhetoric story about the '91 GRIP.  You 

can go any place in rural Saskatchewan, the people that 

complained about the '91 GRIP say to every one of you, say to 

you every day: please give us back what we didn't want in '91; 

please give it back to us.  That's what they want. 

 

How do you add up that $5,000 net income for this year is what 

they're talking about, compared to 45,000 average drop per 

farm?  How do you compare it?  How can you say anything 

was flawed about the '91 GRIP? 

 

There's many, many things here that you're not looking at.  

You're out to get farmers every day.  Your government likes to 

talk about diversifying the rural economy.  Your actions run 

counter to everything you are saying.  If your government 

believes in diversification, then why have you piled up all 

kinds of new charges on Saskatchewan livestock producers?  

At a time when the government should be encouraging more 

Saskatchewan farmers to diversify into livestock, you have got 

brand registration fees, livestock dealer licences fees, 

certificate incorporation fees, and breeder fees. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, now you have increased community pasture 

fees by 18 per cent; that's $360 for a herd of 50 head.  Mr. 

Minister, 360 may not seem like a lot compared to a minister's 

salary, but for a farm family with 5,000 it's quite a bit. 

 

Why are you piling . . . Why, Mr. Minister, are you piling all of 

these on the Saskatchewan producers at a time when you say 

it's time for them to diversify?  Why are you doing it now? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, it's interesting to . . . 

The member opposite claims that changes to the GRIP program 

reduced net farm income by $45,000.  I would like to know at 

what year that farmers in this province had a $50,000 income 

under any program, so they could drop by 45,000. 

 

As to the livestock, we now have record numbers of 



May 4, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1429 

cattle and hogs in this province and that industry is expanding.  

There's a great future in that industry, and we intend to work 

with the industry to continue to help it grow and to become one 

of the engines that drives our economy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A further 

question to the Minister of Agriculture.  We've already seen the 

disaster your government has made out of the health reform, 

absolute disaster.  Even though it was obvious your 

government had no idea what it was doing, you decided to bull 

right ahead and bring down this plan that threatens the very 

future of 52 Saskatchewan communities, even though by your 

own admission your people don't really know what you're 

doing. 

 

Now have you decided to do exactly the same thing with the 

GRIP even though you have no idea how it will be replaced.  

Why are you taking this huge and unnecessary risk with the 

lives of 60,000 Saskatchewan farm families when you don't 

know how or when, what you're going to do to replace it?  Tell 

us what you're going to do to replace the GRIP program if 1991 

or '92, if it was no good. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, we have given notice 

to get out of GRIP which will take two years because that's the 

contract.  We are now working with farmers.  We have a Farm 

Support Review Committee made up of 32 farmers who are 

working at what will be suitable as a replacement program.  

We are working towards that very hard. 

 

We know that GRIP was not the answer, and the ministers who 

designed GRIP, including the member from Estevan who was 

in on it, when I talked to those ministers they readily admit that 

GRIP was intended to be a short-term program because the 

support level drops year after year after year, and sooner or 

later, grain prices are going to go up and kill the program 

naturally. 

 

And all we've done, I think, is taken the lead in getting rid of it 

and getting it replaced with something . . . with a more 

meaningful program that's more suitable to this province. 

 

We need a national program, and I think if the members 

opposite would join with us in urging Ottawa, not only for third 

line of defence but for proper cost sharing on programs, it 

would allow Saskatchewan to implement adequate programs 

for our farmers.  I think that would be very helpful. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Speaker, to the minister.  Talk is cheap.  

You said the 1991 GRIP program is no good so you replaced it 

with the '92.  Now you've dumped that out. 

Okay, you're the government.  You don't want '91, you don't 

want '92, but what are the farmers suppose to be . . . how are 

they supposed to be planning their future when you have 

nothing for '93 or '94?  Or when the programs are completely 

done, what's their future? 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question now is to the Premier.  Throughout 

the time you were leader of the opposition there were two 

things that happened every spring, two things that happened 

every spring.  One, Saskatchewan farmers seeded their crops.  

And two, then you would get up and complain that the 

government wasn't doing enough to help farmers.  No matter 

what was done it wasn't enough. 

 

Mr. Premier, or Deputy Premier, since you were elected you 

have done nothing to help Saskatchewan farmers.  In fact you 

done less than nothing.  And the Premier, Mr. Premier, or 

Deputy Premier, you have said the '91 GRIP should have 

retained . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order.  Does the member have a question?  I 

want the member to put his question, all right?  Put your 

question. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Yes I'll come to my question instantly, Mr. 

Speaker.  Your actions have cost farmers money and you have 

already cost them many of them their farms.  When are you 

going to stop this?  When are you going to stop this brutal 

attack on Saskatchewan farm families?  When are you going to 

do something and quit their brutal attacks on them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, I think what we were 

saying in opposition was that what the members opposite was 

doing was not in the right direction.  We have introduced a 

six-year leaseback to help with the farm programs.  We've 

called on . . . With the farm debt situation we call on Ottawa 

for third line of defence. 

 

What the members opposite did was lent $25 an acre to cash, 

hassle-free cash straight across the board, 6 per cent interest, 

and later increased it to 10 per cent, which was not a solution to 

the debt problem.  Their solution was to lend the farmers more 

money.  Was that a solution to the debt problem?  We feel not.  

We feel that we need to deal with the debt problem and reduce 

the debt and hence we've gone with a program like the six-year 

leaseback. 

 

So I think it's not only spending money to help farmers, it's 

spending money in a way that helps solve the problem and not 

adds to it.  And that's what we are attempting to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Speaker, to the same minister.  It's 

easier for you to make that statement.  What our philosophy . . . 

the difference in our philosophy, we kind of wanted the farmers 

to help balance their budget.  We kind of put that as an 

important first — 



1430 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1993 

balance the farmers' budget and then ours.  But that's the 

difference. 

 

Mr. Minister, the Farm Debt Review Board have stated that the 

cash flow for farmers to plant this crop and operate their farms 

is more serious than any time since 1939.  And this statement is 

backed by the Sask Wheat Pool and all farm organizations. 

 

You must know, Mr. Minister, that there's frozen wheat, no 

cash, poor seed.  Some people have no seed.  In 1944 the CCF 

(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) threw the Liberals 

out of office and began to help farmers survive.  When are you 

going to take action and help the farmers survive?  Don't put all 

Saskatchewan on welfare like you are doing now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, again the member 

opposite makes a good point.  There is a serious problem in 

rural Saskatchewan.  Farmers are facing a very serious spring. 

 

Again I think we would do better if we worked together.  

We've been fighting the federal government as they've made 

cuts to our transportation subsidies, as they attempt to destroy 

orderly marketing.  And we're fighting for our farmers every 

day and we wish the members opposite would join and help us 

fight on some of these issues. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1430) 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 58 — An Act to amend The Northern 

Municipalities Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading 

of a Bill to amend The Northern Municipalities Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 59 — An Act to amend The Education Act (No. 2) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I move that The 

Education Amendment Act (No. 2) now be introduced and read 

the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 60 — An Act respecting Condominiums 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

replace The Condominium Property Act be now introduced and 

read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

Bill No. 61 — An Act to amend The Vital Statistics Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I move that An Act to 

amend The Vital Statistics Act be now introduced and read the 

first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 62 — An Act to amend The Medical Profession Act, 

1981 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I move that An Act to 

amend The Medical Profession Act, 1981 now be introduced 

and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 

 

At 2:33 p.m. Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 

to the following Bills: 

 

Bill No. 11 — An Act to amend The Wakamow Valley 

Authority Act 

Bill No. 4 — An Act respecting Local Improvements in 

Urban and Northern Municipalities and to 

Effect Certain Consequential Changes 

Bill No. 25 — An Act to repeal The Saskatchewan Mining 

Development Corporation Act 

Bill No. 9 — An Act to amend The Emergency Planning Act 

Bill No. 5 — An Act to amend The Planning and 

Development Act, 1983 

Bill No. 8 — An Act to amend The Uniform Building and 

Accessibility Standards Act and to make 

Related Amendments to Certain Other Acts 

Bill No. 3 — An Act respecting Health Districts 

Bill No. 7 — An Act respecting Social Workers 

Bill No. 26 — An Act to repeal The Saskatchewan Computer 

Utility Corporation Act 

Bill No. 13 — An Act to repeal The Mineral Taxation Act 

Bill No. 14 — An Act to amend the Statute Law 

Bill No. 15 — An Act to amend The Limitation of Actions Act 

Bill No. 18 — An Act to amend The Victims of Crime Act 

Bill No. 16 — An Act respecting the interpretation of 

Enactments and prescribing Rules Governing 

Acts 

Bill No. 17 — An Act to amend The Fatal Accidents Act 

Bill No. 19 — An Act respecting Survivorship 

Bill No. 32 — An Act to amend The Family Maintenance Act 

Bill No. 6 — An Act to amend The Prairie and Forest Fires 

Act, 1982 

Bill No. 22 — An Act respecting the Manufacture, Sale, Use, 

Consumption, Collection, Storage, Recycling 

and Disposal of Ozone-depleting Substances 

and Products 



May 4, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1431 

Bill No. 28 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation Act 

Bill No. 46 — An Act to amend and repeal The Farm Purchase 

Program Act 

Bill No. 47 — An Act to amend The Farm Financial Stability 

Act 

Bill No. 50 — An Act to amend The Provincial Lands Act 

 

Her Honour: — In Her Majesty's name I assent to these Bills. 

 

Bill No. 57 — An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain 

sums of Money for the Public Service for the 

Fiscal Year ending on March 31, 1994 

 

Her Honour: — In Her Majesty's name I thank the Legislative 

Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 

 

Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 2:37 p.m. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, by agreement of the 

Assembly, I would move that we would move to private 

members' motions number 190, and then following that, move 

to government motions as per the agreed agenda. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 

 

Return No. 194 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I do not 

intend to take up much of the Assembly's time, but I do want to 

make a few salient remarks regarding the return 190. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is a continual problem for the opposition to get 

information from this government in terms of them answering 

the legitimate questions that the opposition may be asking.  

And over the period of time, over the last 11 or 12 weeks that 

the House has been sitting, on innumerable occasions we have 

been asking this government to live up to their election promise 

of being open and being accountable. 

 

I think it is of rather some significance, Mr. Speaker, to notice 

that we are dealing now with item 190.  And there are items on 

motions for return (debatable) that go well in the 200, Mr. 

Speaker.  That means that this opposition has asked this 

government — this open, this honest, this accountable 

government — over 200 questions in notice of questions that 

the Government House Leader has seen fit to transfer over into 

items that are now going to be simply debatable. 

 

In others words, Mr. Speaker, what the public should be aware 

of is that these motions for return (debatable) are such because 

the government has seen fit to refuse 

 to answer the questions that we have asked. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this particular one on 190 — and I will be 

reading this into the record — was a question that we asked the 

government many, many weeks ago actually because we 

wanted to incorporate the answers that the Minister of Health 

would be giving into the debate on Bill 3; however the 

government, for whatever reason, saw fit not to answer our 

questions.  Now that did not allow us to have a fully impacting 

debate on Bill 3 because we were lacking some of the 

information that we wanted to acquire. 

 

It is for obvious reasons why the government chose not to 

answer these questions because, Mr. Speaker, the motion that I 

am making is regarding the government's rural health care 

policy.  And we're asking the government to, number 1, 

provide the actual amounts of monies allocated specifically to 

the hospitals (a) outside of Regina, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, and 

Prince Albert and (b) within the border of the cities of Regina, 

Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, and Prince Albert because we wanted 

to find out the difference, the spread between those amounts of 

money allocated to the major urban centres and their hospital 

budgets as opposed to those of the rural. 

 

Now on the face of it, that should not have posed a problem for 

the government to do.  Surely those are legitimate facts.  Surely 

those are facts which, in the meantime, Mr. Speaker, we have 

been able to ascertain.  But I guess when the government looks 

at a motion such as this, as a question such as this — it 

originally started off as a question — they realized that there 

would be some embarrassing information in that answer. 

 

And rather to avoid accountability, they decided they were not 

going to answer the question at all because the second part of 

that question, Mr. Speaker, was the average . . . We wanted the 

government to give the average cost per patient to the 

provincial government of patients in hospitals, again (a) outside 

the major cities and within the four major cities, Mr. Speaker, 

because what we're trying to do is determine what is the cost 

effectiveness of urban-based hospitals as opposed to 

rural-based hospitals. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we and the people of this province would be 

able to assess adequately and quite precisely what it was that 

Bill 3 . . . the impact that Bill 3 was really going to have.  And 

we were not able to do that, Mr. Speaker, because the 

government refused to give us that kind of information. 

 

Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, we asked the government to give us 

the number of special care beds in the province, expressed as 

proportion of the total number of seniors in the province and 

then to give comparative data for other provinces used by the 

Minister of Health to justify her policy.  Mr. Speaker, it's a 

well-known fact that in Saskatchewan proportionate to the 

population we have more seniors than any other province in 

Canada. 

 

And so therefore, Mr. Speaker, we are unique, and it is 



1432 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1993 

that uniqueness I think that should be translated into our health 

care delivery system.  And this is what we were trying to prove 

and this is what we wanted to discuss.  But again, Mr. Speaker, 

that kind of information was denied the opposition. 

 

(1445) 

 

We further wanted to — point number 4, Mr. Speaker — 

wanted the government to provide the average distance to the 

nearest hospital over primary all-weather highways for 

residents not living in a community with a hospital.  And we 

know, Mr. Speaker, that there are many, many communities in 

Saskatchewan that are without a hospital.  And we full well 

know now that there are 52 communities that are also been 

added to the list of those communities with no hospitals. 

 

We want to know, quite legitimately, what is going to be now 

the average distance that the people in this province are going 

to have to travel.  I grant you, Mr. Speaker, it does not make 

much difference whether you have two blocks or three blocks 

in the major centres.  But we're talking about significant 

distances in rural Saskatchewan. The south-west part of the 

province where a number of my colleagues are from is a very, 

very significant factor.  And again for whatever reason, the 

government has seen not to be honest, not to be forthright, and 

be the open government that they have pledged to be. 

 

We needed that information, Mr. Speaker.  It was not 

forthcoming.  And instead of giving us that information the 

Government House Leader decided that he was going to 

transfer those questions that we were asking into motions 

(debatable) and the only recourse we have now, Mr. Speaker, is 

to make the public aware that we were asking legitimate 

questions and the government refused to answer. 

 

We asked also another question, Mr. Speaker.  Point number 5 

was that we asked the government to provide for us the number 

of persons who died en route to the hospital in each of the last 

five years.  Now, Mr. Speaker, I think of all of the questions 

that are included in this one, that is probably the one that they 

most desperately wanted to avoid answering. 

 

They didn't want to answer that, because we needed that 

information.  We wanted that information so that we could look 

over the last five years and have a base line, a figure, Mr. 

Speaker, that we could say, all right, under the existing 

circumstances, under the existing health delivery system, we 

had this many deaths, and that would provide a death . . . 

pardon me — a baseline upon which we could hold the 

government accountable under the present system.  And I 

think, Mr. Speaker, quite frankly, they were afraid that that 

baseline would show a marked increase in deaths as people 

have to travel these further distances to their hospitals.  I hope 

I'm wrong; I hope that it will not turn out to be that.  But just 

simply logic and the logistics of our province indicate that that 

is exactly what will happen. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the other question that was included within 

this Return 190 is the point (6) where we asked the government 

and in particular the Minister of Health to provide: 

 

 The number of hospitals in the province expressed as a 

proportion of the number of incorporated municipalities in 

the province with comparative data for other provinces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the contention of many people in this province 

has always been that Saskatchewan is a unique province.  Yes, 

we have a lot of hospitals.  Perhaps per capita we do have more 

hospitals than any other province although I would contend, 

Mr. Speaker, that we do not have more hospitals than we have 

service stations as was indicated by one of the media. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the uniqueness of Saskatchewan is that we 

also have many, many more roads per capita than Ontario.  

And I don't think anyone is suggesting that we close down a lot 

of roads; that is not the point.  But we are unique in 

Saskatchewan in the delivery of the health care system; that has 

to be recognized.  And it is not fair to say that simply because 

we have more hospitals than Ontario does that that is an 

unnatural occurrence.  So I think we have to recognize the 

physical logistics of the province of Saskatchewan and take 

that into account. 

 

Now what we were trying to do, Mr. Speaker, by this particular 

question was to get that information from the government 

during the time of the Bill 3 debate so that it could be 

incorporated into the discussion.  And the government for 

whatever reasons — and I've suggested some of them already 

— decided no, we are not going to answer that question. 

 

And I think that's unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, because if you 

have a point you should be able to discuss and you should be 

able to debate that point and make convincing arguments in 

favour of the point that you're trying to make, instead of hiding, 

Mr. Speaker, literally hiding from over 200 questions that the 

opposition has asked the government, and they've refused to 

answer.  I think it's extremely disappointing to us, Mr. Speaker, 

and extremely disappointing to the government . . . to the 

people that elected this government who thought and 

legitimately expected better of them. 

 

So I just want to reiterate and in closing just simply say that the 

opposition finds itself extremely disappointed with the 

government. They have chosen this close-chested kind of an 

approach where they are not willing to share the information 

with the people of Saskatchewan so that they can indeed follow 

the debate and find out the basis upon which many of the 

decisions that have been made by this government have 

actually been made. 

 

So with those few comments, Mr. Speaker, I want to again just 

register my disappointment and I so move . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, I have already indirectly read it, 

but I will read the motion 



May 4, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1433 

once more, Mr. Speaker, to go into the record and the member 

from Moosomin is going to be the seconder to the motion.  And 

it reads thus: 

 

 Regarding the government's rural health care policy, provide: 

(1) the actual amounts of money allocated specifically to 

hospitals (a) outside of Regina, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, and 

Prince Albert (b) within the borders of Regina, Saskatoon, 

Moose Jaw, and Prince Albert; (2) the average cost per 

patient to the provincial government of patients in hospitals 

(a) outside the four major cities and (b) within the four major 

cities; (3) the number of special care beds in the province 

expressed as proportion of the total number of seniors in the 

province and comparative data for other provinces used by 

the Minister of Health to justify her policy; (4) the average 

distance to the nearest hospital over primary all-weather 

highways for residents not living in a community with a 

hospital; (5) the number of persons who died en route to 

hospital in each of the last five years; (6) the number of 

hospitals in the province expressed as a proportion of the 

number of incorporated municipalities in the province with 

comparative data for other provinces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so move, seconded by the member from 

Moosomin. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to make a 

few short comments on the motion put by the member.  Just to 

say that his rambling about the government not providing 

answers is simply not accurate. 

 

An Hon. Member: — There's over 200 here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — While he mentions that there are 

200 on the order paper, that's true. But it's not whether or not 

the answers are coming — in fact they are coming — but the 

volume of questions being asked here, many would say being 

put on the order paper for political reasons only, are going to 

take hundreds, if not thousands of hours of civil servants' time 

to provide the answers.  And we're going to do it.  And the 

taxpayers will obviously pay for the work that goes into 

answering these 200 questions.  But you have to realize this 

takes a good deal of time for the civil . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — We're not supposed to ask questions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — No, I'm saying that you can ask 

questions, but when you ask 200 questions in this short period 

of time it takes a good deal of time to put those answers 

together.  And we are going to put them together for you.  

Obviously the answers will come, but they are difficult to put 

together.  There's a lot of information asked for, and obviously 

some civil servant somewhere has to take time out of their 

other schedules. 

 

In Health department, instead of providing the 

services to the public, they are supplying the information to the 

legislature.  And that's fair enough. But for you to say they 

should stop everything else to answer your questions in a 

matter of hours is simply not proper for you to be doing.  We'll 

answer the questions, the staff will answer the questions, and 

we will bring them back to the House.  So for you to say that 

you're not getting the answers is another . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — After the House adjourns, right? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — No, not after the House adjourns.  

You will get the answers . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Before the House adjourns. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, many of them you have got 

already.  You ask questions every day and we answer questions 

every day.  Some in the public obviously suggest that the kind 

of questions you put each day could be strengthened, and there 

is other questions they would rather you were asking. 

 

Today for example, about the flies on a certain farm, they 

probably would have wanted you to ask and spend the time in 

the House asking other questions.  But that's not for me to 

decide.  Our objective here is to provide answers for the public 

and for the opposition, and we intend to do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the question put by the member, I want to just 

indicate that I propose to move an amendment, and the 

amendment would be: 

 

 That part 5 be deleted and part 6 be renumbered as part 5. 

 

And I just say to the members opposite that with that small 

amendment to the motion we will intend to bring back the 

answer to this and other questions at a very early and opportune 

time. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I just 

want to take a couple minutes to respond to some of the 

comments made by the minister.  And as my colleague 

indicated earlier, certainly the government has prided itself on 

being an open and accountable government, and yet . . . and the 

minister has indicated that they have responded on a number of 

occasions to questions.  And yet we see a lot of the questions 

have been returned into motions for returns (debatable). 

 

The minister made a promise this afternoon that he would have 

the answers to the questions that have been put forward and 

specifically to this question that has been raised here.  

However, as my colleague indicated and one of the major 

concerns that we have, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that there has 

been significant time for the minister and for the Minister of 

Health, and certainly department officials, to bring forward 

responses to the questions that have been asked here. 

 

And the member from Saskatoon Greystone indicates that 

certainly, I believe, 18 weeks or at least that amount of time in 

which the questions could have 



1434 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1993 

been answered or responses could have been given. 

 

Now the minister has just indicated that . . . or brought forward 

an amendment that deletes question number 5, indicating the 

number of persons who died en route to hospital in each of the 

last five years, and it just reminded me of one of the questions 

raised by the present Minister of Health when she was on this 

side of the House — opposition critic for Health — decrying 

the lack of available services and the fact that one, I believe it 

was Glenda Hall, a young girl from Assiniboia, died en route to 

hospital. 

 

And one has to question why would you remove that question 

other than . . . we can see why the government would not want 

to respond to that question because as they close 52 hospitals 

around the province of Saskatchewan and we find that in many 

areas the closure of hospitals means significant travel time for 

many people in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Even residents of urban Saskatchewan know the problems that 

they can face in trying to reach a hospital in an emergency, 

especially in rush-hour traffic in the morning and late 

afternoon. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it's very appropriate that the question 

has been placed.  It's unfortunate that the answers weren't 

brought forward prior to the final passage of Bill No. 3, so that 

as an opposition, we would have had the ability to provide even 

a more effective response in getting answers from the 

government or inquiring of the government regarding 

expenditures and how they are going to explain the actual fact 

that they're supposedly going to save money while they're 

downsizing health care services in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would just suggest that as an opposition we 

look forward to the answers that the minister and the 

Government House Leader has said he will provide.  We trust 

that it won't be another 18 months down the road.  We trust that 

in fact the answers to the questions will be on our desk before 

this session adjourns some time later, maybe even into the 

summer.  It will depend on the willingness of the government 

to respond to the questions that have been placed before it.  

Thank you, sir. 

 

(1500) 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Just a few 

brief comments to underline remarks made by the Government 

House Leader in this debate — that members of the opposition 

can rest assured that the information will be provided.  I want 

to say that on behalf of the department. 

 

But also to note that, as the Government House Leader has 

pointed out, the volume of questions that have been presented, 

particularly in health care, demands a great deal of the staff of 

the department in terms of time and research and so on.  We 

are working diligently to provide all of the information — 

accurate information — to members opposite through the 

question process.  And that will be done. 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say simply, in terms of the amendment 

that's before us, the information asked for by the opposition in 

this case is simply not available.  It cannot be determined.  The 

time of death of course is always determined by a coroner or 

medical doctor, and that is done in hospital, Mr. Speaker.  And 

so as the question is put in the order, it is simply not ours to 

answer, simply because that kind of information is not 

available. 

 

However, all the other questions will be answered and they will 

be answered specifically and with great detail and will be 

provided to members of the opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just before I take my place, it might be wise for 

members of the opposition to answer a question or two of their 

own that the people of the province are asking. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have here a copy of the Wednesday 28th edition 

of the Nipawin Journal with a great big headline here that says, 

and I'll just quote it, Mr. Speaker, it says: "Cuts will cause 

devastation: Swenson."  A comment attributed to the Leader of 

the Opposition. 

 

Now the question then I think the people of Saskatchewan are 

asking, Mr. Speaker: how can that be aligned with other 

comments that the Leader of the Opposition is making around 

the province?  Because, Mr. Speaker, in North Battleford the 

Leader of the Opposition, and I assume speaking on behalf of 

his caucus and political party, says, and I quote from an article 

that appeared in the Sunday News-Optimist . . . the 

News-Optimist, Sunday edition, North Battleford.  And I quote, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

 The closure and consolidation of hospitals wouldn't 

necessarily stop if the Tories formed the next government in 

Saskatchewan . . . 

 

The process wouldn't be stopped if the Tories formed the next 

government in Saskatchewan.  Further quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 Asked directly if his government would stop the closure of 52 

rural hospitals instituted by the current NDP government, 

Swenson said, "I'd slow it down." 

 

"I'd slow it down" — I think the questions that people are 

asking, number one, he's talking about closure.  Mr. Speaker, 

this government is talking about conversions, renewal of rural 

hospitals, renewal of their role to serve the people of 

Saskatchewan.  The Leader of the Opposition is talking about 

closures, but he said he'd slow it down.  I think the questions 

that need to be asked then are which hospitals would the 

members opposite close or destine for conversion and just 

when would they do this and how would they do that.  That's 

the kind of question I think that needs to be answered in this 

House if we're going to have a credible debate. 



May 4, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1435 

Mr. Speaker, again I assure members of the opposition that the 

information they have requested will be provided, and it will be 

provided in accurate detail. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Amendment agreed to on division. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to on division. 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Referral of  Special Report of the Provincial Auditor r to 

the Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow: 

 

 That the  Special Report to the Legislative Assembly by the 

Provincial Auditor on Bill No. 42, The Crown Corporations 

Act, 1993, be referred to the Standing Committee on Crown 

Corporations. 

 

I so move. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  After due 

deliberations between the vice-chairman and members of the 

Public Accounts Committee, we have come to an agreed-upon 

conclusion and a solution to the impasse, and I would move, 

seconded by the member from Saskatoon Idylwyld, the 

vice-chairman of Public Accounts: 

 

 That the words "Standing Committee on Crown 

Corporations" be deleted and the following substituted 

therefor: 

 

 "Standing Committee on Public Accounts". 

 

I so move, seconded by the member from Saskatoon Idylwyld. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 42 — An Act respecting the Creation and 

Supervision of certain Crown Corporations 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

am pleased to introduce for consideration of this House The 

Crown Corporations Act, 1993. 

 

This Bill replaces The Crown Corporations Act which was 

passed in 1978.  The new legislation will provide a structure 

for the operations of Saskatchewan's Crown sector for the 

1990s and into the next century. 

 

The overriding objective of The Crown Corporations Act is to 

ensure that these corporations are 

accountable to the citizens of Saskatchewan, while at the same 

time leaving the management of the corporations with 

sufficient flexibility and autonomy to enable them to operate 

these businesses in an efficient manner.  These are the 

objectives of the Bill as it is now written. 

 

During the debate on this important legislation and through 

discussions in the Crown Corporations Committee, my 

colleagues and I will be pleased to carefully consider any 

suggestions as to how we can better achieve these objectives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation was drafted in response to 

problems in the governance of Crown corporations that have 

been identified by such agencies as the Provincial Auditor and 

the Financial Management Review Commission.  These 

problems include: a lack of consistency in the annual reports; 

annual reports that were not filed in a timely fashion; the fact 

that Crown corporations were not required to report the 

creation of subsidiaries created under the terms of The 

Business Corporations Act, and that these subsidiaries were not 

required to disclose their mandate or annual reports to the 

public. 

 

The fact that it was possible for the province to make major 

investments or issue loan guarantees without full disclosure of 

the investment or the guarantee, the lack of a clear line of 

reporting for Crown corporations — this Bill addresses these 

concerns. 

 

There will be a legislative provision that every Crown 

corporation file an annual report to the legislature within 90 

days of the corporation's fiscal year end even if the legislature 

is not in session. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the timely filing of annual reports of Crown 

corporations will provide the public, who are the shareholders 

of Crown corporations, with an annual review of the activities 

of a particular Crown corporation.  Timely filing will allow the 

Crown Corporations Committee to begin its in-depth review of 

each corporation on a timely basis.  This further ensures that 

the public will be made aware of the activities of a Crown 

corporation. 

 

During the past decade a number of subsidiaries of Crown 

corporations were formed without the knowledge of the public.  

Mr. Speaker, with this Bill, this practice will be ended.  No 

Crown corporation will be permitted to incorporate a 

subsidiary without the prior approval of the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council.  The order in council must also clearly 

specify the reporting lines by defining whether the corporation 

reports to the Crown Investments Corporation or to the 

Treasury Board. 

 

When a subsidiary is created, the minister responsible for the 

Crown corporation must table in the legislature a report setting 

out the name of the new corporation, its objects and purposes, 

and the location of its head office.  Mr. Speaker, a similar 

disclosure requirement are placed on investments of taxpayers' 

money or the issuing of loan guarantees. 



1436 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1993 

With the passage of this Bill, projects requiring provincial 

investment or loan guarantees by the Crown Investments 

Corporation will require the approval of the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council.  This will establish for the public a record 

of the approval of any particular project.  This forces 

government to be accountable for any investment decisions. 

 

One of the most important ways to ensure accountability is to 

establish a clear, well-defined reporting structure.  Mr. 

Speaker, this Bill establishes such a reporting structure. 

 

The Crown Investments Corporation or CIC is established as 

the holding company for Crown corporations.  As the holding 

company, CIC will perform supervisory and coordinating 

functions throughout the Crown sector.  CIC may also establish 

guidelines for the Crown corporations to ensure that the policy 

objectives of the legislature and the government are being met.  

For example, CIC may set comprehensive standards for annual 

reports and ensure that the format for annual reports is 

consistent for all Crown corporations and that as much 

information as possible is provided. 

 

Even more importantly, by clearly establishing CIC as the 

holding company of Crown corporations, a visible reporting 

structure is created.  All Crown corporations will report to and 

through the CIC board to cabinet, to the legislature through the 

Crown Corporations Committee, and ultimately to the citizens 

of Saskatchewan in their capacity as shareholders. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these changes will allow for better coordination 

of activities of Crown corporations.  All Crown corporations 

will report to one entity, thus allowing for an overall review of 

services, capital budgets, and administration in order to 

increase efficiency and to prevent duplication. 

 

CIC as the holding company will also be responsible for 

providing to the legislature an annual report that will fully and 

completely outline the financial picture of the Crown sector as 

well as a financial statement of CIC's own activities.  This will 

enable the legislature through its Crown Corporations 

Committee to examine the overall performance of the Crown 

sector in a way that has never before been possible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to addressing these accountability and 

reporting concerns, the Bill contains a number of other 

important provisions.  The Bill sets out legislative provisions to 

oblige directors and officers of Crown corporations to perform 

their responsibilities with a duty of care, to act honestly and in 

good faith with a view to the best interests of the corporation 

and the residents of Saskatchewan.  The Bill also outlines 

conflict of interest guidelines to govern the behaviour of 

directors and other officers of Crown corporations. 

 

The Bill also contains a provision to ensure that Crown 

corporations are properly and efficiently audited.  The 

Provincial Auditor has issued a special report commenting on 

these provisions.  I want to assure the 

legislature that these comments will receive careful 

consideration through the Public Accounts Committee and the 

Crown Corporations Committee. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, this Bill achieves several 

extremely important policy objectives designed to ensure that 

Saskatchewan's Crown corporations can continue to serve their 

owners, the people of Saskatchewan.  It contains measures 

which will ensure that the Crown sector is fully accountable to 

the legislature and therefore to the public.  It establishes a clear 

line of reporting and authority for our Crown corporations.  It 

establishes provisions to ensure the directors and officers of 

Crown corporations act in the best public interest and avoid 

any conflicts of interest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since 1944 our Crown corporations have played a 

vital role in the development of our province.  They have been 

the vehicle by which our citizens have been assured low-cost 

access to vital services such as electricity, natural gas, 

telecommunications, and insurance.  They have been the 

vehicle through which governments of all parties have worked 

to develop Saskatchewan's economy and create jobs for our 

citizens. 

 

(1515) 

 

This Bill, The Crown Corporations Act, will ensure that our 

government corporations are able to continue playing this vital 

role in our province while at the same time being fully open 

and accountable to the legislature and to the public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members of the legislature 

work with us to ensure that this Bill achieves its objective in 

the most effective manner.  I move second reading of Bill 42. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to 

the Standing Committee on Crown Corporations. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 41 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that Bill No. 41 — An 

Act respecting the Financial Administration of the 

Government of Saskatchewan be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And again, by 

discussions that we've had with the Public Accounts Committee 

and the Minister of Finance, I am going to move, seconded by 

the member from Saskatoon Idylwyld, the vice-chairman of the 

Public Accounts: 

 

 That Bill No. 41 be referred to the Standing Committee on 

Public Accounts. 



May 4, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1437 

Motion agreed to and the Bill read a second time. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

committee? 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would move, 

seconded by the member from Saskatoon Idylwyld: 

 

 That the Bill be referred to the Standing Committee on Public 

Accounts. 

 

And I would also say, that sometimes you're right and 

sometimes we're right, and thank you for the help. 

 

The Speaker: — Just to make a correction, for the member 

from Morse.  Most of the times I'm right. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill referred to the Standing 

Committee on Public Accounts. 

 

Bill No. 51 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wiens that Bill No. 51 — An Act to 

amend The Wildlife Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and if 

it's all right with you, I won't get into the previous debate that 

was almost generated by the comments being made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm only going to take a couple of minutes here to 

talk about Bill No. 51, which is An Act to amend The Wildlife 

Act.  And, Mr. Speaker, according to the minister, this is to 

ensure Saskatchewan's unique and valuable wildlife resources 

are maintained and enhanced for the people of this province.  

And that's a laudable goal to have, Mr. Speaker, and certainly 

it's a goal that the opposition shares with the minister.  And I 

guess sometimes the differences of opinion are exactly that, as 

to how to accomplish the goal most effectively for the people 

of Saskatchewan so that indeed we do for future generations 

ensure that the wildlife that Saskatchewan has to offer is going 

to be there for us all to enjoy in future generations. 

 

There are some particular concerns that I have with this Bill, 

Mr. Speaker, and certainly I will be asking questions during the 

Committee of the Whole.  But changes to the definition of 

wildlife so both native and exotic species can be properly 

distinguished and regulated, I think, Mr. Speaker, that is 

something that we must maintain a hold of and a handle on.  

Because of the changing conditions in the world, Mr. Speaker, 

and because of the seemingly increased international trade in 

wildlife, it behoves us to make sure that not only do we control 

the types of wildlifes that are coming in from other countries 

that are not indigenous to Saskatchewan, but we must also 

ensure that those that do come in are not going to in any way 

reflect negatively upon the indigenous wildlife within this 

province.  So that is something that must be regulated, and we 

have no problems with that. 

Mr. Speaker, the one-year suspension rule of hunting rights 

following an infraction is something that at first blush I was not 

very enamoured with.  But upon reflection, there is some 

element of truth to the fact that right now the conservation 

officers out in the field coming upon an infraction — let's put it 

this way, coming upon a minor infraction — really had no 

recourse but to charge the individual; and upon being charged 

and convicted, it automatically meant that that individual will 

lose all hunting rights for one year. 

 

And on a minor infraction such as forgetting to sign your 

licence or leaving your licence at home or whatever, the 

penalty was not in tune with the infraction.  And so the 

conservation officer basically looked the other way and tapped 

you on the back of the hand and said, don't do that again. 

 

And that does not augur well because it just kind of reflected 

the fact that, oh, it's not significant.  It's not really important.  

You can do that and nothing will happen to you. 

 

Well now with the option of taking these minor offences and 

applying some kind of a fine to it that there is . . . and that there 

would actually be a penalty for that kind of an infraction, be it 

a monetary one, I think is probably something that we're going 

to be looking favourably upon.  And whether or not we're 

going to have any say . . . and I'm assuming that this Act itself 

will not set that penalty but it will be pursuant to order in 

council through regulations; that we may have some input into 

that during that particular procedure. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are other areas here that are somewhat 

fraught with danger.  Regulations regarding Indian and 

non-Indian people hunting together.  I know that it's as a result 

of the federal Bill C-31 where we have a number of Indians 

now having Indian status and so on, and some are not.  So that 

some of the children now are going to have status, the parents 

aren't status, and the problem is created when these folks go out 

hunting together. 

 

And I think as long as everyone is going to be treated on equal 

basis, that there's not special status being conferred upon some 

and not on others, then I think we will also go along with that. 

 

There are other areas here, Mr. Speaker, that I want to ask 

questions on about conservation officers having the right to 

inspect facilities that house wildlife.  That is a bit of a concern 

for us, and also the province's ability to regulate captive 

wildlife. 

 

And these are areas that I will be discussing in Committee of 

the Whole with the minister and his officials so that indeed we 

can be assured that the government's objectives in this Bill are 

also the objectives of the people.  And if that is confirmed, then 

we will not have any major concerns with this particular Bill.  

And I would recommend that we now let this Bill 51 go to 

committee. 



1438 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1993 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 52 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski that Bill No. 52 — An 

Act respecting Culture and Recreation be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, upon 

review of Bill no. 52, The Culture and Recreation Act, it 

appears to me that what the government is doing is addressing 

some of the changes that have taken place in departments and 

bringing the Bill up to date so that I believe it comes under the 

culture and community affairs.  The changes that are being 

made to the Bill then give the new minister responsible the 

mandate needed to administer the programs of culture and 

recreation in considering the changes that have taken place. 

 

And therefore we don't really have a lot of questions with it, as 

it's more something that is just ordinary, standard procedure 

and making sure that the Bills and the proper authorities are in 

order.  Therefore we'll allow this Bill to go to committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 53 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wiens that Bill No. 53 — An Act 

respecting Natural Resources be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As with Bill 51, 

The Wildlife Amendment Act, we're going to have a little bit 

more difficulty with some of the sections on this one — An Act 

respecting Natural Resources — which is going to replace The 

Renewable Resources, Recreation and Culture Act of the past.  

And I will be spending some time with the minister discussing 

what they call . . . the new Act incorporates new resource 

management philosophies. And we will be spending some time 

on that just to make sure that the philosophies are not 

inordinately different from the existing ones and that are going 

to be in tune with proper resource management.  And the fact 

that you're going to have to make some changes, Mr. Minister, 

to make sure that this Act is going to be consistent with Bill 51 

is understandable. 

 

We want to discuss a little bit about The Natural Resources Act 

authorizing officers to inspect commercial premises, outfitters, 

guides, and business offices, and so on.  There's a new section 

dealing there with the statute of limitations allowing 

prosecution to take place up to two years from the date of the 

violation.  We'll be asking the minister why that is deemed to 

be necessary at this point. 

Another major change in this Act, Mr. Speaker, is a new clause 

which enables the department to enter resource management 

agreements, partnerships, and joint ventures, and so on and so 

forth in keeping with their so-called new management 

philosophies.  And we want to make sure again that those are 

going to be in tune with what is best for wildlife and for all of 

our natural resources that we have in this province. 

 

Although I don't foresee too great a problem, we will have 

some questions to ask in committee, Mr. Speaker, and I would 

recommend that we go on to committee with this Bill. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 54 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that Bill No. 54 — An Act 

respecting the Department of Economic Development be 

now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, here again I believe that we can 

accomplish a little more by allowing this Bill to move to 

committee as the questions that we have to raise . . . we don't 

have a lot of questions, but certainly we can address them a lot 

more clearly and a lot more easily through committee rather 

than taking added time in adjourned debates. And therefore I 

would recommend we move this Bill to committee as well. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

(1530) 

Bill No. 35 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Calvert that Bill No. 35 — An Act to 

amend The Certified Nursing Assistants Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — This Act here is basically, essentially doing a 

relatively simple thing and that is simply changing the name of 

the health professionals known as the certified nursing 

assistants so that they will be called licensed practical nurses. 

 

And if this is going to reflect, as the Bill is intending, more 

adequately and more precisely the changing roles and the new 

roles that these professionals are accessing in the health system 

and to be consistent with other provinces, I don't think that 

we're going to have a major problem with it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Certainly what I'm pleased to see here is that there is 

acknowledgement that there will be potentially some confusion 

during this transitional period as the new change takes place.  

And the way I understand it, it's not going to be done abruptly 

but rather over a three-year period of time.  And it's going to be 

a well-managed name change so that it will not create  



May 4, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1439 

problems, certainly not within the professional field, and also 

not in the eyes and in the minds of the public. 

 

And as long as that is the case and as long as the minister in 

committee will be able to assure us that the change is going to 

be well managed and well controlled, then I don't think that the 

opposition is going to have a particular problem.  Although 

with the caveat that we will be asking questions in committee. 

 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I would again recommend that this 

Bill be brought forward to committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 36 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Calvert that Bill No. 36 — An Act to 

amend The Registered Nurses Act, 1988 be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Again, Mr. Speaker, in this one it — we have 

An Act to amend The Registered Nurses Act — is intended to 

allow registered nurses and the SRNA (Saskatchewan 

Registered Nurses' Association) to appeal Court of Queen's 

Bench decisions on disciplinary matters to the Court of Appeal 

on a point of law. 

 

And as long as it is on a point of law, we believe as well that 

they should have that right and with the caveat to be able to ask 

the minister questions on exactly the implications of this 

change and the impact that it's going to have.  And I understand 

that the minister has the backing of the registered nurses' 

association and its membership.  And as long as they are fully 

supportive of it and with no impact on the health delivery 

system of Saskatchewan, again I would say, Mr. Speaker, that 

we should move this to committee so that we can ask some 

detailed questions of the minister and her officials at that time. 

 

So I'm pleased to let this go to committee now. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 38 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 38 — An Act to 

amend The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code be now read 

a second time. 

 

Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm honoured, Mr. 

Speaker, and privileged to speak after my colleagues, the 

Minister of Justice and the Associate Minister of Finance, on 

the amendments to the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code.  

And I would like to commend them both for their very fine and 

thoughtful words. 

As the Minister of Justice reminded us, on this issue, as on so 

many others, Saskatchewan has truly been the leader on the 

continent.  Tommy Douglas, John Diefenbaker — both saw the 

need for making a guarantee of basic human rights as central to 

civilized human life.  No issue in public service, Mr. Speaker, 

no issue in the history of our civilization has roused the human 

spirit more than the issue of human rights. 

 

I am honoured, I repeat, to follow the Minister of Justice, the 

Associate Minister of Finance, our Premier, Prime Minister 

Diefenbaker, Tommy Douglas, and so many of the best and 

brightest in speaking on this issue.  It is heart-warming and it is 

inspiring to find that most of the great thinkers and great 

orators, all those great men and women whom we most revere, 

have all been on the same side, the only side of this most basic 

of human issues.  Socrates, Cicero, Ghandi, Martin Luther 

King — this is no mean company to keep, for us all to keep. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me quote a great woman on this issue.  

Eleanor Roosevelt said that it is essential to the development of 

true democracy to have no discrimination whatsoever — no 

discrimination whatsoever. 

 

Who could argue with that?  How would any one of us not 

want to live in a true democracy?  Surely Saskatchewan and 

Canada aspire to being true democracies, and it is our 

responsibility as legislators to move our province and our 

country along the road to becoming true democracies. 

 

Inclusion, not exclusion, is what our province and country 

represent to the world.  Acceptance, not rejection.  Welcome, 

not hostility.  Love, not hatred. 

 

Thus, Mr. Speaker, I support wholeheartedly these 

amendments to the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code.  This is 

an issue to which I see only one side and am at a loss to 

understand the fear and hostility these amendments have 

engendered.  Sexual orientation cannot be grounds for 

discrimination in a true democracy any more than religious 

belief or racial origin can be. 

 

To deny shelter, a place to live, to a law-abiding fellow human 

being is discrimination and is indefensible.  To deny 

employment to a worker competent to do the job is 

discrimination and is indefensible.  To deny government 

services to anyone in our community is discrimination and is, 

again, totally indefensible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that fear and hostility that I spoke of a few 

moments ago seems to be based on the belief that this 

protection, this basic human right, will in some way lead to 

promotion of homosexual lifestyles.  We have heard the words 

of the Minister of Justice on this issue and I can do no better 

than repeat them: 

 

 . . . these amendments do not create any special rights . . . 

They do not create any extraordinary legal status.  They seek 

only to eliminate discrimination. 



1440 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1993 

Mr. Speaker, I am profoundly dismayed at how these 

amendments have been wilfully misrepresented by some.  

What is it about homosexuals that generates so much fear?  

These people are our brothers and sisters, sons and daughters.  

They are lawyers, doctors, educators, and writers — some of 

the most gifted people in our community.  They are our 

neighbours.  And have we not been told as Christians to love 

our neighbour? 

 

They are productive members of our society and deserve the 

same protection under the law as you and I do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Prime Minister of Canada recently assured us all that a 

similar amendment to the Human Rights Act would be 

introduced in the House of Commons before the election this 

year.  And as our Minister of Justice said, the Hon. Pierre 

Blais, the federal Minister of Justice, has assured him that the 

federal government does indeed intend to proceed with this 

legislation. 

 

If it is introduced at the federal level, let us hope it soon 

becomes law.  Let us hope that the federal government's 

intention in this matter is not thwarted and diverted by those 

same people who would wish to see this amendment fail in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

There is one point I would like to make about the opponents to 

this legislation, especially those who arm themselves with 

selective Scriptures and self-righteousness.  I wish these people 

would put their energies and their resources to better, more 

positive use. 

 

In our contemporary world there are many worthy causes to be 

fought — helping to educate people, helping people to find 

work, or encouraging those who are downtrodden and 

depressed to find hope and joy in life.  These are positive, good 

things for good people to do, not negative, divisive, hateful 

things.  What our society needs is love and compassion and 

generosity of mind and spirit. 

 

We were all moved by hearing T.C. Douglas's words of 1950, 

that he hoped this province would become an island of 

tolerance and goodwill.  Evidently we still have some way to 

go.  Let us hope that the island can soon be extended to a 

continent, and that the continent to a world — our world. 

 

The extreme expression of intolerance and ill will is to be seen 

right now in Bosnia, in Sri Lanka, in Angola, and in Cambodia.  

That is where bigotry and prejudice lead, and we want no part 

of that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: — Seeking for others what we wish for ourselves 

is the guiding philosophy of this government.  Discrimination 

of any sort must end.  The issue here is solely one of 

discrimination.  And on discrimination we have all the best and 

brightest people in human history pleading for its end. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me add my small voice to that great 

 majority and let me wholeheartedly support these amendments 

to The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Johnson: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to rise and voice 

my support for Bill 38, The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 

amendments.  This Bill puts forth something that, I believe, if 

we as individuals look at our past experiences in life, we will 

understand and be able to point forth individual cases where we 

have met people who have been affected by discrimination of 

the kind that the amendments in this Act change. 

 

And although one area is taking the major amount of 

discussion, and that is the sexual orientation, it is my opinion 

that the other two sections, the other two changes in the area of 

family status and whether you are in receipt of public 

assistance or not, are the two areas that have the most major 

significance for individuals and for the community as a whole.  

In those two areas, although discrimination isn't as blatant or 

shows up as major as in the area of sexual orientation, it 

nevertheless has an effect on the community and the 

individuals who are discriminated against. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when this was proposed and the Bill was 

put forth and the discussions came about that this was going to 

take place, there was a large number of . . . or several groups 

that mailed out information that I believe in essence went way 

beyond where the Act is in suggesting what the Act meant to 

do and what it was going to do.  And this was deliberate, in my 

opinion, to bring about a negative response to what in essence 

is not that significant or that major a change in what we would 

consider human rights. 

 

And this brought about letters to many of the members in the 

Assembly over a period of time, letters which if you took and 

read them and detailed exactly what they were commenting 

about, their comments would not have anything to do with the 

actual amendments that were being proposed in this Act. 

 

(1545) 

 

And because of that, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that I did 

as a member of this Assembly, is took and put forth and 

summarized what I expected the Human Rights Code to look 

like after the amendments that were in place.  And if you do 

that and then read the code in its entirety, you find out that it 

becomes something that is rather boring rather than as exciting 

and demeaning as some of the people who have written letters 

indicate they feel that the code in its new form would be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the human rights amendments basically affect 

five sections of the Act, and those sections are to do with the 

right of an individual to work, the right of an individual to 

purchase property, the right of an individual to rent property, 

the right of access to public places, and the right to an 

education.  And those to me seem to be areas that everyone 

should 



May 4, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1441 

have available to them.  They are not areas that provide a great 

deal of spectrum for people to be involved, but simply areas 

that we'd anticipate everyone in this society to have access to. 

 

Then there is two other areas.  One is the right to make 

contracts.  And from my perspective, I'd have assumed that that 

was something in this society that should be accepted for 

anyone to be involved in.  The right to be employed and the 

right to have a membership in any organization and not be 

discriminated on, the reasons that are listed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you look at that and say why should anyone be 

restricted from that area of activity in this society, it becomes 

very difficult to understand why someone should be restricted 

from these basically commercial activities in our society and 

the ability to make a living. 

 

I found that when the Act is looked at and read in that 

particular manner, that it is not one that people are that 

concerned about.  They start out being concerned, and then 

after looking at it, decide that they were not basically 

understanding what's taking place and decide that they're more 

prepared to live with what is going on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I started out I said that most of us would be 

able to, if we thought about it in our life, indicate that we had 

dealt with people who had been affected by discrimination in 

these categories that are being added.  And I have to say that 

my knowledge from a personal basis of people who have been 

discriminated against for their sexual orientation goes back 

right into some of the early schooling that I . . . it was the 

individuals that were in school with me right into about grade 

6, as far back as I can remember it. 

 

And in looking back on it, it seems to me that it was 

understood by everyone who was there that the individual that 

I'm thinking of had a problem, and it was accepted by everyone 

at the time.  Now that's because it was probably a small school 

and not having the impact that a large community can have, 

where they can reject an individual and not feel the personal 

impact that occurs.  I say as well that that continued on in my 

life, and even at a level at university, and to the same degree. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it is with that in mind that I stand today and 

say that I support the amendments to the Human Rights Code.  

I believe that it is the correct direction to go and that if calm 

individuals respond to what is taking place with this Act, it will 

not create any major problems in the community at all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Human Rights Code is to this year's 

legislation, I think, something that we can as a legislature be 

proud of putting forth.  And with that, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 

indicate that I'll be supporting the Bill when it comes to a vote.  

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm pleased to 

rise this afternoon in this debate on Bill 38.  Human rights 

issues are issues that challenge us at times because when we 

are asked the question, do we believe in human rights, we all, I 

think, will answer the question that yes, we do.  And when 

we're asked the question, do we agree with discrimination, we 

all, I think, will say, no we don't believe in discrimination. 

 

But the test of our beliefs is not really to answer questions like 

that — do we believe in human rights? are we opposed to 

discrimination? — because we will all be able to answer those 

questions easily. 

 

The test of where we stand when it comes to human rights is 

how we deal with issues at times of difficulty and controversy 

and in the face of controversy, not at times when the vast 

majority of people have reached a consensus as to how society 

should deal with particular issues. 

 

And I think if we look back in history — American history, 

Canadian history — we see this, Mr. Speaker, time and again.  

I can think of the example of the legislation that they had in the 

province of British Columbia in this country in the '20s and 

'30s that restricted the rights of people of Asian descent to vote, 

and sometimes to work, and sometimes to employ people of a 

different race. 

 

And the CCF of that day in British Columbia took the position 

— the only party to take that position — that this was wrong; 

that it was wrong to have laws that said that people who were 

from Asian countries could not employ caucasian women for 

example, and certainly wrong that they could not vote. 

 

And many of those people that took that position in the face, I 

might say, of tremendous public opposition, were vilified not 

only in political circles but also in the press.  They were vilified 

for that. 

 

It seems strange for us today to think that anyone would be 

chastised for taking that position, because of course today it 

would be totally unacceptable to any reasonable person in our 

society that we would have discriminatory laws like that on the 

basis of race. 

 

And I think too, Mr. Speaker, of what happened when Prime 

Minister Trudeau in 1970 imposed the War Measures Act.  

Tommy Douglas and his, I think, fairly small caucus in the 

House of Commons at that time and in the face of a lot of 

controversy because of terrorism in Quebec, the FLQ (Front de 

Libération du Québec), stood up in the House of Commons and 

asked questions about human rights and freedoms, and whether 

there were not some implications of the imposition of the War 

Measures Act in the circumstances of the day that had not been 

properly addressed and which, if not properly addressed, would 

raise questions of great concern to Canadians who believe in 

human rights and freedoms both in comfortable times and in 

times of controversy. 

 

And at that time Tommy Douglas and his caucus were also 

vilified by many people in Canada and by some parts of the 

press for taking that position. But it was the 



1442 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1993 

correct position to take.  And in retrospect, many people 

looking back see that it was the correct position to take. 

 

I guess my point is that when one stands up for human rights, 

one will be criticized in some quarters, but sometimes the time 

when there is the most controversy and criticism is the time 

when those who really do believe in human rights and do not 

believe in unjust discrimination have to stand up and be 

counted. 

 

In the United States the battle to desegregate blacks and whites 

did not begin in the 20th century as sometimes we think — 

because much more progress has been made in the 20th century 

— it actually began in the 19th century, the latter part of the 

19th century when the Supreme Court of the United States had 

to deal with the question of whether blacks and whites should 

be able to have access to the same railway cars. 

 

People that took that position in the 1880s and 1890s in the 

United States were also vilified by conventional wisdom 

because it was thought that there was really nothing wrong 

with keeping blacks and whites separate on train cars and in 

washrooms and other public places.  And in fact the Supreme 

Court of the United States of that time decided that they would 

not have desegregation; they would have a separate but equal, 

so-called, policy whereby it was fine to separate people of 

different races so long as you provided them with equal 

accommodation.  And of course what happened was that the 

accommodation never was equal, but that was overlooked. 

 

And the separate but equal doctrine really prevailed until the 

case of Brown versus Board of Education in 1954 when finally 

the Supreme Court of the United States said, after 60 years, that 

it had been wrong in the 19th century and conventional wisdom 

had been wrong and that it was wrong to have segregated 

schools.  And at that time the Supreme Court led the way in 

saying that schools had to be desegregated, and that was very 

controversial.  The military and the policy authorities in fact 

had to escort black students into schools, and it was in fact 

probably a few decades before schools were finally completely 

desegregated.  And of course even in the 1960s Martin Luther 

King was leading people in the United States to desegregate 

buses in Montgomery and elsewhere. 

 

But my point is, again, that we would not even question the 

way we do things today.  Nobody would stand up on this 

continent, no reasonable person, and say that we should have 

segregated trains and segregated restaurants and segregated 

washrooms.  But it was not that long ago before that was the 

conventional wisdom.  And the reason that that ultimately 

changed was because people stood up in the face of criticism 

and said, listen we have to seriously examine this; we have to 

think about this, and we have to make a logical, rational, 

reasoned, and correct decision. 

 

I know that when it comes to the amendments before 

this legislature with respect to human rights, that there are 

people that have concerns about those amendments.  There has 

been literature distributed that suggests the amendments do 

things that the amendments do not do. 

 

(1600) 

 

And when I am talking to people in my constituency that are 

concerned about this issue, I say to them: do you believe that 

someone should be fired from their job simply on the basis of 

their sexual orientation if they have done nothing wrong?  And 

the answer is almost invariably no.  Then I say to them: do you 

believe that somebody should be denied the opportunity to rent 

an apartment or access to a public place like a shopping mall 

simply because of their sexual orientation?  And the answer is 

invariably no. 

 

And I then say to them: well that is all this legislation does.  So 

since you have no problem with what it does and I have no 

problem with what it does, there really shouldn't be a problem 

with the legislation. 

 

Now people can go on to say it's going to lead to this, that, and 

the other thing, but the legislation will do what the legislation 

says it's going to do.  This legislation is the law in the majority 

of Canadian jurisdictions.  And one thing that nobody has 

pointed out to me is any particular problem that has arisen in 

other parts of the country because this kind of protection exists 

in their law.  Nobody has said that, you know, Ontario or 

Quebec are going crazy or there are all kinds of problems in 

their jurisdictions because they have this kind of law, and I 

don't believe it to be the case. 

 

I want to say to those who believe that affording everybody in 

our society the fair treatment of being able to have a job and 

have a place to live, to those who say that those aspects of fair 

treatment will lead to all kinds of other inappropriate 

behaviour, I would say this: the laws of employment and other 

laws that currently regulate the behaviour of individuals 

continue to exist and are unaffected by this legislation.  If there 

is any person in the workplace, wherever they may work, 

whether they're homosexual or heterosexual, that engages in 

some kind of inappropriate behaviour such as . . . And most 

people would think that if you brought issues of sexuality into 

your workplace in an inappropriate fashion, you should be 

dealt with by the employment laws and perhaps even criminal 

laws, depending on the circumstances. 

 

If anything inappropriate should occur, the law will deal with 

what occurs.  There is nothing in the amendments to the 

Human Rights Code that would authorize someone to do 

something today that . . . or after it's passed that they couldn't 

do in the past.  What the law says is, you can't fire somebody 

just on the basis of their sexual orientation.  And I don't see 

how any fair-minded person can take issue with that. 

 

I do want to say that human rights are interdependent.  My 

right to freedom of 



May 4, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1443 

expression and freedom of opinion is subject to the rights of all 

of my neighbours not to be subjected to hate literature, for 

example, and to expressions of opinion on my part which 

would run so contrary to community values that they would be 

found to be obscene. 

 

And similarly, when we enact human rights legislation, the 

right of a person protected by that legislation to work and to 

live and to go from place to place in our society is subject to 

the rights of other people, including, for example, religious 

freedom.  There are provisions in the Human Rights Code that 

say that if my lifestyle runs counter to the creed of a religious 

organization or a religious school board, that organization or 

school board does not have to hire me.  That is the law now.  

So that we've seen, for example, cases involving the separate 

school board where the separate school board has not wanted to 

employ teachers who are divorced or living common law and 

so on, although in other circumstances those would not be 

proper grounds for discrimination. 

 

But we know that each religion must be free to adhere to the 

tenets of that religion.  That will not be changed by this 

legislation at all because our human rights are interdependent 

just as, I think, our society is interdependent, and all of us are 

dependent on one another. 

 

And I have to say that in that regard it seems to me that our 

society is stronger when we consider everybody to be a part of 

our society and everybody to be entitled to fair treatment and 

when we don't emphasize the differences between us and make 

those differences things that should divide us. 

 

So I am pleased to rise in support of the Bill and I certainly will 

be voting in favour of it.  Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise today to 

speak to Bill No. 38.  I've had serious consideration of this Bill 

and have taken the views of my constituents into mind and I 

have thought about it significantly myself. 

 

And in Bill 38, it deals with sexual orientation and family 

status and a number of other things, and I want to begin my 

remarks by making some observations about discrimination. 

 

First of all, I think that the member from Saskatoon Idylwyld 

said that we probably all would agree that discrimination is 

wrong.  We would also believe that intolerance is wrong.  I 

believe that we have to think about these two words in a very 

careful way as it relates to the kinds of things that we're talking 

about in Bill 38. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that all of us have probably in our 

history, in our own memory, been at a function or been 

involved in various ways that we have been discriminated 

against.  And so then when we come to the basis of talking 

about an issue such as we have 

here today, I believe that we can all identify with being 

discriminated against.  I think we have on many times been 

involved in intolerable situations, not that we perpetuated them 

or perpetrated them, but the fact that we were involved, we 

were perhaps part of a group that was discriminated against. 

 

And I want to talk a little bit about that as it relates to my 

family. And I am probably no different than many of the 

people who are in this Assembly who have had their families 

come from various parts of the world where discrimination is a 

part of an everyday lifestyle. 

 

I think about Ireland for example — it is a serious, serious 

problem.  And I think that there is discrimination there on both 

sides of that very significant religious issue.  And I think it has 

gone beyond that.  And in fact, I believe that many times 

people have said that they've probably forgotten what the issue 

really is, until it becomes other issues that burn in the emotions 

of people until they do things that are not correct. 

 

I believe that in other areas . . . I believe in South Africa, we've 

had situations there that are in my mind intolerable.  And I 

believe that we have . . . we all view that in that context.  I 

believe that in Africa itself we have . . . I was in Ethiopia, and 

people there who were of an Arab decent were fighting against 

people who were of black decent. 

 

And so we have people all over the world fighting with each 

other, probably because they've even forgotten what the 

reasons were that originated the problems in the first place.  

And in my mind, Mr. Speaker, I find those intolerable.  And 

yet we talk about them because they don't necessarily impact 

on us on a daily basis.  And we can say that for us it is basically 

a theory, because we don't find those situations in our own 

communities. 

 

In the community that I live in, Mr. Speaker, I spent a great 

deal of time with people who are not the same colour that I am; 

they're not the same nationality.  I have spent a lot of time with 

Norwegians.  I have spent a lot of time with Swedes.  But I also 

have neighbours, Mr. Speaker, who are Lebanese, and I find 

them a very, very significant group of people in my 

community.  They're very industrious; they are intelligent; they 

are hard-working.  They are some of the best farmers in the 

community.  And that, Mr. Speaker, speaks for itself.  They are 

part of the community. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, members of my family have worked 

together with these; my father did.  My father had a drill, and 

my neighbour who was Lebanese had a discer, and so they 

seeded all their farm together, both of them, and they worked 

together for many, many years.  As a matter of fact, Mr. 

Speaker, his son does the farming for me when I'm here in 

Regina, and he's done that since 1982. 

 

And as a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, we worked that 

agreement on the basis of a handshake.  We have never had a 

written agreement.  We have never had a  



1444 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1993 

mutual misunderstanding about what that agreement entails, 

because, Mr. Speaker, we have a certain amount of respect for 

each other. 

 

And so all of us, every one of us here, will say to the other 

person that they disagree with discrimination.  We don't want 

to have that kind of an attitude develop around us, nor do we 

want to be connected with anyone that does.  Because that, Mr. 

Speaker, infers that we have some bigotry within the 

framework of the decisions that we're making and the points of 

view that we have. 

 

I also want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that all of us have come 

from a different country to Canada and have been a part of it, 

except those people who are of original ancestry here in 

Canada.  And I say to most of you here that that would be a 

part of the reason why you came here in the first place, is that 

you felt some sort of discrimination on the part of who you 

were in the context of where you lived and the reasons 

probably why you probably came to Canada in the first place. 

 

Those are no different in my family, Mr. Speaker, and I had the 

distinct privilege of visiting with those same people last year.  

And for me, it was a bit of an emotional experience, Mr. 

Speaker, to visit with members of parliament from the Ukraine, 

where my family is from, and stand in the Ukrainian parliament 

in the podium, where the president speaks from and members 

of the Assembly speak from, and to say to those people that 

were present there that if I had have stayed there, it's 

perceivable and conceivable that I would have been standing in 

one of those seats, speaking with them or for them or against 

them on the basis of the political situation that existed there. 

 

And I felt it was an emotional experience for me.  And one of 

the individuals who is a member of parliament there indicated 

to me that if I had continued to live there, where my 

grandfather had lived, that we probably would have been 

neighbours.  And for me, that was an emotional experience, not 

because I'm a Ukrainian — because I'm not — but that it was a 

part of the country where my grandfather had lived and his 

grandfather had lived. 

 

And so we all, Mr. Speaker, can speak about the involvement 

that we have in viewing discrimination as being intolerable.  

We don't want to have discrimination of any sort. 

 

And so from that perspective, I believe, Mr. Speaker, that we 

have to deal with a number of items that relate to where I 

believe that this function of discrimination occurs or has 

occurred.  And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the Prime Minister 

of Canada in 1960 who was the Rt. Hon. John George 

Diefenbaker probably had some of these same feelings that he 

expressed and he viewed, not only because of what he had been 

taught, Mr. Speaker, but also by what he had learnt as a lawyer 

and as a counsel for many of the people who he served in the 

Wakaw and Prince Albert area. 

 

(1615) 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to the Assembly that 

because of that background and because of that influence of 

that background, the prime minister of the day decided to write 

a Bill of Rights.  And I want to point out some things that are 

very important in relation to that Bill of Rights.  And they have 

stood for 33 years now, Mr. Speaker, as a benchmark for the 

people of Canada.  And I want to point some of them out to 

you and why I think they fit and why I don't believe that this 

Bill fits into the category, in the same category by definition as 

what has been stated by members opposite. 

 

The Canadian Bill of Rights is: 

 

 An Act for the Recognition and Protection of Human Rights 

and Fundamental Freedoms. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is the basis for the Canadian Bill of Rights.  

Now it goes on to say that: 

 

 The Parliament of Canada, affirming that the Canadian 

Nation is founded upon principles that acknowledge the 

supremacy of God, the dignity and worth of the human 

person and the position of the family in a society of free men 

and free institutions; 

 

There are some very significant items in this preamble to the 

context of the Bill of Rights, Mr. Speaker. One of those is the 

recognition of the supremacy of God.  That's one of the things 

that I think is significant.  The worth of the human person, the 

value of the human being as a value in relation and in a 

relationship one to the other. 

 

And the member from Saskatoon Idylwyld stated this, and I 

quote him because I think it's an important part to consider . . . 

is my rights are interdependent with the rights of others.  I have 

that right, Mr. Speaker, as it is for me.  But when that right 

infringes itself on the rights of others, then it does not any 

longer become a right for me.  I have to have some exclusions 

from that right being perpetrated on me.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is what the value or the worth of the human person 

must be put into perspective in dealing with the value that we 

have, as it relates to discrimination. 

 

 . . .(the) worth of the human person and the position of the 

family in a society of free men and free institutions; 

 

Men and women in Canada need to have that freedom to do 

and to be what they want to be.  And, Mr. Speaker, there is 

only one institution that can curtail that, and there is only one 

institution in Canada that can take that and restrict that.  And 

that is a court of law.  A court can determine that that 

restriction is being misused.  And I say to the people of the 

province, that we have to be allowing the court to determine 

that function.  And we, Mr. Speaker, must always respect the 

dignity of others, the rights of others, and we must always 

respect the rights that we have for ourselves.  So: 



May 4, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1445 

Affirming also that men and institutions remain free only 

when freedom is founded upon respect for moral and 

spiritual values and the rule of the law; 

 

The rule of law, Mr. Speaker, is an important part of what we're 

talking about.  So the determination of what is in a Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, the determination of what is in a Bill before this 

House today is that we can say in this Assembly what we think 

it means.  We can say in this Assembly what we would want it 

to mean, but, Mr. Speaker, the courts will determine what the 

law really says.  The courts will determine that. 

 

Yesterday in a ruling handled down by Judge Ron Barclay of 

the Court of Queen's Bench . . . ruled that the law that the 

Minister of Labour had put forward last year, dealing with the 

involvement of the Labour Relations Board and the 

Saskatchewan council for construction . . . those people 

appealed that law and that ruling and said no, you can't just do 

it for one.  You have to do it for everybody, and we want to be 

included in that.  And Mr. Barclay said no; the law states that 

the minister has the authority to do exactly what he did.  And 

the law states that, Mr. Minister. 

 

So what we have is, even though people may agree or disagree 

about what the function of the law in their mind is, it is the 

courts that will determine what the law really is. 

 

 And being desirous of enshrining these principles and the 

human rights and fundamental freedoms derived from them, 

in a Bill of Rights which shall reflect the respect of 

Parliament for its constitutional authority and which shall 

ensure the protection of these rights and freedoms in Canada: 

 

 Therefore Her Majesty, by and with the advice and consent 

of the Senate and House of Commons . . . enacts as follows: 

 

 It is hereby recognized and declared that in Canada there 

have existed and shall continue to exist without 

discrimination by reason of race, national origin, colour, 

religion or sex, the following human rights and fundamental 

freedoms, namely, 

 

And I will go into that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that if we take the aspect of race as a 

belief that we have — and I pointed that out earlier — that race 

should not be discriminated against because we don't have a 

choice.  I don't have a choice on which race that I belong to, 

whether it's black or white or whatever.  I don't have a choice. 

 

Nor do I have a choice on my national origin.  Nor do I have a 

choice on my colour; nor . . . Well I do have a choice on my 

religious beliefs, and many of us follow tradition in our 

families, and many of us go with the religious beliefs of our 

parents, and many of us have — some of us have not. 

The next item, Mr. Speaker . . . But before I leave that, it is a 

fundamental moral belief within each one of us that there is a 

moral value in each one of us, and that is significant.  And I 

believe that that is a part of a religious perspective and we 

should never underestimate that value in each one of us.  The 

other thing that I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, is that I have 

no choice about which sex I am.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

significant. 

 

The following human rights and fundamental . . . 

 

 It is hereby recognized and declared that in Canada there 

have existed and shall continue to exist without 

discrimination by reason of race, national origin, colour, 

religion or sex, the following human rights and fundamental 

freedoms, namely, 

 

And I want to point out what some of these are. 

 

 the right of the individual to life, liberty, security of the 

person and enjoyment of property, and the right not to be 

deprived thereof except by due process of law; 

 

There it is again, Mr. Speaker.  Now as it relates to this issue of 

sexual orientation, there are items under the Criminal Code of 

Canada that are wrong according to the Criminal Code of 

Canada as it relates to certain sexual behaviours, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I want to point some of them out.  And we have those 

identified I believe in criminal action that is being tried today 

in Martensville.  I believe that the court of Canada has the right 

to say . . . or the laws of Canada under the Criminal Code have 

the right to say that there are certain things that we will not 

tolerate as a society.  And I believe that under the rule of law, 

the rule of law will determine whether in fact those individuals 

lived within the framework of that law or whether they did not 

live within that framework of the law. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, those freedoms that we have and enjoy are 

based on the rights that we have as it relates to race, national 

origin, colour, religion, or sex.  And the only way that they can 

be adjusted or terminated, those freedoms that we have, is that 

when a court of law and due process says that we no longer 

have that right.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why I 

think it's important for us to consider what we are talking about 

today. 

 

I do not believe, Mr. Speaker, that sexual orientation is a matter 

of gender.  I do not believe that.  I believe that it is a matter of 

an individual preference, and I have not got a problem with the 

people that practise that.  But I do have a belief that it is not a 

gender in society.  And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I say to the 

people of the Assembly that on the basis of the Bill of Rights of 

Canada that the sexual gender is male and female, and I have 

no problem with identifying with individuals who believe that 

that is all there are.  So far I've never met anybody else. 



1446 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1993 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why I have a difficulty and 

a serious, serious difficulty in saying to the people of the 

province that in a code of human rights that sexual orientation 

should be placed there in exactly the same place in which those 

items which I believe are inherent in me and I had no choice 

about, that sexual orientation should be placed as a part of that 

function.  And I have a great deal of problems with that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I also believe that there is a significant difference between 

tolerating what some people do and what others don't do.  I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, that we have a lot of things that I don't 

believe that are right that other people do.  There are a lot of 

things that I don't believe are right.  But that doesn't mean that 

I'm intolerant of them nor does it mean that I'm discriminating 

against them.  There are many of those kinds of things.  And, 

Mr. Speaker, I don't think that this is the right kind of an action 

but I have no problem in relating to that individual who does 

that. 

 

I have no problem because I believe that the fundamental right 

of an individual is, as I said earlier, that that individual is a 

moral person and I believe that as it is acknowledged in the Bill 

of Rights of Canada that says that the supremacy of God is a 

moral right in a relationship to that creator.  The dignity and the 

worth of the human person, I think that has moral value.  That 

individual is just as much an individual as I am.  He may not 

agree with what I have to say on certain issues and very likely 

doesn't. 

 

But as it relates to a practice such as this, I do not believe that 

he or she have the right to say that this has to be put into the 

framework of a constitution or a Bill of Rights or the Human 

Rights Code of the province of Saskatchewan.  I don't believe 

that and therefore, Mr. Speaker, I don't intend to vote for that. 

 

And that doesn't mean, Mr. Speaker, that I am intolerant.  That 

means that on the basis of the fundamental rights of individuals 

in the framework of the Constitution of Canada and the Bill of 

Rights of Canada, the constitution as it was brought in 1982 

and the Bill of Rights in 1960, that these people do have the 

rights and the freedoms that they say . . . that many say that 

they don't have. 

 

As a matter of fact, I want to point out to the members of the 

Assembly a letter that was written to the majority of the 

members of the Assembly.  The letter comes from a group 

that's called the Equality for Gays and Lesbians Everywhere.  

And this letter is dated February 5, and it has this quote in the 

letter, Mr. Speaker.  The sentence reads: 

 

 The courts are consistently finding that the Charter of Rights 

and Freedoms does indeed protect lesbians and gay men from 

discrimination. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is what the human rights Bill says.  It 

says there that: 

 

 the right of the individual to life, liberty, 

security of the person and enjoyment of property, and the 

right not to be deprived thereof except by due process of law; 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why I believe that they're right 

in their statements.  I believe they're right in what they're 

saying because the law will determine on the basis of the Bill 

of Rights of Canada that they do have rights and freedoms. 

 

(1630) 

 

Now I will say to this Assembly also that to be intolerant of 

people who have this point of view is not a part of me to 

determine that.  I don't have a problem with their point of view; 

I just don't want to be a part of it.  I have a personal preference 

that I don't want to be a part of it.  And that doesn't say that I'm 

right.  I'm not infringing on anyone else's right; as it was stated 

earlier, my rights are interdependent with the rights of others.  

And I believe that, Mr. Speaker, that we have rights ourselves, 

but when they become interdependent and focus and take away 

rights of others, then we have a serious problem.  I really 

believe that. 

 

Now in discrimination, I don't have a . . . Most of us, and I 

would say a hundred per cent of every one of the members of 

the Assembly in the province of Saskatchewan, do not want to 

have discrimination against individuals.  I believe that.  I 

believe that we are tolerant of others.  In fact we have 

references of tolerance all around us.  People are tolerant; 

people are accommodating; people do help each other out; 

people do that on a regular basis. 

 

In the province of Saskatchewan that is a significant part of our 

fabric.  We are a young province and there are people here who 

are first-generation residents and probably could even think 

about a time when this province was begun.  And therefore, 

Mr. Speaker, we have in the province learned to be tolerant of 

others.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is significant. 

 

I want to point out an issue that I was going to raise as it relates 

to the Canadian public in a general kind of way.  And it deals 

with the . . . I believe the reference made to this by the member 

from Saskatoon Idylwyld, but I'm not sure that it was quite in 

this context — but the Japanese in Canada were moved from 

Vancouver in the 1940s because of the Second World War.  

And, Mr. Speaker, they were displaced in Canada in that 

setting. 

 

And there are people that I know very well, who are friends of 

mine, who were moved from Vancouver to Winnipeg.  Those 

people were displaced within the framework of Canada.  And 

that was not tolerance, Mr. Speaker.  We weren't tolerant of 

those people at that time.  And so what happened just a few 

years ago?  That restitution of that intolerance was made to 

these individuals.  And I think that that is significant, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I believe that each one of us here probably agreed with the 

federal government when they said, we 



May 4, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1447 

apologize for what we did and we want to say to you that this is 

our demonstration of showing that we want to acknowledge 

that we were wrong, and we want to correct it. 

 

I also want to go on to say, Mr. Speaker, that I followed the 

referendum this past fall very carefully.  And I listened to the 

debate from the media, and I listened to the debate from the 

politicians, and I listened to the debate in the coffee shops.  

And one of the things that I believe was more prevalent in the 

discussion, the item that was more prevalent in that discussion 

more that anything else I believe was this, Mr. Speaker: people 

want to have equality before the law.  And what they saw in the 

referendum, Mr. Speaker, was that in the referendum it gave 

preference and special privileges to certain groups of people. 

 

And I believe that the Canadian public voted in the referendum 

on that issue as a part of their attitude towards the constitution 

and changes to the constitution.  They voted against the 

constitution on the basis, I believe, that they did not want to 

have all of these people coming forward with special interests.  

And each one of us could mention special interest groups that 

had preference in the constitutional debate. 

 

And therefore, Mr. Speaker, the people I believe spoke out 

soundly and resolutely that they did not want to have special 

privileges given to individuals.  And that, Mr. Speaker, was the 

reason why I believe that the referendum, constitutional 

referendum failed, is because there were too many people 

getting too many preferential treatments from across Canada.  

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason I believe that it failed. 

 

Underlying all of that, the people of Canada believe that there 

should be equality before the law without discrimination, 

without allowing any of the special interest groups to be 

brought forward.  And I believe that, Mr. Speaker.  I also 

believe that in spite of that, they are a tolerant group of people.  

I believe they're tolerant.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason 

why I raise these points as a part of my discussion and why I 

think that this Bill should be defeated. 

 

I want to point out a number of other issues, Mr. Speaker, that I 

find interesting in comparison to this.  Well before I go into 

that, I want to make some observations about how I view this 

in a moral sense. 

 

Personally, Mr. Speaker, I believe that I tolerate a lot of 

different people who think different than I do.  As a matter of 

fact, my neighbours are Muslim.  They have a different attitude 

towards the moral values than I have.  And I find that tolerable.  

And yet, Mr. Speaker, personally I don't have to accept them 

— accept that religion as a part of what I believe — because I 

have that freedom to accept the one I have. 

 

I therefore, Mr. Speaker, also have to have the freedom to 

accept other behavioural patterns that are I believe just as 

fundamental.  And as pointed out in Bill 38, I think that we 

have on the basis of sexual orientation gone beyond what the 

Bill of Rights of the 

province of Saskatchewan or the Human Rights Code of 

Saskatchewan should disqualify or qualify. 

 

I think we've gone beyond what should be said in that Bill on 

the basis that I believe that it's a behavioural pattern that we're 

talking about.  And I think that we have to say to the people of 

Saskatchewan, I will not tolerate in any way, shape, or form, 

actions of individuals where they do not infringe on the rights 

and actions of other individuals.  And I believe that as a part of 

the moral value that I place on other individuals and I place on 

myself. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point out some areas where this 

government has, in my view, demonstrated a lack of rights that 

an individual should have, and they have been taken away.  Mr. 

Speaker, I point out to the Assembly that in dealing with rights 

of an individual: 

 

 the right of the individual to life, liberty, security of the 

person and enjoyment of property, and the right not to be 

deprived thereof except by due process of law. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that we have had examples in this 

Assembly within the last 16 or 17 months where that has been 

happening.  And, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out a number of 

them. 

 

Now we can say on one hand that I'm going to be tolerating all 

of the people, and yet on the other hand this Assembly — and I 

voted against that — but this Assembly voted to have all of the 

contracts stripped from all of the people in the province of 

Saskatchewan who have made an agreement with a Crop 

Insurance Corporation that they were going to be involved in in 

a contract.  Under law the contract, I believe, exists as part of 

law.  And that agreement that is reached in a contract is law, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what was determined by the members of this Assembly, 

on the government side of the House, was that the 

interpretation they had is that they could break a contract that 

was made with the farmers of the province of Saskatchewan, 

and they could do it within the framework of the law.  They 

said they could do it because they make the law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say to the members of this Assembly, you have 

one rule for one group of people who come to you and ask for 

protection, you have another group of rules that you lay out for 

all of the other people to consider.  And I say, Mr. Speaker, 

those actions are hypocritical. 

 

You also raised, Mr. Speaker, another . . . or, Mr. Speaker, the 

government has also raised issues that relate to breaking the 

contracts with individuals.  Those are items that should not be 

taken away. Those rights should not be taken away as based on 

a contract, should not be taken away from individuals except 

how, Mr. Speaker?  Except in a court of law. 

 

And I say to you that Bill 38 should not be amended, it should 

not be amended, and it should be a process of law that says that 

sexual orientation should be a part of 



1448 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1993 

the Human Rights Code based on what, Mr. Speaker?  Based 

on precedent that is established to the functions of a court of 

law to determine whether in fact they have security in that. And 

I want to point out again, Mr. Speaker, that the organization 

called Equality for Gays and Lesbians Everywhere says in a 

letter that we received:  The courts are consistently finding that 

the Charter of Rights and Freedoms does indeed protect 

lesbians and gay men from discrimination. 

 

And so why would we need to put this into law in 

Saskatchewan?  I don't believe it should be, Mr. Speaker.  I 

believe that the court should determine the freedoms because in 

our constitutional right, it says by the very fact that the right of 

the individual to life and liberty, security of the person is there 

except — except, Mr. Speaker, by the due process of law. 

 

And then going on, the right of equality.  Not that one should 

be treated better than the other, but by the right of the 

individual to equality before the law and protection of the law.  

That, Mr. Speaker, if there are rights that are being disposed of 

that are against individuals for certain practices that are not 

illegal and that have not been taken away from those 

individuals, those individuals have the right before the law to 

confront those people who are taking that freedom away. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is where we should be with this idea of 

sexual orientation.  And I say to you and to the members of this 

Assembly that the approach is entirely wrong.  It's entirely 

wrong, Mr. Speaker, and I say that not only from my 

perspective but also from those people who wrote to us and 

told us that that is what they believe in. And that was from the 

Equality for Gays and Lesbians Everywhere, that association. 

 

And so I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that the rights before law, the 

right of an individual to be treated equally before the law, and 

the protection of the law is a fundamental right.  And if 

someone is breaking the law, Mr. Speaker, he should be taken 

to task for that by the courts of this land.  And I believe that 

that has to be the right. 

 

Now why do I believe that the areas of race, national origin, 

colour, religion, and sex are the ones that need to be dealt with?  

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that they need to be dealt with on the 

basis that they are inalienable things that we don't have a 

choice with — we don't have a choice with.  And, Mr. Speaker, 

I believe that that's the reason why we have to have . . . why 

this Bill should be defeated.  I really believe that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I believe that the law needs to be made in a way that will 

protect people who have these innate rights and the moral 

values that they have.  And I believe that this law goes beyond 

that, Mr. Speaker, and it protects a behavioural pattern that I 

don't think should be there.  But I also think that it's already 

protected under the Canadian Bill of Rights. 

 

Mr. Speaker, going on from there I want to point out to the 

Assembly also that the Canadian Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms guarantees the rights, and this is under 

The Constitution Act of 1982: 

 

 The Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms guarantees 

the rights and freedoms set out in it subject only to such 

reasonable limits prescribed by law as can be demonstrably 

justified in a free and democratic society. 

 

The rules that we have to follow have to be a balance between 

my rights, which are interdependent with the rights of others, 

and it has to be interdependent upon the . . . and the 

evolvement and how we treat other people. 

 

(1645) 

 

The reason I say that, Mr. Speaker, is this: that the people in 

the province who are breaking the law should be charged with 

breaking the law if they do not meet the requirements of the 

law as it is based on the constitution.  And I believe that, Mr. 

Speaker.  And I don't believe that in any way, shape, or form 

anyone has convinced me in this Assembly otherwise. 

 

And I don't believe that it is intolerant on my part to say that 

the law shall determine that, because the law will determine 

whether that individual has a right or not.  And as a matter of 

fact, Mr. Speaker, as we come to the place to vote on this and 

this becomes law, it will not be the reference to the discussion 

in this Assembly that will determine what the law is.  It will not 

be the discussion of the Minister of Justice in this Assembly 

what the law will be. 

 

The justices of the province of Saskatchewan will not turn to 

Hansard 1993 and ask, what did the Minister of Justice say, in 

determining what the law was.  They will not make reference 

to what the law is.  They will interpret the law how, Mr. 

Speaker?  They will interpret the law based on the decisions 

that have come prior to this.  They will determine that the issue 

is that the determination by the justices will be on the basis of 

precedent, and it will be on the basis of law and constitutional 

rights.  That's the determination that will make individuals in 

this Assembly responsible, but it also will make society 

responsible. 

 

And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I believe, I honestly believe that 

the fundamental rights of individuals who practise 

homosexuality are today protected equally with those that 

don't.  And that is my contention, and it has been my 

contention ever since I began to understand what the 

government was going to bring forward today. 

 

And I believe that the protection under the law is the same 

regardless of sex.  I believe also, Mr. Speaker, that our rights 

are protected under the basis of the Bill of Rights.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, the only thing that can take them away, the only thing 

that can take them away is the constitutional reference as it 

says there by a court of law.  It's the only way that that right 

can be taken away. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, the practices of homosexuality are not 

in the framework of the 



May 4, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1449 

Criminal Code.  They're not in the part that puts them in the 

same place, they're not of the same . . . in the same position as 

those people who are now being tried in Martensville.  They 

are not. 

 

And therefore, Mr. Speaker, they have every right to believe 

that the court and the jurisdiction of Saskatchewan should 

protect them as well with this Bill or without it.  What I'm 

fearful of, Mr. Speaker, what I'm fearful of and many people 

have told me is that this goes beyond what that court can 

determine, and that, Mr. Speaker, is what people are concerned 

about.  And I want to point out rightfully so, and I believe that I 

am concerned about that as well. 

 

I also want to point out to this Assembly that when the 

determination is made by the court about whether this is going 

to be struck down and what will happen, I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, the court will determine at some point in time, when 

someone challenges this, that they don't have the right under 

the Canadian constitution to have special privilege any more 

than anyone else, and that my right is interdependent with the 

rights of the others. 

 

They will determine that individuals who have assumed that 

they have a right under this Bill of Rights, the Saskatchewan 

Human Rights Code, they will determine that they have rights 

under that.  The court will determine whether they have.  And I 

say to this Assembly I think that they have already decided that 

they have rights, and that is again — I want to point out — 

exactly what the organization that wrote to us said.  They 

already have the rights under the Canadian Charter of Rights 

and Freedoms.  They already have that right.  And I say to the 

members of this Assembly that that is what I believe, and I 

think they're right in saying that. 

 

I want to point out a number of other issues that I find very, 

very interesting as it relates to these people wanting to defend 

certain rights of individuals and not the rights of others. 

 

I mentioned about farmers being excluded from the court.  

They excluded people from the court, Mr. Speaker.  They said 

no, you cannot challenge this decision by this Assembly in a 

court of law.  And, Mr. Speaker, I find that repulsive.  What 

they are doing, what they did to farmers in the province of 

Saskatchewan, is not what I'm asking this Assembly to do in 

sexual orientation — not at all. 

 

I want to have those individuals have the right where they are 

unjustly treated, and I believe they perhaps are, just as you will 

find that there are people who are unjustly treated, male and 

female, in a sexual way.  So that if people who have a sexual 

orientation are mistreated, they have access to the law to be 

treated the same as you and I do.  And that is very important, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But this Assembly, this Assembly in the case of the farmers of 

the province of Saskatchewan, this Assembly — and I didn't 

vote for this — but this Assembly took away those rights from 

appearing 

before a court of law in this province to have the court 

determine whether they were right or wrong; not whether the 

government was right or wrong, but the court to determine 

whether the actions were right or wrong.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is as fundamentally wrong as what these people are 

telling us is wrong with the present Human Rights Code. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have on three occasions seen advertising done, 

one by the Minister of Justice and two by the Minister of 

Labour — three instances altogether, Mr. Speaker — where 

they advertised for individuals in an ethnic and a gender way 

and in a race way. They said that it was exclusive, that it was 

exclusive to those races and exclusive to those individuals and 

exclusive to that gender. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that that is wrong.  That is the height 

of hypocrisy.  On the one hand they say, we've got to be 

tolerant of these people; and yet they on their own advertising 

for employment say that if you're not of this race and if you're 

not of this gender, then you won't be hired.  Now is that right?  

I raise that question to this Assembly: is that right? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice, as a part of his 

responsibility is the Indian and Metis Affairs, the Minister of 

Justice in a job application for one of his branches said that the 

race has to be this, the gender has to be this, and I will not hire 

anyone else.  In fact the ad says, Mr. Speaker, the other 

individuals need not even apply.  The other individuals need 

not even apply.  And is that fair? 

 

I say to the members that have spoken on this issue, is that 

what this thing is trying to protect?  And I say you should start 

at square one.  You haven't even fixed the things that you 

should be fixing before you start fixing the things that you 

think you should have and haven't.  And, Mr. Speaker, I find 

that deplorable. 

 

If I would say to this Assembly that I would put an ad in the 

paper and say that I wanted to hire a male, white, between 35 

and 45 years of age, and nobody else need apply, Mr. Speaker, 

I could be taken to the Human Rights Commission because that 

is not right.  And I believe that it's not right.  But what this 

government has done and the Minister of Justice's department 

himself has done — and the Minister of Labour — on three 

occasions they have said, if you are this and this, all of the 

others need not apply. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is deplorable.  And in my mind I find 

that disgusting.  And I would say to the members opposite, it's 

time you went home and cleaned up your own offices and 

cleaned up the things that you're doing because that is more 

wrong than anything that you're trying to prevent in Bill 38. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why I will not be voting in 

favour of Bill No. 38 because I don't believe that is does any of 

the things that they have said it does. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the reasons that I have outlined here, I 

believe, are fundamental to the Human Right's 



1450 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1993 

Code. I think they're fundamental to the Canadian Bill of 

Rights, and I also think they're fundamental to the Constitution 

of Canada. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I therefore now move adjournment of 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:56 p.m. 

 


