




















































Hansard: June 02, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2139 

 June 2, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order, the following petitions have been 

reviewed and pursuant to rule 11(7), they are hereby read and 

received: 

 

 Of citizens of the province humbly praying that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

And: 

 

 Of citizens of the province humbly praying that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to order 

SaskPower to facilitate the production of non-utility 

generated power in areas of increased demand. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I do today give notice 

of a motion that I shall on Friday next introduce an Act to 

amend The Trade Union Act. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Draper: -- I'd like to introduce to you and through you to 

the members of this House, Allen Engel who's sitting behind 

the bar here on this side of the House. 

 

Allen Engel was the previous member for Notukeu-Willow 

Bunch, and he was my predecessor as member for the 

constituency of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg.  And he and his 

family have been long-time friends and patients of myself, my 

wife and family.  Our children went to school together, played 

together, and God knows what else together, sir.  I'd like to 

welcome him and ask you to join with me in welcoming him to 

this House today.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

introduce to you and through you to members of the legislature, 

some 18 grade 7 and 8 students from the Admiral School.  

They're seated in your east gallery, Mr. Speaker, with teacher, 

Don Friesen, and bus driver, Jocelynn Hammond.  And please 

welcome them. 

 

And also welcome to a good friend of mine and a constituent, 

Allen Engel.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It gives 

me great pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to introduce to 

you and through you to all members of the Assembly, a former 

MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) from the 

constituency of Saltcoats and a former cabinet minister in the 

Blakeney administration, Mr. Edgar Kaeding, seated in the east 

gallery. 

 

Mr. Kaeding served the province as minister of Agriculture and 

also minister of Rural Affairs.  And he served the constituents 

of Saltcoats in a very fine fashion for some 11 years.  And I 

would like the Assembly here to welcome Mr. Kaeding to the 

question period this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a pleasure 

today to introduce to you and this Assembly, members of the 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker, 17 grade 3 and 4 students from the 

Craik Elementary School.  Mr. Speaker, they're sitting in the 

east gallery.  I'll be meeting with them for pictures and drinks 

and questions -- questions are the most important -- and we'll 

be doing that about 3 o'clock. 

 

And I want to just specifically say that it's a pleasure to have 

my home town of Craik represented here.  This is the school I 

attended for 12 years, and it's always a pleasure to see Craik 

represented in this Assembly.  So I ask all members to join in 

with me in welcoming the Craik grade 3 and 4 class.  Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It gives 

me great pleasure to introduce to you and through you to other 

members in the Assembly, my former MLA from Saskatoon 

Westmount, also a former cabinet minister and a Speaker of the 

Assembly.  Up in the Speaker's gallery is John Brockelbank. 

 

And I'm asking him where his wife is?  I don't know.  I don't 

see her up there either, but Ina was with him at lunch. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce 48 grade 7, 8, and 9 students, 24 of whom are from 

Ecole Monseigneur de Laval in Regina. The other 24 are 

exchange students from St. Augustine in Quebec which is a 

place about 30 minutes outside of Quebec City, and I believe 

they are seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Aux etudiants du Québec je vous dire bienvenue au 

Saskatchewan. 

 

(Translation:  To the Quebec students I say, welcome to 

Saskatchewan.) 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I will be meeting with the students after 

question period for any questions and photos and drinks.  So I'd 

like to ask you and the other members of the Legislative 

Assembly to join me in welcoming 



2140 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1993 

them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It gives me 

pleasure today to introduce a group of some 16 grade 7 

students from St. Joseph School in North Battleford.  And I 

might ask the member who just spoke if she could maybe 

address them in French later since I'm incapable of performing 

that task. 

 

They have with them today their teacher, Denis Carignan, and 

chaperons Mrs Harrison, Mrs. Pirot, and Ian Hamilton.  They're 

seated in your gallery and I'd ask all members to welcome them 

to the Assembly here this afternoon, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

legislature, a very dear friend of mine and one of my part-time 

assistants in my office, Ms. Ida Prytulk, who's sitting in the east 

gallery here, Mr. Speaker.  Ida has been involved a long time in 

politics and in the development of major public policy issues.  

And even today she's more involved than ever at that level, and 

certainly her hard work and commitment I appreciate very 

much.  So, Mr. Speaker, I'd ask you to welcome Ida here today. 

 

I'd also like to add my voice to my colleague, the member from 

Regina Hillsdale, in welcoming the students from Monseigneur 

de Laval and also from Quebec. 

 

M. le président, je voudrais prendre une opportunité 

aujourd'hui d'accueillir les étudiants de Monseigneur de Laval 

ici à Régina, mais aussi plus important les étudiants du Québec 

qui sont ici pour une visite.  Je sais pas comment longtemps 

qu'ils sont ici mais certainement je vous souhaite une bonne 

vacances dans la Saskatchewan.  Et je souhaite que vous avez 

une bonne visite aussi aujourd'hui dans la législature. 

 

(Translation:  Mr. Speaker, I'd like to take this opportunity 

today to welcome the students from Monseigneur de Laval here 

in Regina, but even more significantly, the students from 

Quebec who are here for a visit.  I don't know how long they're 

here for, but I certainly wish you a good holiday in 

Saskatchewan.  And I hope that you have a good visit here 

today at the legislature.) 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this 

opportunity to introduce to you and through you to members of 

the legislature seven grade 10 students from Midale Central 

School seated in the east gallery.  They're attended by the 

teacher, Garth Holman, and they are here to watch question 

period and will be meeting and discussing all kinds of topics 

after question period. 

While I'm on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I want to take an 

opportunity to also welcome the students from Monseigneur de 

Laval and also from the province of Quebec.  One of them, Mr. 

Speaker, Christophe, is staying with us and my son John.  And 

they tell me they're all Jean Charest supporters, so I'm happy to 

welcome them to the province of Saskatchewan.  Bienvenue. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Judging from the 

attendance in the galleries today, the legislature is probably the 

most popular place in town.  I have the distinct pleasure to 

introduce three people to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the rest of 

the House. 

 

Seated in your galleries, first of all, two women who have been 

very instrumental and play key roles in the struggle for 

women's equality and equity, Dianne Barrow and Trish Elliott 

of the Saskatchewan Action Committee on the Status of 

Women; and also a constituent of mine from Saskatoon 

Wildwood, Doug LaVallie, regional director of the Canadian 

Union of Public Employees.  Please join me in welcoming 

these people. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure on behalf of 

my colleague from Prince Albert Northcote and myself to 

welcome to this legislature a former member of the legislature 

from Prince Albert, Mr. Mike Feschuk, who's seated behind the 

government benches. 

 

Mike has spent several years here under the Blakeney 

administration and was certainly somebody that I learned a lot 

from about how to deal with public issues in the city of Prince 

Albert.  And I want to welcome Mike to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I've got actually three different groups of guests here 

I'd like to introduce today. 

 

The first is my very good friend and former . . . well I shouldn't 

say former, he's a constituent of mine.  He's a former member 

of the legislature, Mr. Ed Whelan, the former member from 

Regina North West.  I'd ask all members to welcome him here 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- As well, Mr. Speaker, I'd also like to recognize 

in attendance in the gallery today the president of the Regina 

Rosemont NDP (New Democratic Party) Constituency 

Association, and the treasurer: Malcolm McKinnon and Lee 

McCaig.  And I believe they're in the east gallery today. 

 

And the third group I'd like to introduce are a broad 

representative of the trade union movement.  I'm 



June 2, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2141 

going to take, Mr. Speaker, a moment or two just to recognize 

them here individually. 

 

First of all, there's Mr. Rick Bryne; he's the director of the 

prairie region of the Canadian Labour Congress, and he's also 

the labour vice-president of the Saskatchewan New Democratic 

Party.  Mr. Don Anderson, executive assistant to the 

Saskatchewan Federation of Labour.  My colleague, the 

member from Wildwood, has recognized Mr. La Vallie.  Dave 

Maki, treasurer of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour and 

representative of the Office, Professional Employees 

International Union.  Debra Brin, president of the Regina 

District Labour Council.  John MacLeod, the vice-president of 

the South Saskatchewan Building Trades Council and business 

agent for the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers. 

Calvin Goebel, business manager, United Brotherhood of 

Carpenters and Joiners of America.  Larry Hubich, 

vice-president of Sask Federation of Labour, representative of 

Grain Services Union, as well as many other members of the 

Grain Services Union who are here today.  George Britton, 

vice-president of Saskatchewan Federation of Labour and 

secretary-treasurer of Local 820, the Canadian Union of Postal 

Workers; Mr. Gord Murray, president of the Brewery Workers 

Local 318W, the United Food and Commercial Workers 

International Union; Mr. Chris Banting, secretary-treasurer of 

Retail, Wholesale and Department Store Union; Leo Weaver 

and Helmet Sieh for the Amalgamated Transit Union -- Mr. 

Weaver is the chair of the Regina sublocal; Mr. Sieh is the 

Saskatchewan Federation of Labour vice-president, president 

of the SFL 1,000 Club, and on the Saskatchewan executive 

board; Victoria Wotherspoon, Sask Coalition for Social Justice; 

Paul Guillet, vice-president of the SFL and staff rep with 

Retail, Wholesale; Mr. George Rosenau, president of Sask 

Government Employees' Union; Brian Rands, Local 4728, 

United Steelworkers; Mr. Myron Gettle, 4728, president of that 

Steelworkers Local. 

 

And as well, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to recognize some local 

members from the Communications, Energy and Paperworkers 

Union of Canada.  As you may be aware, Mr. Speaker, this is a 

new labour organization in this province.  I'd like to recognize 

their attendance today. 

 

And as well I'd like to recognize the participation of various 

members of the Saskatchewan Young New Democrats; Pam 

Birkbeck, Plasterers and Cement Masons Local 442; as well as 

Mr. George Manz, the editor of Briarpatch magazine. 

 

I'd ask all caucus members and all members of this Assembly 

to welcome these people to the proceedings of the legislature 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Proposed Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

my question is to the Minister of Labour.  Mr. Minister, today 

we see more evidence of how your government meets with 

people but doesn't listen to them. 

 

Mr. Minister, the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association has met with you on three separate occasions to 

request that you withdraw Bills 55 and 56.  They told you that 

in this absence of any clear, identified need, this significant 

increase in employer costs cannot be supported. 

 

Mr. Minister, SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association) says that this amounts to further downloading by 

the province onto municipalities and it will leave them no 

choice but to raise taxes, reduce services, or eliminate jobs. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you listen to the SUMA group today and 

withdraw Bills 55 and 56? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I recognize, Mr. Speaker, that 

members opposite are going to maintain until their dying days, 

which as a political party I don't think is far off --  but they're 

going to maintain until their dying days there's no need for any 

changes to The Occupational Health and Safety Act. Suffice it 

to say, Mr. Speaker, that's not our view. 

 

I have met with SUMA.  I'm not sure the date of the document 

which the member is referring to.  I've discussed it with them.  

It is our view there is a clear need for reform of the Workers' 

Compensation Board and the occupational health and safety 

legislation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, it's not 

just SUMA that is requesting Bills 55 and 56 be withdrawn; the 

Saskatchewan business coalition is as well.  SUMA is telling 

you the legislation should be withdrawn, and SUMA is part of 

the business coalition; SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities) is part of the business coalition; SSTA 

(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) and the 

Saskatchewan Health-Care Association, all want you to 

postpone or withdraw this legislation. 

 

These groups represent 40,000 public sector employees.  So 

now we have virtually the entire private sector against the 

legislation, and now virtually the entire public sector is against 

the legislation as well. 

 

Mr. Minister, there's nobody supporting this legislation, yet you 

seem intent on dismissing those who disagree with you and 

ramming these Bills through anyway. 

 

Mr. Minister, why won't you listen to these groups?  Why are 

you so intent on passing this legislation when virtually no one 

supports it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm not entirely sure that this is what 

brought them to the legislature, but I note 



2142 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1993 

some support for some of these measures in the gallery.  So I 

don't think I'm entirely alone, I say to the opposite member. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- I would ask the minister, first of all, not to 

entice people in the galleries to participate in activities on the 

floor.  I think he knows full well that the members in the 

galleries are not to participate in either opposing or supporting 

activities that happen on the floor. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, SUMA, 

SARM, SSTA, SHA (Saskatchewan Health-Care Association), 

have all informed you that they cannot afford these increased 

costs, especially in light of further provincial offloading that 

has already been announced for 1994. 

 

Mr. Minister, what you are doing to municipalities, school 

boards, and hospital boards, amounts to a claw-back of 

provincial funding.  In the past couple of days we have heard 

the Finance minister being very critical of federal offloading 

onto the province, yet you have no hesitation whatsoever in 

downloading more costs onto municipalities and local boards. 

 

Mr. Minister, don't you think that is a bit of a double standard?  

And why don't you simply listen to those groups who have 

asked you on three separate occasions and postpone this 

legislation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, these two Bills have 

been the subject of the wildest nonsense perpetrated by 

members opposite and their cohorts.  And I'm not here 

suggesting SUMA and SARM are cohorts.  I am suggesting 

you people have spread the wildest nonsense.  You have 

suggested the increase will be around 200 per cent in the 

assessments.  That's nonsense.  You have suggested there's no 

need for it.  That's nonsense.  Forty people in this province died 

last year.  We think that's 40 too many and we're going to do 

what we can to bring the carnage, the death, the accidents, to an 

end. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, on the 

front page of today's paper we see another example of what 

happens when a government quits listening to the people. 

 

Out of 38 Canadian cities, Regina placed dead last in 

employment prospects -- dead last, Mr. Minister.  That's your 

record in your city, Mr. Minister.  Eleven NDP MLAs and four 

senior NDP cabinet ministers and we're dead last in 

employment opportunities in this province, in this country. 

 

Maybe, just maybe, it's time you started listening to groups like 

SUMA, Mr. Minister.  Maybe it's time you started listening to 

the chamber of commerce and the Canadian Federation of 

Independent Business and 

other people who know how to create jobs.  And maybe, when 

these people tell you a piece of legislation is going to cost jobs 

to this province, maybe you'll recognize that what they say is 

correct. 

 

Mr. Minister, when are you going to listen to the business 

groups and other groups around this province that do not agree 

that this legislation is necessary? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, the member from 

Kindersley says we're dead last.  He's half right, the 

Conservative Party's certainly dead.  And I suspect in any poll 

they're probably last, so he's probably entirely right. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say, I want to say to members, I want to 

say to members opposite, Mr. Speaker, that we have a workers' 

compensation scheme which was not properly compensating 

workers.  An impartial tribunal, established by the members 

opposite when they were in office, suggested the Workers' 

Compensation Board scheme in this province was a fraud upon 

workers.  We're determined to see that come to an end, and this 

legislation will do that. 

 

We invite members opposite to join us in a progressive, 

compassionate pair of Bills.  But whether or not you decide 

you are with the public of . . . the workers or whether you 

decide you're against them, it is the government's determination 

to pass those Bills. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, large 

groups like SUMA are telling you that your policies are 

destroying jobs, and so are individual business owners. 

 

I have a letter here from the manager of Prosper Tractor in 

Estevan.  He wants to know when are you going to abandon 

this politically motivated course that will lead to more 

devastation on the people of Saskatchewan.  When are you 

going to really listen to the people whom you've been elected to 

represent.  Bills 55 and 56 will have a very negative impact 

upon this business which could in turn have a negative impact 

upon employees and families. Admitting that you have made a 

mistake is not a sign of weakness but is actually a sign that the 

government has the courage to change direction when the 

direction is wrong. 

 

Mr. Minister, he's asking you, do you and your government 

have the courage in light of the overwhelming evidence to 

change your course of direction on these Bills? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Let me leave with the member from 

Kindersley some evidence he might want to consider.  The 

member from Kindersley might want to consider that there 

were over 30,000 claims filed with the Workers' Compensation 

Board last year, 



June 2, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2143 

12,000 of which were lost-time accidents.  That's a city the size 

of Moose Jaw or Prince Albert, roughly, who have been 

injured.  That is far too many.  And an unacceptable percentage 

of those workers who were injured were not properly 

compensated.  A single one who isn't properly compensated is 

too many. 

 

I'd invite the members opposite to consider some of those 

statistics.  You might consider the workers who were killed; 

there were 40 last year.  There were a number killed at Shand.  

I'm not going to get into that in detail; I'm sure Mr. Speaker 

won't allow it.  Suffice it to say, that was a real tragedy.  That is 

some of the statistics which members opposite might want to 

think about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Job Creation 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

directed to the Minister of Finance.  Madam Minister, you 

recently attended a meeting of other provincial Finance 

ministers and your federal counterpart.  And at that meeting 

you were quoted as saying, and I quote: 

 

 We think that jobs are just as important as debt. 

 

 If we tackle the debt but don't tackle the job issue we are only 

tackling half the issue. 

 

You're quick to claim, and your government is, the credit for 

900 Sears jobs, 200 Royal Bank jobs, 140 AECL (Atomic 

Energy of Canada Ltd.) positions, and 100 Price Club jobs.  

But you fail to accept responsibility for the loss of 300 CP 

(Canadian Pacific) Rail jobs, 60 Labatt jobs, 800-and-counting 

health care jobs, and 300 public service jobs.  Even using NDP 

math, Madam Minister . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order.  Does the member 

have a question?  I want the member to put her question. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Madam Minister, there is a net job loss.  

What is your government doing to demonstrate that you are 

tackling what you call the whole issue? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I welcome 

that question.  I thought it was important that if ministers of 

Finance were going to meet in Ottawa and talk about the deficit 

and our debt problem, which is a serious problem, we also had 

to talk about the other side of the equation which is jobs. 

 

And what I focused on and what the minister from Ontario 

focused on was the role of interest rates in job creation and in 

stimulating the economy.  If you look at the 1980s and the 

problems of the '80s, the problems with deficits, and the 

problems of unemployment, it was high interest rates that 

helped to create those problems. 

 

What we said was we wanted to speak with the Governor of the 

Bank of Canada who is the individual 

who sets interest rates and impress upon him the importance of 

long-term, low, stable interest rates which will across Canada 

help create jobs and stimulate the economy.  Our approach is 

balanced.  Deficit problem, yes; job creation as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, your 

predecessor predicted in his 1992 budget that 2,000 new jobs 

would be created.  But the end result was a net loss of 7,000 

jobs.  The situation is expected to worsen this year with your 

predictions already 16,000 below your target. 

 

Furthermore companies in Regina have told Manpower 

Temporary Services that 10 per cent more of them will be 

laying off than hiring in the July to September quarter of this 

year.  Is this an indication of a job creation strategy in action? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I think it's important 

that we put this whole issue in perspective.  There is a problem 

across the western world with unemployment.  Four of the 

seven G-7 countries have double digit unemployment.  

Provinces across Canada have problems with jobs.  Manitoba 

last year lost 11,000 jobs.  The year before Alberta lost 15,000 

jobs. 

 

I don't think there's any suggestion and I don't believe anybody 

out there believes there is a quick-fix answer.  We are 

concerned and we're willing to cover it all across the piece.  We 

have a strategy within the province.  We're urging the federal 

government nationally to look at a low interest rate policy for 

the long term as a solution nationally, or part of a solution to 

job creation.  But the member opposite is misleading the 

electorate if she thinks there's a quick-fix answer to this, 

because there isn't.  But we are on the right track. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, I 

mentioned nothing about a quick fix.  We're talking about some 

priorities here. 

 

Forty-five thousand people in this province don't have the 

dignity of employment.  The jobless rate has reached 

double-digit figures for the first time in Saskatchewan's history.  

As the Saskatchewan business coalition noted recently, and this 

is their quote:  It is urgent that we begin to work together to 

rally the spirits of Saskatchewan people around a lucid, 

common vision for economic renewal. 

 

Do you intend to listen to their ideas?  Or do you share the 

view of your Premier -- that the coalition doesn't represent 

business at all in this province and simply choose to ignore 

their input? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, several different points 

here.  First of all, in terms of strangling the economy and 

limiting our ability to provide services and create jobs, the 

greatest problem we have 



2144 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1993 

now is the debt and the deficits, across the piece.  And all 

ministers from all across Canada agreed on that. 

 

The second point is we do have a plan for job creation and for 

the economy developed in cooperation with all groups within 

the community, the Partnership for Renewal. 

 

And finally, we do have a formal process -- the Provincial 

Action Committee on the Economy -- where business, labour, 

and other groups regularly meet to tackle the problem. 

 

We are tackling it across the piece in a coordinated, committed 

way.  But there is no quick fix.  We're here not for the short 

term, but for the long term. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam 

Minister, like it or not, business knows how business works.  

And obviously business does not feel that you are approaching 

job creation the way that you should. 

 

Why will you not demonstrate some of the cooperation that 

you and your colleagues preached during the election, that you 

preach in this legislature, and allow the business community 

and labour in this province to help you bring in a solid, 

workable, job creation initiatives. 

 

And I'm not talking politics here, I'm talking about work.  I'm 

talking tax dollars -- this is something that perhaps you should 

all listen to -- tax dollars and consumer spending that comes 

from real pay cheques.  If you're worried about debt and deficit, 

put people to work so they can have some money to put into 

the economy. 

 

Now I ask you again:  what solid job creation plans do you 

have? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I would be pleased to 

answer that question.  In our most recent budget, despite our 

very, very difficult financial circumstances, we had in that 

budget a package of initiatives designed to stimulate the 

economy and create employment.  And the package was very 

effectively targeted to our long-term game plan which is that 

small businesses and small co-ops are the main creators of jobs. 

 

What was provided for in that budget was a 20 per cent 

reduction in the corporate income tax rate for small businesses 

and co-ops over a two-year period.  There was incentives for 

investment in manufacturing and processing.  We tried to build 

on our strength in the telecommunications industry in the 

province by removing the E&H (education and health) tax on 

1-800 numbers, and the list goes on. 

 

We provided $31 million in targeted incentives or other 

measures to promote economic development and job creation.  

Our commitment in dollar terms speaks for itself. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam 

Minister, almost 8,000 men and women completed their 

post-secondary educations this year at Saskatchewan's 

universities, colleges, and technical schools.  And that's not to 

mention the 15,000 young people who are completing their 

high school this month.  These people are looking to your 

government to create the kind of atmosphere that is going to 

result in jobs -- jobs that will enable them to become 

productive citizens of this province. 

 

Isn't it time your government reviewed your so-called 

Partnership for Renewal strategy in cooperation with business 

and labour to ensure that the young people of this province 

have jobs in Saskatchewan and are not going to have to go 

somewhere else? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, again what is 

frustrating is when the member opposite suggests that there is 

some quick-fix answer to this.  We are working across the 

piece, in our budget, in our Partnership for Renewal, in our 

Provincial Action Committee on the Economy, in our 

approaches to federal policy with respect to interest rates, and 

we are working in a coordinated way with other ministers in 

Canada to promote economic development and job creation.  

But this is not something that will occur quickly. 

 

I guess the other point that I would raise is there is a gloom and 

doom to the member's comments.  There has been an increase 

in employment from March to April.  We as a country have just 

received GDP (gross domestic product) figures which are 

astonishing to the other G-7 countries in terms of growth.  So 

there are very bright signs on the horizon.  And I would 

encourage her to join with us, share with us her ideas about 

how we can do better. 

 

We are committed and we are working at it and we are seeing 

some signs of success. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Minister's Remarks on Swift Current 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to ask the 

Premier a question today.  Yesterday the Associate Minister of 

Finance attacked the credibility of the Swift Current Chamber 

of Commerce.  Mr. Premier, yesterday he attacked the 

credibility of the chamber's president.  Yesterday he attacked 

the credibility of the Medicine Hat chamber.  Mr. Premier, 

yesterday he attacked his own city, and -- by an observation 

that I'll make -- he attacked the city that I believe is a good city. 

 

Now I'd like to ask you to ask the Associate Minister of 

Finance to apologize to this Assembly and to the people of 

Swift Current for the statements he made regarding that city 

yesterday. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm sure that 



June 2, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2145 

even the Swift Current Chamber of Commerce is ready and 

able to exchange in debate an exchange of ideas and facts and 

figures.  That is what the minister was doing.  I don't think that 

we need the member from Morse . . . I don't think the Swift 

Current Chamber of Commerce needs the member from Morse 

to help it out in what I think is an important dialogue and 

debate that should be engaged. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Premier, I also am a member of the city's 

chamber in Swift Current, and so I'd like to ask you these 

questions also.  Mr. Premier, yesterday he told a reporter that 

Swift Current is not a very attractive city.  Now I don't happen 

to agree with that; I think Swift Current is a great city.  Three 

years ago Stats Canada called Swift Current the most 

prosperous city in Canada, Mr. Premier.  Two years ago 

Chatelaine put it the top 10 places to live. 

 

So what could have changed so quickly, Mr. Premier?  They 

still have the same mayor.  They still have the same chamber.  

They still have the same businesses.  They still have the same, 

what I think is a great hockey team.  They still have all of the 

business people doing business in that city. 

 

But one thing is different, Mr. Speaker and Mr. Premier, one 

thing is . . . there's a big difference.  The difference I see, Mr. 

Premier, the difference I see, Mr. Premier, is this: that they now 

have an NDP MLA, and that's the problem with him.  Will you 

ask that member to apologize to the people of Swift Current for 

the things that he said to them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member from 

Morse ought to know, and I think he does know, that the 

member from Swift Current, the minister, has been a resident 

of Swift Current since 1956, almost 40 years.  He's a business 

person there.  He's a member of the chamber of commerce 

there.  He's a former councillor there.  He is an MLA, and he's 

a distinguished member of the Executive Council.  Now this 

does not mean that being MLA he cannot dispute the facts and 

figures of individuals from Swift Current, no matter how well 

intentioned they might be.  And that's exactly what the member 

from Swift Current was doing. 

 

Where the numbers are wrong, he has an obligation -- and I say 

a right -- to say so, bluntly and honestly.  And I don't think the 

chamber of commerce needs your protection from that.  It can 

defend itself very easily.  He wasn't attacking the chamber of 

commerce; he was disputing the figures taken by the president 

of the chamber of commerce.  And I think that that's a fair 

comment in a fair arena of debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The paper says, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. 

Premier, that Mr. Kiesman . . . and he states this, Mr. Premier: 

and my blood's just boiling over, he said in 

an interview.  He said: Penner and the government have their 

heads in the sand.  That's what he said, Mr. Premier.  And I 

want to point out to you what was really said in the information 

that was provided to you and to the members of cabinet. 

 

It was stated in that letter that $50 million was what the 

Medicine Hat Chamber of Commerce were providing as 

figures for their involvement of the part of the south-west part 

of the province of Saskatchewan that was going to Medicine 

Hat to buy goods and services.  That is a fact, Mr. Premier, and 

we want you to apologize to the people of the south-west part 

of the province. 

 

And on top of that, I would like to ask you, Mr. Premier, to do 

what the letter very basically says.  Will you become involved 

in an economic summit, without delay, to provide the people of 

Saskatchewan an opportunity to give you the information about 

a solution to the economic development in this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I hope the hon. 

member doesn't take any personal offence, but I shudder at the 

thought that he would give us a solution to the economic 

problems of the province, having sunk this province on the 

verge of bankruptcy for nine and a half years. 

 

You know the fact of the matter is that the hon. member says 

he's such a defender of Swift Current.  Where was he at the 

time when he was sitting in the treasury benches, and they got 

this province involved in all kinds of multibillion 

_dollar schemes?  They got this province involved in a 

situation of a total debt of $16 billion, where they attacked the 

working men and women in the province of Saskatchewan.  

Where were you then as the supposed defender of the people of 

Swift Current? 

 

Look, I simply don't think that the people of Saskatchewan are 

ready to accept that kind of an approach at all.  It's simply is 

not relevant, nor credible.  Your response and position is 

straight politics.  You have got to be in a situation where you 

present some ideas, and unfortunately you don't have them.  

You haven't had them.  That's why you're sitting there as a 

rump party in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Question period has ended for today 

but I want to caution members that I will take much stricter 

action in future question periods if this constant interruption 

carries on in future question periods.  So I'll ask members to 

please abide by the rules of question period and listen to the 

question and listen to the answers. 

 

Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Draper: -- I beg leave to make a statement on the 



2146 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1993 

40th anniversary of the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II, sir. 

 

The Speaker: -- The member could possibly do that before 

orders of the day. 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: -- Before orders of the day, I would like to table 

pursuant to subsection (1) of section 30 of The Ombudsman 

Act, to table the report of the Ombudsman. 

 

Mr. Draper: -- I beg leave to make this statement, sir. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Fortieth Anniversary of Coronation of Queen Elizabeth II 

 

Mr. Draper: -- Mr. Speaker, sir, and members of the 

Legislative Assembly, today, June 2, marks an important 

anniversary in the life of our country and our province.  Forty 

years ago on June 2, 1953, Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II was 

crowned Queen of the United Kingdom, Canada, and her other 

realms and territories. 

 

The colourful and moving ceremony of the coronation marked 

the beginning of a reign which continues today. The portrait 

above the Speaker's chair in this Chamber was made at that 

time and is a constant reminder to members and visitors in this 

Assembly of two things.  First, the dignity and devotion to duty 

and tradition of service of Queen Elizabeth as our sovereign; 

second, the key role of the constitutional monarchy in our 

system of government. 

 

For four decades Queen Elizabeth has served us with wisdom, 

humanity, and generosity as our Canadian head of state.  She 

has always shown profound understanding for and sensitivity 

to the complexities of Canada -- a federal system in a vast 

territory, our official bilingualism, our multicultural society. 

 

Her visits to Saskatchewan in 1959, 1973, 1978, and 1987 have 

been highlights of our life as a provincial community.  Her 

warmth and abundant common sense have left an imprint on all 

whom she has met. 

 

And on a personal note, sir, I remember being given a day's 

holiday from school on Coronation Day and visiting a 

neighbour who had a television set, which were few and far 

between in those days, to watch the ceremony, and the memory 

of it has remained with me through this day. 

 

The institution over which the Queen presides, our 

constitutional monarchy, is one of the distinguishing 

characteristics of our Canadian political culture.  It marks our 

heritage of parliamentary democracy, of our historic rights and 

freedoms under the rule of law.  It is symbolic of the 

commitment of Canadian people to the notion of community 

where collective 

obligations and priorities balance and complement individual 

rights. 

 

(1445) 

 

The Crown is an indelible feature of our Canadian identity.  It 

ensures the continuity of the state above and beyond partisan 

politics.  It separates the role of head of state from that of head 

of government.  It provides a focus of loyalty to Canada for all 

of us. 

 

This is why the office of Lieutenant Governor is so important 

as the local representative of the Crown and the Queen.  This is 

why Saskatchewan people of all backgrounds and all political 

persuasions respect the office. 

 

We are fortunate indeed to have in the person of our present 

Lieutenant Governor, the Honourable Sylvia Fedoruk, someone 

who fulfils with such warmth and distinction the vice-regal role 

in our province. 

 

I ask all members to join with me in an expression of loyalty to 

Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, Queen of Canada, on the 40th 

anniversary of her coronation.  Long may she reign.  Thank 

you, sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  With leave I'd like 

to also make some remarks. 

 

The Speaker: -- The member may proceed. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and members of the Assembly, I 

very clearly recall the day that King George passed away 

because it was my responsibility to go out into the school yard 

to lower the flag to half-mast.  And I believe that was 1951 or 

in that neighbourhood.  And I very clearly remember that day, 

Mr. Speaker, as a part of the tradition of the involvement of 

myself in my school. 

 

I clearly also remember the day that Her Majesty Queen 

Elizabeth became the heir and became responsible for that at 

her coronation.  And I recall that day with some interest 

because I noted, and I listened on the radio -- we didn't have 

television at the time -- and I listened to the radio and I recall 

that very clearly. 

 

I also recall very clearly on a day that I received recognition for 

my responsibility to rural communities when I received from 

the Governor General of Canada a 25th silver jubilee medal on 

the celebration of the anniversary in 1977 of Her Majesty's 

25th year of reign.  And I clearly remember that.  And so it has 

been with some interest that I have viewed the responsibilities 

that she has taken, and that she has represented us in a way that 

is very dignified. 

 

I had occasion to meet the Queen Mother on occasion when she 

was here, and I was very impressed with the dignity that she 

has and the carriage that she has and the bearing that she has.  

And that dignity I believe has been transferred to Her Majesty 

as well. 



June 2, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2147 

Mr. Speaker, I think it's important for us to recognize that.  

What she represents to the Assembly and to the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan is that she represents democracy, not 

by what she is in relation to the democracy, but what 

democracy has come from, Mr. Speaker, and to what it is 

today.  She represents that.  Just like the mace does here in the 

Assembly, she represents that authority being transferred to 

you and to me as individuals. 

 

And I believe and I've always believed that the democracy of 

Canada and the parliaments across the world have a very, very 

distinct tribute to pay to that family, because they gave up of 

their rule so that the common man could be a part of it.  Now it 

came with a great deal of struggles and dealings, and I respect 

that.  But the dignity that we place upon these people is a part 

of what the whole democracy represents in the parliamentary 

system, and that she represents the transfer of rule from a 

monarchy to the democracy that we live in today, and that the 

ordinary individual can be a part of the rule of law in Canada 

and in Saskatchewan. 

 

And I believe that I want to join with the member from 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg.  And I know that he probably has 

very strong ties to that country because that is the country of 

his birth.  And I want to join with him in his 

acknowledgements here today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: -- No, I'd like leave . . . ask leave for introduction 

of a guest. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Harper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it gives 

me a great deal of pride to introduce to you and to all the 

members of the House, the former member from Pelly, Norman 

Lusney, who has joined us in the House behind the bar there. 

 

Norman, who is a good friend and a long-time acquaintance of 

mine and has served as the member from Pelly from 1977 to 

1986 and has served his constituency with great distinction.  

And, Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to ask all 

the members to offer him a warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, before beginning my 

remarks, may I, with the indulgence of the Assembly, introduce 

yet another guest? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Wes Robbins of Saskatoon, former 

cabinet minister in the Blakeney government, is also here this 

afternoon.  And I'd like the Assembly to welcome Mr. Robbins. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 90 -- An Act to protect the financial viability of 

NewGrade Energy Inc. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I introduce for 

consideration of this Assembly, The NewGrade Energy Inc. 

Protection Act.  This legislation is designed to protect the 

interests of Saskatchewan taxpayers and to ensure the financial 

viability of the NewGrade upgrader project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government does not take this step lightly.  A 

negotiated solution has always been and remains our preferred 

route.  Legislation has been introduced only as a last resort.  

Nearly 18 months of discussion, negotiation, and mediation 

with our partner in the NewGrade upgrader, Federated 

Co-operatives Ltd., have failed to produce a financial 

restructuring of the project. 

 

You will recall that during the provincial election campaign in 

1991, my party promised Saskatchewan taxpayers that a New 

Democratic government would undertake a complete review of 

all the megaproject deals signed by the previous administration.  

Our commitment was to review each deal from the point of 

view of ensuring the public interest and reducing the financial 

exposure of provincial taxpayers. 

 

In a number of instances, we have already succeeded.  Without 

legislation, without rancour, the provincial government has 

negotiated improvements to megaproject arrangements to 

companies like Weyerhaeuser and Crown Life.  Discussions 

with FCL (Federated Co-operatives Ltd.) have been much 

different and more difficult. 

 

Shortly after our election we began a complete financial review 

of the upgrader project.  We became very concerned with a 

number of aspects of the deal including the economic viability 

of the upgrader and the governance structure of the project.  

We attempted to open negotiations with FCL to improve these 

arrangements.  This was in the spring of 1992.  FCL's position 

was that they were under no legal obligation to change the deal 

and they indicated that they had no intention of doing so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few things about the history of 

how the NewGrade project came to be.  In 1986 the previous 

administration entered into an agreement with Consumers' 

Co-operative Refineries Ltd., which I will refer to as CCRL, to 

build and operate a heavy oil upgrader integrated with CCRL's 

refinery in Regina.  CCRL is a wholly owned subsidiary of 

Federated Co-operatives Ltd., FCL, which is the umbrella 

group for retail cooperatives in the four western provinces. 



2148 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1993 

The original conception of the project was very good.  And I 

believe that the motivations of the partners as they approached 

the project were no doubt laudable.  The government of the day 

wanted to create jobs and build the capacity to process the 

natural resource of heavy oil.  Saskatchewan is blessed with 

enormous resources of heavy oil, and it made sense that we 

would be able to process this resource in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

FCL wanted to ensure that its refinery would have a secure 

supply of crude oil into the next century.  This secured supply 

was in doubt because of declining reserves of conventional 

crude oil.  FCL also needed to undertake a modernization and 

refurbishment of its refinery.  The upgrader seemed to be the 

opportunity to accomplish this objective. 

 

Despite these praiseworthy objectives, Mr. Speaker, something 

went horribly wrong.  The conditions that we find in the 

upgrader agreements are unprecedented in any sort of normal 

commercial partnership arrangement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me ask the question in very blunt terms.  Who 

would enter into a partnership deal like this?  Who would enter 

into a business arrangement where their partner contributes no 

capital, assumes no risk, and has complete operational control?  

And who would agree to arrangements where their partner is 

entitled to receive half of any profits and then flatly refuses to 

share in any part of the losses that occur?  These are terms that 

very few people would accept on their own behalf.  

Unfortunately they were accepted on behalf of the taxpayers of 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

For CCRL it was a deal too good to be true. 

 

However the deal did not fall into their laps, Mr. Speaker, out 

of the blue.  The original memorandum of understanding on 

this agreement was signed between FCL, Saskatchewan, and 

Canada in 1983.  NewGrade Energy was to be incorporated and 

a maximum of $10 million was to be spent on project 

assessment and feasibility work.  This cost was to be shared 

between all three parties. 

 

While this preliminary work was being carried out, 

negotiations were conducted on the project agreement and the 

operating agreement.  These negotiations, Mr. Speaker, were 

protracted and difficult.  In June of 1985, FCL threatened to 

withdraw from the upgrader project on the ground that a 

projected 16.1 per cent rate of return was not acceptable. 

 

The then premier instructed the provincial officials to not lose 

the deal.  The result was a revision to the 1983 memorandum of 

understanding.  This revision contained a number of major 

concessions to FCL, the most important of which was an 

agreement that CCRL staff alone would manage the operations 

of the upgrader. 

In addition to this granting of control, a number of financial 

sweeteners were given to FCL in order to keep it involved in 

the project.  These included, first, Saskatchewan taxpayers 

would fund the equity dollars previously committed by FCL; 

none the less FCL would continue to receive half of any 

profits. 

 

Second, CCRL was to receive an annual operating fee of 

$14.75 million indexed to inflation.  Now since CCRL can 

charge all direct costs of operating the upgrader to NewGrade, 

much of this operations fee of $14.75 million represents profit 

to FCL each year. 

 

Thirdly, royalties on natural gas supplied to NewGrade would 

be rebated. 

 

There were other aspect to the memorandum, Mr. Speaker, but 

those are the main ones that I want to draw to the attention of 

the Assembly today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this 1985 revision to the memorandum of 

understanding was signed by the government against the advice 

of the government's expert officials.  Further, the federal 

government refused to sign these revisions to the original 

memorandum of understanding. 

 

This collapse of the provincial government's bargaining 

position, under a threat by FCL to withdraw was bad enough, 

Mr. Speaker; however it merely set the stage for yet further 

collapses. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this time, 1985, there was still no project or 

operating agreements in place.  Despite this, a contract was 

awarded to Kilborn/Fluor to construct the upgrader project.  

Development work was undertaken and major components 

were ordered.  All this was done without any agreements to 

govern the construction and operations of the project. 

 

By late 1986, close to $100 million had been spent without the 

project or operating agreement having been completed.  Almost 

all of this money, Mr. Speaker, came from the taxpayers.  A 

hundred million dollars without the final contracts in place.  

Mr. Speaker, that can only be described as a stunning 

dereliction in the duty of the then government to protect the 

interests of the taxpayers of this province. 

 

FCL knew that it had the government in a very bad position.  

After all, the government had already caved in once to a threat 

to withdraw from the project, and that was before the hundred 

million dollars had been spent. 

 

In September of 1986, FCL again began threatening to 

withdraw from the project.  They said that they wanted a final 

agreement before the government's term expired.  This was just 

days before the then premier was planning to call the 1986 

election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the then premier agreed to a five-day lock-up 

session in Regina during the first week in October 1986.  Two 

senior government officials were 



June 2, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2149 

instructed to hammer out a deal with Mr. Thompson and Mr. 

Empey of FCL.  By the time the lock-up began, the provincial 

election had already been called and the campaign was under 

way.  Mr. Thompson and Mr. Empey, after negotiating for only 

a couple of days in this lock-up session, abruptly left the 

negotiations. 

 

And on October 9, 1986, just 11 days before the voters of 

Saskatchewan went to the polls, they presented to the 

government negotiators a complete draft agreement.  They said 

the government had 24 hours to sign that agreement.  If the 

government refused, they said that FCL would hold a press 

conference to withdraw from the project and accuse the 

government of having bargained in bad faith.  In addition, they 

said a letter attacking the government would be mailed to every 

co-op member in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you don't have to take my word for what I have 

just told the Assembly.  In a speech some four years later, 

Harold Empey said that: 

 

 We agreed to wait at the hotel until 8 p.m. and when they 

came to see us with no acceptable answers, we said it was all 

over.  I remember well promising to tell every co-op member 

in Saskatchewan what had happened. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government then had a choice.  Having gotten 

itself into a real pickle, it could choose to protect the taxpayers 

or it could choose to surrender.  It decided to surrender. 

 

The then premier sent for Mr. Eric Berntson, who was then the 

deputy premier and who was then the campaign manager for 

the Conservative Party in the 1986 election, to sign the 

agreement that FCL had presented.  Mr. Berntson met with Mr. 

Thompson and Mr. Empey on October 10, 1986, 10 days 

before the election, and signed the project agreement and the 

operating agreement. 

 

When they learned of this deal, Mr. Speaker, the federal 

government initially refused to sign it.  In effect the deal was 

too bad for Brian Mulroney to accept.   However after a few 

more months of negotiations, the federal government was 

brought on board and the final agreements were signed.  These 

were almost identical to the terms that FCL had extracted from 

the government in the midst of the election campaign. 

 

In shaping this deal, Mr. Speaker, neither party is blameless.  

The government of the day had foolishly and irresponsibly 

spent close to $100 million before any project or operating 

agreements were in place.  It was going into the 1986 election 

campaign . . . it was in the 1986 election campaign when it was 

presented with FCL's final offer. 

 

Rather than suffer the political consequences of the project 

collapsing, the then premier ordered his officials to sign the 

deal.  It was not that the government didn't know any better.  

Throughout the negotiations, its officials and advisers were all 

strongly warning against giving in to FCL's demands. 

In a letter to the then premier Mr. Phillip Gordon, an oil 

industry consultant who was serving on the government's team, 

stated that the terms were: 

 

 . . . unreasonable and inconsistent with any standard of 

normal business arrangements, and incompatible with sound 

commercial terms. 

 

When he heard that the project agreements had been signed, 

Mr. Gordon told the premier, and again I quote: 

 

 I felt that you should know, for the record, that I advised 

against signing the Operating Agreement in the form in 

which I last saw it on October 9th. 

 

Despite this advice, Mr. Speaker, the deal was signed. 

 

During the course of negotiations, the government's own legal 

advisers from the firm of MacPherson Leslie & Tyerman stated 

that, and I quote: 

 

 Our general view is that the Operating Agreement as 

presently proposed falls far short of the standards which 

would normally thought to be essential for the adequate 

protection of NewGrade's rights. 

 

Despite this, Mr. Speaker, the deal was signed without the 

major problems identified by the lawyers being rectified. 

 

In 1985 the deputy minister of Energy and Mines at that time, 

Mr. Bob Reid, stated that FCL's demands to gain complete 

operating control should be rejected as "non-negotiable" since 

NewGrade required the ability to monitor operating decisions 

-- and again I quote from Mr. Reid's letter -- "to ensure the 

economic viability of NewGrade and the loan guarantees." 

 

Despite this, Mr. Speaker, the deal was signed with a 

capitulation to FCL's demand for operating control. 

 

So how did such a thing happen?  Clearly there was fault on 

both sides.  FCL put its private interests ahead of the public 

good.  It concentrated on writing into the agreement absolute 

protection of its own interests and a guaranteed profit 

regardless of the viability of the project or its consequences to 

the province.  For its part, the then government weakly 

capitulated to the demands of FCL for their own purposes late 

in the election campaign of 1986. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this was a shocking and disgraceful failure by a 

government in its duty to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan.  This 

is the fundamental reason why we find ourselves in the 

situation that we do today. 

 

So what has been the result of this deal signed by the previous 

administration?  NewGrade, the corporation that owns the 

upgrader, is owned equally by the Saskatchewan taxpayers and 

CCRL.  The taxpayers have invested a total of $234.5 million 

in cash into the 



2150 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1993 

project.  CCRL has put up no cash.  The Saskatchewan 

taxpayers are liable for $360 million in loan guarantees.  The 

taxpayers of Canada are exposed to the tune of $275 million.  

CCRL has no exposure.  Indeed NewGrade must compensate 

CCRL if problems at NewGrade impact on refinery earnings. 

 

The board of directors of NewGrade consist of eight directors.  

Four are nominees from CCRL, three are nominees from the 

Saskatchewan government, and one is a nominee from the 

federal government.  However CCRL has complete operational 

control over NewGrade's assets and cash flow.  It has sole 

NewGrade cheque-signing authority. 

 

If CCRL management makes a decision with which the 

NewGrade's board, acting in the best interest of NewGrade, 

disagree, there is a dispute settlement mechanism in the 

agreement that was designed to resolve the difference in a fair 

and impartial manner.  It is an arbitration process, and on its 

face it should work. 

 

Since 1989, Mr. Speaker, it has not been allowed to work.  The 

problem is that it takes a three-quarters vote of the NewGrade 

board to refer these issues to arbitration.  As I have said, CCRL 

names half of the board members.  For a period of years 

spanning both the tenure of this administration and the previous 

one, the CCRL board members refused to allow the issues to 

go into the arbitration process.  The issues in dispute include 

whether salaries and equipment costs should properly be 

assigned to CCRL or to NewGrade.  They include what the 

price of the upgraded crude oil sold by NewGrade to CCRL 

should be. 

 

Until last week only one issue was ever allowed to go to 

arbitration.  In 1989 an arbitrator ruled in NewGrade's favour in 

a dispute over the pricing formula for the upgraded crude that 

CCRL was purchasing.  The issue should have meant an 

additional 2 to $3 million per year for NewGrade.  Instead 

CCRL used a different section of the operating agreement to 

change the formula again.  Some estimates of the cost to 

NewGrade are as much as $12 million per year.  CCRL then 

refused to allow this new pricing decision to be arbitrated. 

 

We believe that arbitration of these issues will mean some tens 

of millions of dollars for NewGrade.  If the arbitrator agrees 

with NewGrade's position, it will mean that this money has 

been owing to NewGrade by CCRL for up to four years in 

some cases. 

 

Last week for the first time since 1989 the CCRL board 

members agreed to allow some outstanding issues to proceed to 

arbitration.  We welcome this move, Mr. Speaker.  It does not 

change the fact, however, that a mechanism is needed to ensure 

that this type of impasse does not occur again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are some of the key features of the 

NewGrade deal that was signed by the then government against 

the strenuous advice of their expert advisers. 

So how has the project fared?  According to the corporation's 

audited financial statement, in its first full four years of 

operation, NewGrade has lost $299.9 million.  It lost $59.6 

million in 1989.  It lost $102.3 million in 1990.  It lost $79.4 

million in 1991.  And it lost $58.6 million in 1992.  By CCRL's 

own projections, it is anticipated that NewGrade will lose a 

further $59 million this year.  The projections for future years, 

Mr. Speaker, are no more encouraging. 

 

NewGrade has survived this long for two reasons.  First, the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan have covered cash deficiencies to 

the tune of $80 million.  Second, NewGrade has been rolling 

over its debt.  In four and a half years of operation, not a penny 

of principal has been retired.  In the meantime, the physical 

plant is depreciating and wearing out.  This is not a state of 

affairs that can go on for ever. 

 

If the differential between light and heavy crude oil drops, if 

interest rates rise, or if there is any unscheduled production 

interruptions, the project will immediately have major cash 

deficiencies and could default.  A default would mean that the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan would have to honour the loan 

guarantees and pay the lenders $360 million. 

 

To put this figure in context, it is approximately equal to the 

sum total of tax increases and expenditure cuts in this year's 

budget.  The interest costs on this money would be well in 

excess of $30 million per year. 

 

Even if all were to go well, Mr. Speaker, NewGrade has no 

realistic prospect of retiring its debts.  This means that when 

the plant wears out, all of the debt will remain outstanding and 

must be paid by the taxpayers. 

 

This analysis of the project is not just ours, not just the 

government's.  The members of the Financial Management 

Review Commission noted that, and I quote: 

 

 The province has an investment that is not performing up to 

its original expectations and which could hold future 

financial risk. 

 

(1515) 

 

The members of the Gass Commission went on to note that, 

and again I quote: 

 

 The Province's ability to monitor the performance of this 

project and to work with its joint venture partner (CCRL) to 

reduce its financial exposure is severely restricted under the 

agreement. 

 

Mr. Justice Estey, after looking at this issue in detail for some 

five months, had an even more chilling conclusion.  He stated 

that: 

 

 . . . the project has, in a financial sense, run aground.  

Operating at capacity, it cannot sustain the existing debt load. 



June 2, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2151 

By this, Mr. Estey said that NewGrade, and again I quote: 

 

 . . . cannot generate, at present levels of operation, a cash 

flow which will pay out the outside debt as to both principal 

and interest.  Furthermore, at no stage in the foreseeable 

future will cash flow of the Upgrader, by itself, service the 

interest and principal charges falling due on the guaranteed 

debt, even when operating at full capacity, which is now the 

case. 

 

Mr. Justice Estey also drew attention to one other fact.  I will 

quote him at length, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 The last remaining bedrock circumstance is the practical and 

prudent limitation felt by Saskatchewan in continuing to 

expose itself to the infusion of public funds into a venture in 

which Saskatchewan will ultimately be required to turn over 

one half of the profits to a non-governmental agency (FCL) 

which has made no capital contribution to the venture, and 

which has made no contribution to the very serious losses 

suffered by the taxpayers of Saskatchewan.  Such an 

imbalance of investment and return was in all probability far 

from the minds of the contracting parties in 1986 when the 

project took its final form in the Agreements executed in 

December of that year. 

 

Given the amounts of money at stake, Mr. Speaker, and the 

importance of the refinery-upgrader complex to our province's 

well-being, and the imbalance between the rights and benefits 

between the parties, the government has no alternative but to 

act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we've tried in every way possible to solve these 

problems.  Shortly after this administration took power and 

after the initial warning sounded by the Financial Management 

Review Commission, government officials and ministers 

approached CCRL and FCL officials to attempt to negotiate 

changes to the NewGrade agreements that could save the 

project and protect the interests of the taxpayers.  Our desire, 

Mr. Speaker, was to work together with CCRL to place 

NewGrade on a financially sound footing so that jobs could be 

protected, so that the exposure of taxpayers could be limited, 

and so that the refinery-upgrader complex could continue to 

provide crucial products and income flow to the retail co-op 

network. 

 

Our efforts to renegotiate the terms of the agreement were 

rebuffed.  As a consequence, we appointed former Supreme 

Court Justice Willard Estey as a commission of inquiry to 

examine the project, to mediate between the parties, and to 

propose solutions.  At the time, FCL and CCRL officials 

welcomed this choice and lauded Mr. Justice Estey's 

well-grounded reputation for fairness and impartiality.  Mr. 

Justice Estey worked tirelessly for five months to mediate a 

settlement.  He did not succeed.  As a result, he issued a report 

in which he outlined his recommendations that could save this 

vital project. 

Before discussing Mr. Justice Estey's recommendations, I want 

to touch on the fundamental principle that those 

recommendations are based upon.  Mr. Justice Estey stated 

that, and I quote from his report: 

 

 The Commission has explored all possible avenues which 

will ensure the continuance in Western Canada of what is 

now clearly a viable and valuable petroleum refining facility.  

While FCL may benefit from a rescue of the operation, 

Saskatchewan will benefit equally if the reorganization of 

NewGrade brings to an end the very serious drain on the 

resources of Saskatchewan.  At the same time, these two 

results must be brought about without exposure to FCL to a 

systemic risk which would place a financial stress on the 

far-flung valuable Co-operative development headed by FCL 

and its many Co-operative units and affiliates upon whose 

welfare the community of Saskatchewan is very much 

dependent, as indeed is the welfare of the member 

Co-operators in the other Prairie provinces and British 

Columbia. 

 

Mr. Justice Estey framed his recommendations to accomplish 

three fundamental objectives: (1) to ensure the survival of the 

refinery-upgrader complex; (2) to ensure that the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan and Canada are treated fairly; (3) to ensure that 

the cooperative system is not put at risk.  Mr. Speaker, this 

government endorses these objectives completely. 

 

Mr. Justice Estey stated that there were a number of issues that 

needed to be addressed in order to accomplish these objectives.  

These were that the project needs a cash injection from CCRL 

and the federal and provincial taxpayers; secondly, provision 

for any future cash deficiencies to be met on an equal basis 

between CCRL and the Saskatchewan taxpayers; third, a 

resolution to the issues awaiting arbitration and a workable 

arbitration process for the future; and fourth, a resolution to the 

problems inherent in the governance in the NewGrade project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, even though Mr. Justice Estey's recommendations 

would mean additional expense to the Saskatchewan taxpayers, 

the provincial government is willing to implement these 

recommendations. 

 

We believe that the NewGrade upgrader is too important for 

the government to allow it to fail and that the proposals are fair 

to all three partners.  We further believe that the proposals will 

ensure that the co-op movement will not be threatened.  Indeed 

it will continue to benefit from that project. 

 

The Hon. Bill McKnight, on behalf of the federal government, 

has expressed some misgivings about the amount of the federal 

contribution recommended by Mr. Justice Estey.  However Mr. 

McKnight has indicated that the federal government will be 

willing to make a substantial contribution if the province and 



2152 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1993 

CCRL do likewise and resolve the other problems facing the 

project.  We have no problems with this federal position, Mr. 

Speaker, and we applaud the commitment of Mr. McKnight 

and the federal government to this vital project. 

 

However despite strenuous efforts, we have not been successful 

-- we have not been successful in convincing CCRL and FCL 

to accept Mr. Justice Estey's recommendations.  All our efforts 

to reach an acceptable negotiated settlement have been 

rebuffed. 

 

FCL has presented a proposal that partially addresses the issue 

of a cash injection.  This proposal would result in $50 million 

into NewGrade, instead of the $80 million proposed by Mr. 

Justice Estey.  However the injection of the money is 

conditional upon the taxpayers paying another $15 million per 

year until all of NewGrade's debt is paid off. 

 

FCL's proposal would mean that Saskatchewan taxpayers 

would contribute $180 million more than Mr. Justice Estey 

proposed.  This is more than the taxpayers of this province can 

afford. 

 

The FCL proposal was also conditional upon the outstanding 

issues being withdrawn from arbitration.  If this were to occur, 

the cost to NewGrade could be substantially more than the $50 

million cash injection which FCL proposes to make. 

 

Last week, as I have already said, Mr. Speaker, FCL allowed 

the outstanding issues in dispute to proceed to arbitration.  This 

is a welcome step, since both this administration and the 

previous administration had been trying to get some of these 

issues arbitrated since 1989.  However CCRL and FCL have 

not provided us with the assurance that future disputed issues 

will be arbitrated in a prompt and expeditious manner. 

 

Just as seriously, there has been no movement on the question 

of provision for future cash deficiencies.  Satisfactory 

resolution of the arbitration process and cash deficiencies is 

fundamental to ensuring the future of the NewGrade project.  

The provincial government must address these two questions if 

it is to honour our responsibilities to the taxpayers of this 

province.  That leaves us with no choice but to proceed with a 

legislative solution. 

 

I want now to turn to the content of the Bill that is before us 

today.  The legislation is designed to protect the taxpayers' 

interests respecting NewGrade and to ensure the project's 

survival.  It does this by setting out a solution to the two 

problems I've just discussed -- a workable arbitration process 

for the resolution of disputes, and the sharing of liability for 

losses.  It also gives the government the capacity to act if 

necessary to protect the financial viability of the project or to 

ensure that it can function. 

 

Before I go on to describe the details of the legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, I must say that it, that is the legislation, will not solve 

all of the problems at the upgrader.  For example, it does not 

deal with the matter of the injection of additional money into 

the project.  As I've 

already noted, that was one of the central recommendations of 

the Estey report. 

 

It is clear that without a significant injection, this project will 

not succeed.  It is, however, beyond the capability of this 

legislature to create a comprehensive solution.  This can only 

be achieved through negotiations between FCL and the federal 

government and the provincial government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members will note that there are three major 

provisions in this legislation.  The first, outlined in sections 3 

and 4, deals with dispute resolution.  These provisions are 

designed to ensure that NewGrade is able to have disputes with 

CCRL arbitrated in a prompt fashion.  It was drafted because of 

the difficulties in reaching arbitration over the past four years 

to which I've already referred.  As I've also mentioned this is 

necessary because the existing provision has not been allowed 

to work. 

 

Section 3 states that the Crown Investments Corporation can 

submit disputes to arbitration.  In addition, because of the 

conflict inherent in CCRL's position as both the operator of the 

upgrader and one of the parties to the arbitration, this section 

specifies that CIC will conduct NewGrade's side of the 

arbitration while leaving CCRL's officials free to represent the 

interests of their corporation. 

 

Section 4 states that if the arbitration process outlined in the 

current operating agreements is unreasonably frustrated or 

delayed, the Lieutenant Governor in Council can modify the 

rules and procedures to ensure that arbitration proceed 

promptly. 

 

It is important to note that these sections will only have effect 

if the arbitration process outlined in the operating agreement is 

frustrated.  If CCRL continues its very recent practice of 

allowing arbitrations to proceed, these sections will simply not 

be needed and will not be utilized. 

 

The second major provision, which is outlined in section 5, 

provides for an equal sharing of any cash deficiencies suffered 

by NewGrade.  This matter was omitted from the original 

agreements, perhaps in a fit of optimism that losses would 

never occur.  Clearly, Mr. Speaker, this omission cannot be 

allowed to stand. 

 

I draw your attention to the remarks made on this issue by Mr. 

Justice Estey who stated that, and I quote: 

 

 The Agreements are silent as to any source of funds to meet 

cash flow deficiencies on either a short-term or a long-term 

basis. 

 

And Mr. Justice Estey goes on to observe that, and again I 

quote: 

 

 Saskatchewan has not covenanted in any of the Agreements, 

to make such deficiency payments to NewGrade in 

Perpetuity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we believe that the survival of 



June 2, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2153 

NewGrade is so important that we are willing to make a 

commitment to our share in perpetuity, but we will not commit 

for more than is fair to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 

 

CCRL and the taxpayers of Saskatchewan will have equal 

liability for losses which reflect their equal ownership 

positions.  We believe it is only fair that partners share 

potential losses in the same way that they share potential 

profits. 

 

(1530) 

 

It is ludicrous, Mr. Speaker, for anyone to suggest that in all of 

these circumstances that I've outlined to the Assembly, all of 

the losses should fall only on the taxpayers of this province.  

This is especially so when you recall that this entire operation 

is under the sole and exclusive control of CCRL.  The kind of 

efficiencies and cost controls that would be necessary to 

eliminate losses at NewGrade are therefore beyond the control 

of the government.  There is no direct financial incentive for 

CCRL to eliminate losses.  There should be, Mr. Speaker, and 

by this provision there will be. 

 

Section 6 of the Bill provides the mechanism through which 

NewGrade can collect from CCRL its share of any cash 

deficiencies.  Section 7 provides that, in the event that CCRL 

fails to meet its obligations, the Government of Saskatchewan 

can make the payments in order to prevent a default by 

NewGrade and then in turn collect from CCRL. 

 

The final substantive provision in this legislation is found in 

section 9.  This provides that the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council has the power to amend NewGrade's project or 

operating agreements.  This provision is extremely serious, and 

the section specifies that these powers can only be utilized if 

they are necessary to protect the financial viability of 

NewGrade or to ensure that the corporation can be properly 

governed. 

 

Why do we feel that this is necessary?  Mr. Speaker, as we 

have seen, FCL and CCRL have almost total operational 

control over this project.  They could even attempt to force 

NewGrade into default.  I stress again that in the event of 

default, under the current agreements, FCL is protected from 

all risk while the taxpayers would pay all costs. 

 

I am not suggesting, Mr. Speaker, I am not suggesting that FCL 

intends to consciously attempt to force this project into default; 

however, the potential is there.  It could be argued that FCL 

could, in the end, financially gain from a NewGrade default. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we do have some fears in this respect.  As 

recently as May 14, 1993, senior officials for FCL wrote to the 

Crown Investments Corporation on NewGrade letterhead and 

suggested that NewGrade: 

 

 may require funding for costs which would become payable 

if it is determined to temporarily discontinue the operations 

of 

NewGrade. 

 

The letter states that the Crown Investments Corporation, 

which is in fact the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, should be ready 

to pay to pay for such things as the "costs to mothball the 

NewGrade operating assets." 

 

Further, in a discussion with my colleague, the Associate 

Minister of Finance on May 13, 1993, Mr. Vern Leland, the 

president of FCL, raised the possibility that FCL might walk 

away from NewGrade -- walk away from NewGrade. 

 

Mr. Speaker, does FCL have the right to shut down NewGrade 

and stick the taxpayers with the bill?  Our legal advisers tell us 

that they probably do not have this right.  However, based on 

the actions and comments which I have just outlined, they tell 

us that -- and this is the lawyers tell us -- that there is clearly 

some reason for us to apprehend that CCRL intends to try to 

make out an argument under the agreements that it has these 

rights. 

 

Our lawyers went on to advise us that such an action could lead 

to a call on the guarantees which have been provided in respect 

of the NewGrade project by the governments of Saskatchewan 

and the governments of Canada.  They say that one way to 

protect against such a risk would be for the legislation to 

include a section which would enable the cabinet, by order in 

council, to specify modifications to the NewGrade agreements.  

Such a provision could be called in aid if CCRL were to pursue 

the agenda suggested in its recent initiatives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is why section 9 is in the legislation.  It's 

there for the defence of the taxpayers should FCL once again 

place its private interests above the public good and take this 

position to the extreme.  Mr. Speaker, I fervently hope that this 

Government of Saskatchewan will never be forced to make use 

of section 9.  However, in the event that it is necessary, we 

need to be ready. 

 

In addition to the powers given to CIC (Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan) and the government in this 

legislation, there are two other provisions that I would like to 

draw to the attention of the Assembly. 

 

Section 10 specifies that in the event that any cash deficiency 

payments are required, the legislature is to be informed of the 

payments and the reasons for and circumstances surrounding 

the payment. 

 

In addition, should section 9 be utilized to change the project or 

operating agreements, a full report must be made to the 

legislature. 

 

Section 17(2) states that in the event that a satisfactory 

negotiated settlement is reached between Saskatchewan and 

CCRL, the Lieutenant Governor in Council can repeal all or 

any portion of this Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this section reflects the strong desire of 



2154 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1993 

this government for a mutually agreeable, negotiated 

settlement.  It codifies in law our standing offer to CCRL to 

work together to achieve a settlement that can achieve the three 

principles that Mr. Justice Estey based his recommendations 

upon, namely:  one, that the survival of the refinery-upgrader 

complex is ensured; two, that the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 

and Canada are treated fairly; and three, that the cooperative 

system is not put at risk. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are the objectives of the government, both 

in our negotiations and with this legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NewGrade deal is a bad one for the taxpayers 

of Saskatchewan.  In fact it is perhaps the worst of the deals 

entered into by the former government.  NewGrade has lost 

close to $300 million in four years of operation.  It is incapable 

of generating enough money to pay off its debts.  The 

governance structure gives us no assurance that the interests of 

the taxpayers can be protected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the most comprehensive and fairest solution was 

outlined by Mr. Justice Estey.  This is the solution that this 

government would like to arrive at through negotiations.  If this 

is not possible, Mr. Speaker, we must act to protect the project 

and protect the public interest. 

 

We are not breaking the contracts.  We are ensuring that 

contractual mechanisms can be effective and that provision is 

made for such things as cash deficiencies where the original 

agreements are silent. 

 

It is with regret, Mr. Speaker, that it is necessary for the 

government to make this move and with regret that I move 

second reading of this Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, before I address that I'll give way to 

the member from Shaunavon to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: -- The member must ask for himself.  Someone 

else can't speak for him. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- I ask leave for introduction. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to members of the 

Legislative Assembly today some 21 grade 4 students from the 

Shaunavon Public School.  They have teachers, Jim Coulter 

and Greg Balas, and chaperons, Carol Stork, Annette Taylor, 

and bus driver, Barry Sonen. 

 

And I'll be meeting with this group after a while for photos and 

drinks.  And special recognition to my son, Cameron, seated 

there.  I'm sure that he would have words if I didn't say . . . 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 90 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I would have to begin by 

saying this is a very sad day in the province of Saskatchewan.  

One has to wonder about democracy in this province. 

 

Yesterday the member from Regina Rosemont stood in this 

Assembly and introduced a number of guests and then ridiculed 

and criticized Federated Co-op for the undemocratic actions in 

laying off 180 employees in this province.  And yet, then today 

we see the Government of Saskatchewan coming in with 

legislation that again gives it the ability to hold a 

sledgehammer over someone's head while they negotiate or 

attempt to negotiate. 

 

The unfortunate part, Mr. Speaker, is what kind of negotiation 

is taking place?  I believe what we've seen over the last number 

of days and last number of weeks, Mr. Speaker, is a period of 

negotiation where the negotiation has been my way or no way.  

It hasn't really been an open negotiation. 

 

The Premier of the province has stood in this Assembly and has 

said to the people of Saskatchewan and said to the opposition 

members, well I've waited for a phone call all weekend or I've 

waited for a phone call all week.  Well maybe as the leader and 

the Premier of this province he should have initiated some of 

the phone calls.  He should have taken the time to sit down and 

maybe negotiated or tried to work out an agreement or an 

arrangement if indeed the minister responsible, the member 

from Swift Current who he placed in the responsible position 

of negotiating, wasn't able to come to an agreement with 

Federated Co-op. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as well we were sitting in the House here last 

night addressing the Gaming Commission, and the member 

from Prince Albert Carlton stood up in this Assembly and 

made a comment about the openness and about the new era, the 

new age that dawned in Saskatchewan in October of 1991, in 

the way in which the government dealt with the people of 

Saskatchewan, worked with the people to build a better 

province. 

 

We've come to this Assembly today and we ask ourselves, well 

exactly what kind of new era dawned on the people of 

Saskatchewan?  In fact I would think if you talked to people 

across this province today, if you did a poll across this province 

in light of what has taken place over the past 19 months or so, 

or 18 months, you would find the people of Saskatchewan 

would really be asking themselves, really what did we do? 

 

What kind of day dawned upon us on October 22, 1991, when 

we elected a New Democratic 



June 2, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2155 

government, only to have them at every whim and every turn 

take away the basic rights and privileges and freedoms that the 

people of Saskatchewan deserve and rightly deserve? 

 

And we see it in all kinds of pieces of legislation before us.  

Mr. Speaker, there's no doubt in my mind and no doubt in the 

media's mind that the only reason for the Bill before the 

Assembly and the only reason for all the actions that have been 

taken by the government is strictly politics.  And we've seen 

that on numerous occasions.  The motivation was purely and 

explicitly self-serving, electoral politics. 

 

Another media personnel mentioned, if you believe politics is 

at the front of the problem that has been created with the FCL 

agreement, then move to the head of the class.  It would seem 

to me, Mr. Speaker -- and we can go time and again from one 

point to the next -- we can see where the government has 

chosen to specifically pick on areas and agreements that were 

entered into by the former government, the Conservative 

government of the '80s. 

 

And on one hand they criticize the agreements, Mr. Speaker.  

They criticize the agreement with Cargill and the Saskferco 

fertilizer plant out west of Regina here; a plant which is 

employing some 190 more people that didn't have a job in the 

province of Saskatchewan some two years ago, and who 

employed I believe it was in the neighbourhood of 2,000 

people while it was being constructed; a plant that is working 

full tilt; a plant that will be paying its fair share of taxes and 

royalties to this province. 

 

We see this government went and dealt with Weyerhaeuser; 

they opened the Weyerhaeuser agreement.  We see this 

government sitting down with Crown Life, and in fact the 

minister referred to that.  And the minister referred to the fact 

that some of these corporations were willing to sit down and 

renegotiate. 

 

Now it would seem to me one has to wonder if these 

companies, after all the money they had put into building and 

establishing sound and reputable corporations and entities in 

this province, were not sitting down with the government and 

were being fair and reasonable. 

 

But is this government being fair and reasonable with 

Federated Co-op, their own organization, which over the years 

has possibly supported the NDP Party a lot more than it has 

supported the Conservative Party?  Although I would suggest 

in my area there are many members of the Federated Co-op 

movement who happen to be strong Conservatives as well. 

 

(1545) 

 

Co-op members cross all party lines, and it would seem to me, 

Mr. Speaker, that it would be only fair that the government sit 

down and come to a workable agreement without bringing in 

legislation that gives them the ability through CIC (Crown 

Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) to determine 

whether or not the agreement is appropriate. 

And that's why, Mr. Speaker, when we raised the questions 

regarding Bill 42 the other day, we had some major concerns 

because that Bill just instituted a major Crown corporation 

giving a few people in the province of Saskatchewan the ability 

to make some major decisions, going to Executive Council and 

saying this is how we should . . . maybe we should establish a 

new Crown corporation in this area, or we can decide whether 

or not we like the agreements, whether or not the agreements 

we are entering into are fair. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think at the end of the day we are going to 

find that not only have people become very disgusted and very 

demoralized, but as well one has to begin to wonder when we 

are going to see a light at the end of the tunnel, when the 

people who are on the unemployment rolls are going to be able 

to reach out and apply for jobs that are beginning to . . . and 

appearing in the province of Saskatchewan.  Because I just 

don't understand and don't know whether any business person 

or corporation would like to re-establish . . . or establish in the 

province of Saskatchewan in light of the regressive legislative 

that has been introduced over the past while. 

 

In light of . . . view of the fact that is seems like every time you 

turn around . . . and we've even got Bill 55 and Bill 56.  And, 

Mr. Speaker, my colleague raised questions on those two Bills 

and we've had some discussion back and forth.  The business 

community have raised concerns. Certainly the labour unions 

have, and the labour out there has concerns. 

 

And no one is criticizing the fact that we need legislation that is 

fair, that is effective, and that protects employees.  But we need 

fairness for employers as well.  After all, they're the ones 

creating the jobs.  So you begin to ask yourself, where are the 

jobs going to come from?  Who's going to move into this 

province? 

 

On one hand, the Minister of Economic Development and 

Trade gloats in the fact that there are 150 people more working 

in Regina because of the NewGrade upgrader.  Then on the 

other hand the minister talks about it not being a good deal.  

One has to wonder where the justice really is. 

 

And the minister has taken a long time today to lay out his side 

of the argument.  Maybe we should have invited Mr. Leland to 

come to the steps of this Assembly and lay out his side of the 

argument so the people of Saskatchewan can see both sides, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The member from Swift Current who criticizes his own city 

council and his own chamber because he finds it easier to shop 

in Medicine Hat than in Swift Current, now is asking me 

whether or not we should allow that, or the fact that they 

haven't been given that opportunity. 

 

Well I think, Mr. Speaker, Federated has shown and they're 

willing . . . they've shown that they are willing 



2156 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1993 

to go to the people to present their side of the picture as well.  

And yes, the minister gave us quite an overview.  But the 

minister forgot to go back to 1980 and prior to when a number 

of negotiations were taking place at that time with Federated 

Co-op, because the government of the day had looked at or was 

looking at possibly building a heavy oil upgrader.  But they 

were looking at not only building an upgrader, but the fact that 

they would have to also add on a refinery. 

 

And their own studies indicated that to build an upgrader by 

itself and then to add on a refinery would cost a lot more than 

by tying the upgrader to the refinery here, the Federated Co-op 

refinery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that it is only fair that we take the 

time to review the Bill.  And if indeed, as the minister 

indicated, he is willing to sit down . . . his cabinet colleagues 

and the Premier are willing to sit down with Federated Co-ops 

and seriously negotiate, then why not pull the Bill?  Why not 

take a moment to pull the Bill? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Why pull it? 

 

Mr. Toth: -- The member from Swift Current says, why pull 

it?  Well, Mr. Speaker, just look at section 16.  Section 16 of 

the printed Bill, which the minister conveniently forgot to bring 

into the picture about what the Bill was doing, says: 

 

 Every decision of the minister pursuant to this Act and every 

certificate filed by the minister pursuant to this Act is final 

and conclusive and is not open to question or review in any 

court, and no decision made and no certificate filed by the 

minister shall be restrained by (any) injunction, prohibition, 

mandamus, quo warranto, certiorari or other process or 

proceeding in any court or be removable by application for 

judicial review or otherwise into any court on any grounds 

whatsoever. 

 

And section 2 says: 

 

 No appeal lies against a judgment arising from a certificate 

filed pursuant to Part III. 

 

What does that do?  It takes away Federated Co-op's ability to 

really even . . . What it basically says is, either negotiate and 

accept our deal or the legislation is in place to implement a 

deal, and if you dare to challenge it in court, we'll just take it 

away. 

 

Sounds a lot like the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 

debate we had about a year ago -- the debate where 60,000 

farmers had their contracts all of a sudden revoked.  And the 

government decided that it was in their best interest and the 

best interest of the agricultural community to deem that they 

actually had a contract in place and that the the changes in the 

legislation were deemed to have been in place by the 

appropriate time, and since they weren't . . . At the same time, 

Mr. Speaker, remember the debate that took place and the fact 

that that piece of legislation 

also took away the farmers' ability to go to court.  It just kicked 

the feet right out from underneath them. 

 

And I see what's taking place in this Assembly today, Mr. 

Speaker -- much the same thing.  We see GRIP '93 actually 

arising.  And it will be interesting to see where it all shakes out. 

 

Now certainly, Mr. Speaker, I would hope that the government 

and Federated would be able to work out an amiable and 

agreeable solution to the problem.  And I think it's fair.  There 

isn't anyone in this province who isn't saying that it wouldn't be 

right and appropriate to come to a fair and equitable agreement. 

 

Now on this side we can . . . And the minister has nodded his 

approval, and I can appreciate that.  But, Mr. Speaker, when 

you look at the agreement, what we as an opposition must do is 

look at what the government is bringing forward to this 

Assembly, look at the legislation they're putting before this 

Assembly and ask ourselves, is this the appropriate way to deal 

with an action where a government finds itself in a position 

where it isn't agreeable with, say, a group that it is working 

with?  Or should we work a little harder to come to an 

agreement? 

 

One has to ask themselves, why the hurry?  Why do we need 

the legislation today?  Would it have been possible, Mr. 

Speaker, to allow Mr. Estey to work even a little while longer? 

-- to take 10 more days, or two weeks, or a month?  Is it 

possible, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. Estey could have come to an 

agreement? 

 

We've been informed that Federated was in the process in 

dealing with Mr. Estey and had opened their books to Mr. 

Estey, that they felt they were in the process of coming to a 

workable agreement.  And yet the member from Swift Current 

laughs, the Associate Minister of Finance laughs.  Is that how 

he shows his contempt for the people of Saskatchewan, for 

Federated, for their board of directors, for the 240,000 

members across this province?  And those 240,000 members, 

Mr. Speaker, may represent some 500,000 people in the 

province or even more.  How many families?  Not every 

member of a family is a member, but how many people are 

represented by Federated Co-ops? 

 

It would seem to me, Mr. Speaker, that there is a fair bit of 

debate that we are going to enter into.  There are a number of 

questions that we must enter into, we must take the time and 

raise. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in order to allow for a greater perusal of the 

legislation that is before us, and hopefully to allow for the 

process of negotiation to take place so that at the end of the day 

the minister . . . and I would ask the minister if they can 

successfully sit down and realistically work out an agreement 

with Federated Co-ops if they pull the Bill.  I would trust that 

before this House adjourns, Mr. Speaker, this Bill is pulled 

from this Assembly. 

 

I don't believe it's necessary.  I believe it's possible. 



June 2, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2157 

And I believe there's time for the Minister and the Associate 

Minister of Finance to sit down and if need be, even bring in a 

mediator to sit down with them to find a common working 

agreement.  And I would ask the minister to give some serious 

thought to that.  And as I've indicated earlier, before this House 

adjourns, Mr. Speaker, I trust that we do not have to really pass 

this piece of legislation before the Assembly.  I think it would 

be appropriate that that would take place. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, the piece of legislation is here.  We're 

going to have to take a little more time to peruse the legislation.  

Therefore I move adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 39 -- An Act to amend The Education Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Seated behind me is Arleen Hynd, 

deputy minister, I think known to many members of this 

Assembly; to my left is Rene Archambault, executive director 

of the official minority language office, I am told, and indeed 

correctly; Michael Littlewood, director of board and teacher 

services; and Tom Irvine, Crown solicitor, constitutional law 

branch, is seated behind me. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister.  

What we have here today is a move to establish a third school 

board.  This third school board would be additional to the 

public system that we already have in place and additional to 

the separate system that is already in place.  And it would be a 

school board designed mainly, or totally, for those parents who 

wish to have their children educated totally in French based on 

their own views of what that educational system should be. 

 

We already have within Saskatchewan, French being taught 

within the schools.  Not just the French that . . . or the French 

in a manner that was taught many years ago in high school, but 

a totally immersion French, or a French of a total nature within 

the school system where the entire school day is taken up with 

French other than those classes which might be English 

language. 

 

So when this new school board as being outlined by the 

minister comes forward, there will not be a great deal of 

change in the minds of many people in this province from what 

is already available in the province; that the French education 

will still be comparable to what is currently being offered, but 

it will be done through a different mechanism. 

 

(1600) 

 

And one of the concerns we have with this, Mr. Minister, and 

one of the concerns that a good majority of the people in 

Saskatchewan have is the financial burden that is going to 

place on the people of 

Saskatchewan, on the taxpayers not just of Saskatchewan, but 

the taxpayers of all of Canada.  Because in this legislation part 

of the funding will come from federal monies which we all pay 

into as taxpayers -- not just taxpayers of Saskatchewan but 

taxpayers of Canada. 

 

And that's one of the concerns that we have with the proposal, 

is how is that funding going to be accomplished and where will 

those monies come from. 

 

One of the other funding concerns that has been expressed to us 

is what happens when those facilities and those students are 

withdrawn from either the public or the separate system, 

moved into the third school board. 

 

What happens in the public and the separate system when they 

lose students and when they lose facilities?  If they don't lose 

facilities, where are the facilities going to come from for the 

new school system? 

 

Where this move originates from is from the charter of rights 

for this country.  And I'd like to read to you section 23 of the 

charter.  It deals with minority language educational rights: 

 

  Section 23. (1) Citizens of Canada 

 

  (a) whose first language learned and still understood is that 

of the English or French linguistic minority 

population of the province in which they reside, or 

 

  (b) who have received their primary school instruction in 

Canada in English or French and reside in a 

province where the language in which they received 

that instruction is the language of the English or 

French linguistic minority population of the 

province, 

 

 have the right to have their children receive primary and 

secondary school instruction in that language in that 

province. 

 

 (2) Citizens of Canada of whom any child has received or is 

receiving primary or secondary school instruction in English 

or French in Canada, have the right to have all their children 

receive primary and secondary school instruction in the same 

language. 

 

 (3) The right of citizens of Canada under subsections (1) and 

(2) to have their children receive primary and secondary 

school instruction in the language of the English or French 

linguistic minority population of a province 

 

  (a) applies wherever in the province the number of 

children of citizens who have such a right is sufficient to 

warrant the provision to them out of public funds of 

minority language instruction; and 



2158 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1993 

  (b) includes, where the number of those children so 

warrants, the right to have them receive that instruction in 

minority language educational facilities provided out of 

public funds. 

 

This is the piece of the charter in which the court decision was 

based which said in Saskatchewan minority language 

instruction should be provided for citizens who met section 23 

qualifications under the charter.  It did not say that these people 

had to be parents who would put their schools . . . excuse me, 

their children into such a school system, but parents who 

qualified under this charter right.  No place in there does it say 

they have to put their children into the system to be able to 

participate in the development or organization of such a school 

system. 

 

And that is part of what this Bill is trying to do.  It is going 

beyond what the court case suggested and what the charter of 

rights suggests.  And that is another one of those concerns that 

a good number of parents, a good number of francophones in 

this province have, that the way the legislation is drawn up, 

they will be excluded from having a say in the system.  They 

will be excluded because they may not necessarily agree with 

the establishment of a third school board.  Therefore if they do 

not promise . . . or if they do not place their children within that 

school board, or promise to place their children within that 

school board, they have no right to express an opinion one way 

or the other, on the establishment of such a school board. 

 

The way this Bill is drafted, the only ones that have the right to 

have a say on the establishment of a third school board are 

those parents who qualify under this charter and who will put 

their children into that system. 

 

Now if you disagree with the establishment of that system, why 

would you want to place your children in that system?  But if 

you disagree and if you do not place your children there, you 

have no right under this legislation to comment or be part of 

the process.  And that is wrong. 

 

Also part of this Bill as it's drafted, people who have their 

children in French education, in primary or secondary school 

instruction, but whose first, primary language was not French 

have no rights to participate in this piece of legislation or in the 

third school board as it would be structured.  And again that 

does not meet the criteria as outlined in the Canadian charter of 

rights. 

 

So while you may be basing your argument and need for this 

piece of legislation on the court decision based on the Canadian 

charter of rights, section 23, you are not even following the 

outlines and the guidelines as set out by section 23 of the 

charter of rights. 

 

You are being exclusionary.  You are excluding people from 

participating in this third school system because a small group 

of people have a fear that if the larger francophone community 

in this province is allowed to 

have a say in the establishment of this third school board that 

indeed it might not come about. 

 

In Gravelbourg, which is acknowledged as the centre of 

francophone culture within this province, a large number of 

people, a very large number of people within that community 

do not support the establishment of a third school board.  I have 

a large number of letters.  I have petitions from people in that 

community, in that area, who do not support this legislation, 

and I will be tabling those later. 

 

In a survey conducted by the local Gravelbourg school board 

which represents the community of Gravelbourg which 

represents an area of approximately five miles around the 

community of Gravelbourg, in a survey in that community the 

overwhelming majority of people did not support the 

establishment of a third school board.  I can't remember exactly 

what the numbers were but they were higher than 80 per cent 

of the people surveyed.  And those surveys went out to the 

general population, the parent population of that community. 

 

So even in that community which is, I would suggest, the 

centre of French culture within this province, the support is not 

there for this particular piece of legislation. 

 

There are a group of parents in Gravelbourg who do support it.  

And when you look into who those parents are, the vast 

majority of those parents are teachers from College Mathieu 

and the Gravelbourg School Division who emigrated here from 

outside of Saskatchewan. 

 

Across the province there are other communities who are also 

going to be affected by this.  In my own community . . . not my 

own particular community but in my constituency the 

community of Bellegarde, which is not that far from where I 

live -- I have a good number of friends there -- they are unsure 

whether or not they will join this third school board.  They are 

interested in it, but they're still unsure whether or not they will 

participate.  And they have a school that goes from K to 12 in 

French, approximately 130-some students at the present time.  

They are part of the Arcola School Division. It works; there are 

problems, but there are problems with all small schools within 

a larger school division.  You can't point at a particular school 

and say they are having a problem within their division because 

they are a French school.  You can point at certain schools and 

say they are having a problem within their division because 

they are a smaller school, but not because they are French. 

 

In the case of the Bellegarde School, there are certain things 

that they do want to have, and they do have some legitimate 

beefs that they have not received some considerations over the 

last 30 and 40 years because they were a smaller school or 

because 30 and 40 years ago there was prejudice and biases 

against French Catholic schools. 

 

That happened not only there; that happened in other locations.  

And that happened not just because you 



June 2, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2159 

were French; that happened for other reasons, because of the 

small "p" political games that were being played within various 

school divisions.  And those still go on. 

 

But there are a good number of people in this province, Mr. 

Minister, who do not feel that at this time this is the appropriate 

legislation.  We are seeing cut-backs in the public system; we 

are seeing cut-backs in the separate school system.  We see 

cut-backs to funding to the universities, to SIAST 

(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) -- 

across the board in the educational system. 

 

And yet you're proposing to spend a significant amount of 

money to develop a new third school system while all those 

children are already being educated.  And a good number of 

those children are being educated in the language of their 

choice and that being in French. 

 

Those children will not be denied the access to French 

education under the current system.  They do have access.  So 

the people of Saskatchewan question the need to have this 

particular school board put in place at the present time. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, I'd like to ask you: why do you feel it is of 

paramount importance at this time of financial constraints to 

develop a third school board when the majority of people in 

this province feel that this is not the time to do so? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would 

like to respond briefly to the member's comments opposite. 

 

Let me at the outset say that many of the things which the 

member has indicated are very much correct, that there are 

certain obligations that the province has -- which has been 

outlined by the member opposite and which I'm going to refer 

to from other sources other than the ones that he quoted -- 

which indicate that what is being done here today with these 

amendments to The Education Act dealing with French 

governance are being done, quite frankly, far later than they 

should have been done. 

 

And so in addressing the question that the member talks about, 

what is the correct time, if I may ask that question.  I suppose 

one could answer that the correct time was 1988.  Because 

since 1988 unfortunately -- and I'm not laying blame anywhere; 

this is not an easy issue to deal with -- but since 1988 the 

province of Saskatchewan has been in contravention of the law.  

It's been in contravention of the charter of rights.  It's been in 

contravention of the court judgements which have been made 

in Saskatchewan, the Court of Queen's Bench, which ruled that 

a form of French governance was required. 

 

And it seems to me even though the arguments are made about 

the financial situation and the difficulties that we face as a 

people and as a government and as school boards is there, that 

surely the legislature of 

Saskatchewan should be the last jurisdiction, should be the last 

place in which we contravene a law, especially a law as 

important as one which has been ruled on by the Supreme 

Court of Canada. 

 

In the Manitoba case the Supreme Court of Canada confirmed 

very clearly that the provinces have a constitutional obligation 

to create minority language education systems and should do so 

as quickly as possible.  And it's important for the member to 

listen to this because he raised this question, and I think it's a 

very legitimate question about the minority. 

 

The court said, and I'm going to quote: 

 

 The rights provided by section 23, it must be remembered, 

are granted to minority language parents individually.  Their 

entitlement is not subject to the will of the minority group to 

which they belong, be it that of a majority of that group, but 

only to the "numbers warrant condition." 

 

So the Supreme Court has addressed that question and has 

provided that ruling and given that direction. 

 

Coming back again to the question of when is the right time, I 

want to say as others have said -- and clearly the Supreme 

Court has made it very clear -- that if the provinces fail to act, 

the courts may ultimately order the creation of francophone 

school systems, creating the clear possibility of a struggle 

between the provincial governments and the courts. 

 

I think the member opposite would agree with me and I think 

probably in this whole legislature we could agree that we 

should not, and we should not want the courts to be running our 

schools.  There have been judgements, I believe in Ontario, 

where the court ordered the building of a school on this very 

issue.  I don't think that we should be putting ourselves in that 

kind of a situation. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are doing now something that everybody over 

time has agreed that it should be done.  I have here a letter from 

the Leader of the Liberal Party who wrote in 1992, who clearly 

wrote and gave full support to the passing of this legislation.  I 

know that members of the Conservative Party . . . and I'm not 

being critical when I say this, I'm just offering what I think are 

constructive comments on why I think that this is an important 

issue and has in many ways been above the politics.  Because 

in 1989, former minister of Education, Lorne Hepworth, made 

it very clear that francophones in Saskatchewan should have 

control and management of some French schools by the start of 

the 1990 school year.  And then he said, and I quote: 

 

 These measures will go a long way towards meeting the 

legitimate aspirations of Saskatchewan francophones with 

respect to their education needs. 

 

And others who have been in important positions 



2160 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1993 

have said the same.  The former premier made it very clear in a 

letter on July 24, 1990 to Mr. Allan Sincere of Gravelbourg 

when he said that the province remains pledged to its 

constitutional obligations and fully respects the Canadian 

Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 

 

Now I hope the members recognize that in using these quotes 

I'm not being critical of anyone.  And I know the member in his 

comments has not been critical either.  He's asking some very 

legitimate questions.  The fact is that there comes a time when 

duly elected members of any legislature must carry out the 

responsibilities for which they were elected to carry out.  And 

that's why we have before this legislature today this legislation 

which meets the requirements of the charter of rights, meets the 

requirement of the Wimmer decision of the Court of Queen's 

Bench in Saskatchewan, and meets the requirements of the 

Supreme Court of Canada, which has made it very clear what 

has to be done. 

 

But let's put aside the legalities.  There is also the question of a 

moral obligation because of the nature of Canada and the kind 

of country that we are.  And I do believe, speaking for myself, 

and I know for my colleagues, that we do also have a moral 

obligation to provide this opportunity to the second official 

language people of Canada.  And that's why we are here and 

that's why we have got this Bill to the committee and why I am 

speaking in favour of it. 

 

Now there's one question the member asked which I want to 

briefly address, and that is the question of funding, because it is 

a very important question.  There will not be required any 

additional provincial funding under this system.  Keep in mind 

it's a permissive system.  A community of people, as a group or 

as individuals getting together, can decide to set up in a 

community a school of French governance.  They will get the 

same amount of funding as the regular school system, and it 

simply will be the same students but under a different 

governance.  There will be no additional provincial funding. 

 

Now there are some additional costs.  Those additional costs 

are going to be provided under an agreement signed not by us, 

so I can't take any credit for that, but signed by the former 

government with the federal government which will provide 

$13.4 million over 5 years to carry on those additional costs. 

 

And I'm pleased to report to the legislature that further to that, 

there now has been an agreement formally indicated by the 

federal minister, Monique Landry, who has indicated that there 

will be an additional $112 million in Canada - 

_ and next week I understand the negotiations will begin -- for 

further funding for these purposes. 

 

So I hope that that answers the question that the member 

opposite has asked from the point of view of what the funding 

situation is going to be. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I find some of your 

comments to be quite interesting.  I find it very 

interesting that you would talk about the court action in that the 

government is bound to follow the court action.  And perhaps 

that explains why, in recent legislation within this legislature, 

last year in GRIP and this year with the NewGrade legislation, 

that you're denying people the right of access to the court 

system.  Because you don't want to have to listen to what the 

courts have to say in those particular pieces of legislation, so 

you deny them the right to have access. 

 

And then you turn around and you talk about the moral 

obligations that you as a government have to the citizens of this 

province; that you have the moral obligation to provide them 

with their charter rights in the case of French language 

education, but that you don't have the moral right to allow them 

their rights under the charter to access to the courts to seek 

redress. 

 

Mr. Minister, you can't have it both ways.  Either you have a 

moral obligation to support the charter of rights, which 

includes minority language and which includes the right to 

have access to the court system, or you do not support it. 

 

If you wish to use the argument that you are forced to do this 

because you have a moral obligation to do it, then you have a 

moral obligation to allow people access to the courts to deal 

with the legislation you are bringing forward in this legislature. 

 

Now the court actions are indeed in place.  And because of that 

court action, the previous government instituted a commission, 

a report, the Gallant report, to deal with French language 

education within this province, and at the same time that you 

and your colleagues were touring the province saying that the 

government was spending too much money, that the previous 

government was creating too much debt. And now when you're 

government you're saying that the previous government spent 

too much money and bankrupted the province. Now you're also 

saying that we should be spending more money to meet that 

court action, the obligations brought forward by the court 

action. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, prior to the election you're saying that the 

government was in some areas spending too much money; in 

other areas you're saying they're not spending enough.  And 

now that you've won government you're saying that the 

government is bankrupt, that this province is bankrupt, and yet 

you want to spend more money on what some people in this 

province would consider not necessary. 

 

So how do you justify that action, Mr. Minister, in the light of 

the statements made by your Premier, by your Minister of 

Finance, and by yourself that this province is bankrupt?  How 

do you justify standing up here and spending additional funds 

on a third school board? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm glad that the 

member raised the matter of the Gallant report, because I 

wanted to in my earlier remarks comment on it and I neglected 

to do that. 



June 2, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2161 

I appreciate that the Gallant report was an excellent piece of 

work and an excellent report.  And I say that not because I was 

on this side of the House at the time that report was put 

together; it was another government that initiated that study.  

It's an excellent piece of work because it is truly, Mr. 

Chairman, an indication and an example of how we do things 

in Saskatchewan -- do things in a cooperative way through 

consensus making. 

 

And every part of this Bill, Mr. Chairman, is based on the 

recommendations of the Gallant report which was a consensus 

of all of the partners in the education system and the 

community at large.  It was a consensus and an agreement 

reached by the school trustees association, by the teachers' 

federation, by the department, by the francophone parents, and 

everybody who had a role to play.  And as a result of that 

process and that report and its recommendations, we have 

based the legislation on that. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, I repeat again that the province will not 

spend additional money under this system that's being proposed 

here.  The province will accommodate whatever is required 

under the existing funding arrangements that are there now and 

under the existing foundation grant formula and the foundation 

grant system and the amounts of money that are allocated there.  

Any additional monies that are required when a school with 

French governance is established is going to be provided by 

agreement by the federal government. 

 

Now the member opposite may say, well that's still spending 

more money.  Well the point is, Mr. Chairman, that if it was 

not for this, none of that federal money would be available to 

Saskatchewan.  As a matter of fact, because of the delay in the 

implementation of this legislation, I believe the province has 

already lost eleven and a half million dollars, eleven and a half 

million dollars which is no longer available. 

 

So I want to make it very clear to the public and clear to the 

member opposite that there is no additional provincial money 

that is required to be spent in setting up the system.  There is an 

agreement with the federal government that they will pick up 

the additional amount of money as is required, because we're 

required to do this.  And that agreement was negotiated in 

1988.  It's been there since then. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'm surprised 

that you mentioned the loss of . . . what you consider to be a 

loss of $11.5 million to this province.  Because last year you 

left $40 million on the table under GRIP.  That didn't seem to 

bother you at all.  Again it's one of those situations of the 

double standard, it seems, where if it's something you want, 

then there's an excuse for doing it and if it's something you 

disapprove of, then it's fine to leave the $40 million sit there. 

 

One of the things that is brought forward, Mr. Minister, when 

we talk about the $13.5 million that will come from the federal 

government over the next 

five years or the potential for another $112 million across 

Canada for francophone education, is that it comes from the 

taxpayer.  And it doesn't matter, Mr. Minister, whether you're 

paying that tax to the provincial government or you're paying it 

to the federal government, it's still one single taxpayer.  And 

that taxpayer, Mr. Minister, is not happy today to be paying for 

extras that they are not sure need to be in place at the present 

time. 

 

We have recognized the fact that under the charter, the 

francophone school governance system, that they have a right 

to that.  And we have never said that they don't have.  And 

that's why the member from Estevan, the previous premier, 

instituted the Gallant commission to study French governance.  

And that's why the previous minister of Education under the 

previous government supported it, because we do recognize 

that right. 

 

But at the present time, we do not feel that there is the financial 

viability within Saskatchewan to support it because there is still 

only that one taxpayer to pay the bill.  And it doesn't matter 

whether the cheque is signed by yourself or signed by the 

Minister of Finance for Canada; it all comes out of the pocket 

of that one taxpayer. 

 

And that is where the dispute lies, Mr. Minister, with those 

taxpayers.   They don't feel at the present time that this is the 

right time to do this.  That down the road some place, when the 

economy turns around, when you do get those jobs that you 

keep promising in Saskatchewan that never seem to appear, 

then perhaps we can afford this, Mr. Minister, but not at the 

present time. 

 

The people in the public system, the parents whose children 

will be affected by this Bill, by the implementation of the third 

school board, have a great deal of concern because when you 

establish that separate, that third school system within a small 

community, there may only be one school facility within that 

community.  If that school is transferred over to a third school 

board, what happens to the anglophone students within that 

school?  Under the Bill as you've proposed it, they would not 

be allowed to attend the third school board even though they 

may wish to.  They are going to have to be transported some 

place else. 

 

What happens in the communities where the children are taken 

from a small school and transported down the road to a French 

school and the school in the community with the anglophone 

school loses a significant portion of their population, and 

programs are cut because of that, teachers are let go, or the 

school is closed?  How do you answer to those parents, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Let me respond to the member's 

opposite comments first of all, Mr. Chairman.  If the conseil 

scolaire and the school division in which this other unit will be 

existing agree 



2162 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1993 

that other students who are presently in a French program want 

to participate in the educational opportunity offered by the 

school that is under French governance, that's an arrangement 

that can be made. But they're going to have to work this out 

between them, and that's how it should be. 

 

I don't disagree with the member opposite whether the money 

is spent by the province or by a municipality or by a school 

board or by the federal government, that somehow it's a 

different taxpayer.  It is the same taxpayer; nobody will dispute 

that. 

 

But I will dispute the question that the member asks that he's 

not sure whether we need to have the system in place at the 

present time.  Because quite frankly, in my opinion, I believe 

we do.  It's a system that should have been in place in 1988.  

Because it wasn't in place, Mr. Chairman, we have lost eleven 

and a half million dollars of federal dollars, money that the 

Saskatchewan taxpayer contributed to the federal treasury 

which we didn't get.  So we've lost that. 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, every year that we delay, we continue to 

lose more of that federal funding so that eventually the hundred 

per cent of the cost will be a cost of the Saskatchewan 

taxpayer. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Oh, so there will be a cost. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well yes, if you don't have this 

legislation and if the court imposes a decision which imposes 

what we have to do, as has happened in other jurisdictions, if 

we don't proceed with this, the court may very well do what it 

has done in other jurisdictions and say to Saskatchewan, you 

have to put it in.  Here's exactly the way you have to do it.  

Forget about the Gallant report which is a consensus 

recommendation, and you fund 100 per cent. 

 

So in some ways one could argue, I say to you, Mr. Chairman, 

and to the members opposite, that this in fact is protecting -- if 

you want to view it on that narrow argument of tax dollars 

from the taxpayer -- protecting the Saskatchewan taxpayer by 

proceeding with what is required by the charter of rights, 

required by decisions of the Court of Queen's Bench in 

Saskatchewan ruling, required by the ruling of the Supreme 

Court of Canada. 

 

There is no good or bad time.  It's a question of doing what has 

to be done and doing what is right.  And on both of those 

counts, this is an appropriate Bill. 

 

I think we're fortunate in this province because the Bill is based 

on an agreement that has been made by all of the partners and 

the stakeholders in the education system -- school trustees, 

teachers, francophone parents, and other organizations.  I 

would not want it any other way because that's the way the 

school system in Saskatchewan has always operated, on the 

basis of that partnership. 

 

And I'm proud of the fact that this Bill recognizes that 

partnership and brings forward proposals and legislation and 

amendments which implement a 

decision that was reached among all of those partners who said, 

this is the way it needs to be done.  We wanted it done this 

way.  Let's get on with it so that we don't have to be doing it in 

some other way like the imposition of something totally 

contrary to what we want by a court ruling which could come 

at another time.  Maybe sooner, maybe later, but it could 

happen.  And I don't think that would be doing the 

Saskatchewan taxpayer any favour. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I 

don't believe that a good percentage of the people of 

Saskatchewan believe you when you're saying that you're doing 

this to protect the Saskatchewan taxpayer and get the $11.5 

million from the federal government, because last year, as I 

stated earlier, you left a minimum of $40 million federal money 

on the table when it came to GRIP. 

 

You also stated that there's a consensus across the board of all 

the educational organizations in this province to support this.  

And indeed that was the circumstances in the past. 

 

But your government has done a very good job in one 

particular area.  You have convinced the public of this province 

and the organizations that indeed the province is bankrupt.  

And because of that, last year at the annual meeting of the 

Saskatchewan trustees association, they voted not to support 

third French school boards in this province.  So you no longer 

have that consensus, Mr. Minister. 

 

The group that represents both the trustees and the parents of 

the separate system and the public system have voted not to 

support this legislation because they recognize that at the 

present time it's not financially viable. 

 

And in my previous question I asked you, what do you do with 

the system when a school closes in a community because 

students have been transferred out of that community to 

another school and there's no longer the student population left 

within that community to support the school and then those 

children are going to be transported some place else?  Would 

you respond to that too please, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I am informed 

that there will be not that kind of an impact because all of the 

children who are likely to become part of this new system, if 

they so choose, already are in separate school systems.  So the 

impact on existing school divisions will be negligible and in 

some cases none at all. 

 

For example, there is a case of a school in Regina, 

Monseigneur DeLaval, which is a separate system altogether, 

will have no impact on the school divisions in the city of 

Regina.  So the answer to the question is, minimal or no impact 

at all. 

 

I want to also respond to the earlier comment that the member 

made at the initial . . . (inaudible) . . . of his remarks about the 

Saskatchewan School Trustees Association and I want to 

assure the House the 



June 2, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2163 

Saskatchewan School Trustees Association continues to sit as 

part of the task force which is working on the implementation 

of the system. 

 

And this is true, that at the last SSTA convention there was 

some debate about an earlier decision which the SSTA had 

been made, but the SSTA has made a decision to agree to the 

recommendations of the Gallant commission report, has 

supported them, and continues to sit as part of the task force 

because they know that this is a process that has to take place. 

 

The Chair: -- Clause 1?  I'm sorry I didn't recognize the 

member. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Sorry for 

standing behind the Clerk's head there and not getting in your 

view. 

 

I did want to say a few words before we passed out of clause 1, 

about this Bill.  Because while my colleague has done a very 

excellent job of presenting the positions of most of the people 

of Saskatchewan, the feeling in my personal constituency is so 

strong on this matter that I would not be doing my job as an 

MLA if I didn't echo their sentiments and their feelings to the 

minister in charge. 

 

It will largely of course be based on the same propositions that 

my colleague has done, but in my words and in the reflection of 

the people who have put me in my seat in this Assembly. 

 

I've done a bit of a survey, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, in 

our area.  And quite frankly, the truth of the matter is that I 

haven't been able to find one person in my constituency that 

supports the move of this legislation -- not one.  I have had 

many people tell me that they oppose what is happening here; 

they are against it.  They give me a variety of reasons, most of 

which my colleague has pointed out. But I have not had one 

person from my constituency say that you, the government, are 

right in doing this Bill. 

 

They cite the economic difficulties of our province and of our 

country.  They particularly dwell on that issue.  That is the 

major concern.  The fact that it is federal money has not fazed 

them one bit. 

 

People have become very educated in the realities of the cost of 

our world and the cost of taxation. And every one of them, to 

the last person, has said it doesn't matter whose dollars you 

waste in forms of taxation, whether it's federal dollars or 

provincial dollars, you're wasting dollars that are going to come 

out of my hip pocket because I'm the taxpayer.  That's what 

they tell me, and I relate this to you. 

 

Every person says just because you're getting money from the 

federal government to waste is not advantage to Saskatchewan.  

They say, if you're going to get federal dollars from Ottawa, 

even though we've paid them in our taxes, get them back to 

Saskatchewan to use on something that is good to fight the 

depression that we are in -- even if it's just for fighting fires in 

the North so that we can alleviate some of the 

responsibility of the deficit that this government may incur in 

that area.  More readily, they would like to see farm support 

programs, obviously because that's the biggest base of the 

economy of my constituency. 

 

And I do have a question to you, Minister, directly.  My 

colleague mentioned that -- and I have observed this as well -- 

that a small group of lobbyists have been very visible in this 

whole confrontation about this Bill and this process; a small 

group of lobbyists that have been described to you as a group 

of people who are affiliated to the teaching profession in 

Gravelbourg.  And the observation, Minister, was made that 

these folks have immigrated to Saskatchewan from Quebec. 

 

And I would like to know whether or not you would confirm 

that this is the lobby group that is the most prominent to have 

presented the views in favour of this proposition to both the 

opposition members, my colleague, as well as to government 

members.  Would you confirm for us that that in fact is a true 

statement that my colleague has made. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Could you repeat the question . . . 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- The minister has asked me to repeat the 

question.  Obviously he doesn't think what we have to say is 

very important on this issue because he can't pay attention long 

enough to hear what we've got to say. 

 

For your benefit, Minister, my colleague has pointed out to you 

that a particular group of people affiliated with the teaching 

profession from the town of Gravelbourg have been the 

strongest and most predominant and visual group of people 

who have lobbied in favour of this particular change in this 

legislation.  I would like to know if you confirm that the people 

that have met with our opposition members, as well as the 

government, are in fact that group, and if you would identify 

them as being that group. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I really think 

that that -- I put this in the most positive sense that I can -- is an 

unfortunate statement.  Because there is no substance to what 

the member from Maple Creek is saying, and I think he knows 

that.  And that's why I think it's unfortunate.  Because this is 

not the kind of debate that is necessary on this kind of an issue. 

 

And since the House understands that there are certain court 

requirements, requirements by the constitution, I think it's an 

obligation on all of the members of this House, regardless of 

political affiliation, to explain to their constituents, as I have 

attempted to do -- I think with some success -- that there is 

certain things in Saskatchewan that we must do to meet our 

obligations. 

 

I don't think it's a waste of money to meet these obligations.  I 

think it's a good expenditure of taxpayers' dollars to provide 

opportunities to the people of this Canada . . . of this country of 

Canada, according to what the constitution said is their right. 



2164 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1993 

Now in responding directly to the member's question, because I 

know it has been raised before, and maybe I should say 

probably quite honestly by the members, because I think they 

must . . . may have misunderstood or not known the full 

numbers of people who've been involved in this process.  So I 

will provide who these people are.  There is the president of the 

APPF (Association provinciale des parents fransaskois), Mr. 

Gérard Le Blanc, who was born in St. Denis, formerly in my . . 

. former constituency.  There's the executive director of the 

ACFC (Association culturelle franco-canadienne de la 

Saskatchewan) who is Florent Bilodeau, is born in 

Saskatchewan, is president of the association; also, Mr. Denis 

Magnon, a Saskatchewan citizen, been living here for 25 years.  

All francophone members on the task force are Saskatchewan 

born francophones. 

 

(1645) 

 

Now that is not to say that there are some people in 

Saskatchewan who have moved here from other places and we 

should welcome them with open arms because that's what 

Saskatchewan's all about -- people from other places.  That's 

what makes this place so special, at least to me it does, and I 

think it does to most Saskatchewan people. 

 

So to say that somehow there is a small group of people from 

one . . . some other place other than Saskatchewan that have 

been spearheading this, I want to say to the member, would not 

be a correct conclusion to the question that he asks.  There's a 

far broader number of people, almost all Saskatchewan people 

who either have been born and raised here and have raised their 

families here or have lived here for a considerable period of 

time. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you didn't answer the 

question directly, but indirectly you told me that in fact my 

colleague has identified a real fact.  I didn't ask you who the 

task force was that came up with the recommendation that 

favoured rubber stamping what you initially set out to 

accomplish and wanted to justify, I asked you who the primary 

lobby group was and what people were on that primary lobby 

group. 

 

And what you've basically told me is the fact that those people 

are a small group of people from Gravelbourg who are 

affiliated with the teaching profession who for the most part 

have immigrated to Saskatchewan from Quebec.  They have 

come to this province with their ideals of a Quebec 

French-based nation, and they are trying to promote that.  I 

don't fault them for wanting to do that because it's in their best 

interest, in their minds, to do that. 

 

However, of those people -- perhaps 5, 10, maybe 15 folks -- 

they express the view that favours their very minority group.  

And they express an opinion that we should adopt in our 

province a program that will serve 1 per cent of our population 

at the very top.  That's even stretching it from the figures I've 

been able to get out of my research.  You correct me where I'm 

wrong. 

And I know you'll have figures that are different; you'll say 3 

per cent. 

 

The reality is though that most French-speaking people don't 

want this program because we can't afford it.  They accuse your 

government of trying to buy champagne on a beer budget at a 

time when we're broke and need to spend the money in other 

places. 

 

And quite frankly, sir, I agree with them.  I'm not saying that 

it's wrong to have champagne.  I'm not saying it's wrong to 

have a French school board.  But you've got to be able to afford 

it.  And you can't afford it and the taxpayers can't afford it and 

we shouldn't be doing it at this time. 

 

And realistically, sir, constitutions do change.  I remember a 

time in my short lifetime when French school boards were not 

required by the Constitution of Canada.  And obviously 

governments may recognize that we can't afford these luxuries 

and they may change the constitution in the future again to 

reflect that. 

 

I'm going to let this go on.  I think my point has been made.  

And we do for the expediency of time, sir, have to get on with 

other business in this House.  So I will let you off the hook 

with that.  And I want my constituents though to know that I 

lodge my strongest protest to the way that you're wasting the 

money of this province. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I almost 

forgot one very important item.  And I would like to table these 

letters from the people across the province.  And this is mainly 

. . . these letters are from the Gravelbourg area, opposing the 

implementation of the third French school board.  I'd like to 

table them now, please.  Thank you. 

 

One comment on the minister's statements earlier, was that the 

opposition was holding things up and we were wasting . . . 

losing money in this province that could be federal money. 

 

The previous minister of Education introduced this Bill last 

year.  But for some reason the government chose not to pass it.  

The government chose to pass the new GRIP legislation which 

allowed $40 million to escape from the hands of Saskatchewan 

farmers, and yet they accused the opposition of holding this 

legislation up because if we did it might allow $11 million to 

escape from the hands of the province.  Well, Mr. Minister, I 

would suggest to you that $40 million would have gone a lot 

further than the 11 million you're talking about now. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 agreed to. 

 

Clause 3 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have an 

amendment to propose to this clause.  I would like to read the 

amendment. 



June 2, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2165 

 Amend clause 3(g) of the printed Bill by deleting subclause 

2(w.1)(iii) and substituting: 

 

  "(iii) who meets the criteria establishing minority language 

educational rights for citizens of Canada as set out 

in section 23 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms;". 

 

Mr. Chairman, this amendment will allow all section 23 people 

to participate in the establishment of the third school boards, to 

make the determination amongst themselves whether or not 

they wish to have a third school system developed within their 

area. 

 

The way that the government has written this piece of 

legislation, it would only allow those parents who meet section 

23 criteria, who will be putting their children into the system, 

to have a voice in that system.  And it's my belief, Mr. 

Chairman, that to be democratic, to follow our democratic 

ideals, to follow the charter as written, the Charter of Rights 

and Freedoms as written in this country, that all francophones 

who meet this charter, the section 23, requirements, should be 

allowed to participate in the decision to establish or not to 

establish, as they choose, a francophone school system within 

their district. 

 

By making this amendment, this would allow those people to 

participate in the system which they are being excluded from 

under the legislation as presented by the minister.  I move this 

amendment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I appreciate what the member is 

attempting to do here, but I'm going to ask and advise the 

House that this amendment is not appropriate or required and 

therefore I'm going to ask the House to vote against it. 

 

I remind the House that the Supreme Court has ruled on the 

Manitoba case, that under section 23 this is an individual right, 

not a group right.  And the legislation as it is proposed here 

follows that.  The people who have worked on this legislation 

are lawyers who are familiar with constitutional law.  So the 

amendment that is being proposed here is not necessary 

because . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Too many lawyers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well sometimes we might agree 

with that, but they're important anyway. 

 

The legislation as proposed in (w.1) and (iii) already sets out 

the criteria included in section 23 of the charter, and therefore I 

would submit, Mr. Chairman, to the Chair and to the House, 

that the proposed amendment is redundant and we should not 

be proceeding with it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, a good many people 

of this province would disagree with you.  I talked today to the 

director of education for the Gravelbourg School Division, and 

she felt it was very 

important that all section 23 people be allowed to participate in 

the establishment of these school boards.  It doesn't deny 

people access; it allows inclusion. 

 

Your legislation denies access to be part of this legislation 

because throughout this whole Bill, the definition of a minority 

language adult is paramount that they have children within the 

system.  And it should be, Mr. Minister, that it is a section 23 

person who is allowed to participate in the decision-making 

process within this legislation -- not the fact that they may or 

may not have a child within that school system, but that they 

meet the requirements as set out under the Charter of Rights 

and Freedoms. 

 

And those people are individuals that want to have access to 

that process.  You're denying individuals the right.  You're 

saying because you make that individual choice not to 

participate in the system you will be denied the voice to say 

yea or nay to what happens to the development of the system.  

Not because they are anglophones, not because they're German, 

not because they're some other nationality or ethnic group, but 

because they have chosen not to participate in the system, they 

will be denied the voice.  And those are the individuals you 

wish to deny, Mr. Minister. 

 

And I would ask you to seriously reconsider, because these 

people have the democratic right in this country to participate, 

and you wish to deny them.  The Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms clearly gives them the right to participate.  It's only 

this legislation that denies that.  And I ask you to seriously 

reconsider that, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Not to speak at any great length, I 

just want to assure the House, Mr. Chairman, that this 

provision provides and sets out the criteria which is included in 

section 23 of the charter as it exists and has been proposed. 

 

The Chair: -- The question before the committee is the 

amendment moved by the hon. member from 

Souris-Cannington.  I want to thank the member as well for 

providing in advance the number of amendments and to help 

determine that they're in order and ask you that with the 

additional amendment that you wish to move, if you'd put your 

remarks and then in conclusion move the amendment, to be 

consistent with our format in the House. 

 

The division bells rang from 4:57 p.m. until 4:58 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Toth 

Muirhead D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

Boyd  

-- 7 

Nays 



2166 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1993 

 

Tchorzewski Whitmore 

Shillington Flavel 

Teichrob Roy 

Kowalsky Scott 

Carson Wormsbecker 

Penner Crofford 

Lorje Stanger 

Calvert Keeping 

Murray Carlson 

Hamilton Langford 

Trew Jess 

-- 22 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have 

another clause to deal with, section 3.  And this deals with the 

definition of a voter as outlined by the Bill.  And as the Bill has 

it, a voter is someone who has a child to be enrolled within the 

francophone school system. 

 

And I would propose an amendment that it be a parent who has 

a child that can be enrolled, and this would allow a broader 

aspect of the community to participate in the system rather than 

defining it simply as someone who is part of or who wants to 

be part of the school system.  It can be somebody in the 

community who meets the criteria as outlined, by a minority 

language adult that has a child who could be enrolled, rather 

than a child that is enrolled. 

 

So I would move the following amendment, Mr. Chairman: 

 

 Amend clause 3(o) of the printed Bill at paragraph 

2(tt)(iv)(A) by deleting "to be enrolled" and substituting: 

 

 "can be enrolled". 

 

I so move, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Pardon 

me for . . . I needed to consult with some of my advisers. 

 

But once again I'm going to ask the House to defeat this motion 

for the following reason.  And that is that this would extend the 

voting rights to all minority language adults in an area, not just 

those who are participating in that particular school, and 

therefore the control would no longer be in the hands of the 

parents who wish to enrol their children in a Fransaskois 

school.  You could have a situation where the majority of the 

people voting were not having any children in that particular 

school nor having an interest in sending their children to that 

school.  And clearly, Mr. Chairman, that would not be 

appropriate. 

 

I remind the members again that the Supreme Court has said 

that the rights are individual rights, not the rights of a group or 

a majority.  And therefore for those reasons, I would ask the 

House to defeat this amendment. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

Clause 3 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 4 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 8 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have an 

amendment for this clause dealing with time frame for which to 

seek damages from an individual who through some 

wrongdoing has caused some harm to the école scolaire.  Under 

the Bill, the government has proposed one year as being the 

time frame in which damages must be sought.  I would like to 

extend that to three years.  I believe that three would be a more 

appropriate number. 

 

Why let a person escape from the system if their problems have 

not been discovered within a one-year period?  I believe that a 

three-year time frame would be much more appropriate, Mr. 

Chairman, Mr. Minister.  So I would move the following 

amendment: 

 

 Amend clause 8 of the printed Bill: 

 

 (a) at subsection 14.6(1) by deleting "after the expiration of 

one year" and substituting: 

 

 "after the expiration of three years"; 

 

 And 

 

 (b) at subsection 14.6(2) by deleting "from the day that is one 

year" and substituting: 

 

 "from the day that is three years". 

 

I so move, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Once again, Mr. Chairman, I 

respect the member's interest and proposal in this, but once 

again I regret that I have to inform the member that I am going 

to ask the Assembly to vote against this amendment. 

 

What is in the present Bill, Mr. Chairman, is the standard 

procedure that exists in legislation now.  One year is the 

current limitation for boards of education.  This amendment 

would move away from what is the established practice and 

what is in the established legislation.  And besides that, Mr. 

Chairman, really three years under these kinds of issues is an 

exceptionally long time and is far too long for a period for a 

limitation of actions.  And therefore I must once again urge the 

members of the House to defeat this amendment. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have 

another amendment for clause 8, and this deals with petitions in 

clause 8.  The government has included the provision for 

petitions but they have not defined who is eligible to sign a 

petition or to make a petition.  I would like to have that 

clarified within the Bill, Mr. Chairman. 



June 2, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2167 

And this is what my amendment would do.  I would like to: 

 

 Amend clause 8 of the printed Bill at clause 14 . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  The hon. member for 

Souris-Cannington is trying to put an amendment before the 

committee and I ask members to give him the courtesy of being 

heard when he's doing that. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like 

to: 

 

 Amend clause 8 of the printed Bill at clause 14.61(1)(g) by 

adding immediately after "receive petitions" the following: 

 

  "from the voters of a proposed francophone education 

area". 

 

Voters are already defined in the Act, so that would be clear as 

to who would be allowed.  I would like to move that 

amendment, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  A brief 

comment simply is that this would create a group right which 

would be inconsistent with the court decisions and therefore 

could be challenged.  And I don't think that therefore it would 

be the appropriate amendment, and I would ask the Assembly 

to oppose this amendment. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 8 agreed to. 

 

Clause 9 agreed to. 

 

Clause 10 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I believe that 

this particular amendment and some of the ones to follow are 

very reasonable amendments and will not in any way affect the 

minister's concern for court jurisdictions. 

 

This amendment would allow the people in the community to 

know and understand what is happening within their particular 

communities.  Under the government's legislation when it talks 

of notifications of the establishment of a third school board, 

when people are petitioning to have that third school board 

established, the law provides, this Bill provides, that that 

notification be provided only in French. 

 

My amendment, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, would provide 

for that notification to be made in both Canadian official 

languages, that being both in French and in English.  I think, 

Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, that is a very reasonable request, 

and I see no reason why it should not be accepted. 

 

I would like to move the following amendment: 

 Amend clause 10 of the printed Bill at clause 21.1(a) by 

deleting "French or English" and substituting: 

 

 "French and English". 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the 

member's comments about his view that this is a reasonable 

amendment, and I'm not going to comment on that except I 

think it would not be an appropriate amendment because you 

have to remember that this is enabling legislation.  If a French 

governance school system or board wishes to publish in either 

English or French or both, they can do that.  But we should not 

require and force that it be done in both languages any more 

than we would require or force by legislation an English school 

system to have to publish in both English and French because, 

if we accept this amendment, we're setting a double standard. 

 

And I think that, Mr. Chairman, that obviously should be clear.  

I'm sure it's clear to you that that would not be an appropriate 

amendment, and therefore I'm asking the Assembly to oppose 

it. 

 

The Chair: -- Before we take the vote, I would remind the 

minister that it's not appropriate to involve the Chair in the 

debate in the House. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have 

another amendment which I consider to be also very 

reasonable, and I would find this one very difficult for the 

minister to turn down.  He's going to have to come up with 

some very convoluted logic to do so. 

 

This section of the Bill calls for the establishment of a . . . the 

proposal to establish a third school board to be advertised in a 

local newspaper.  It calls for that notification to be placed once 

in that newspaper. 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, to place such an ad once could mean that 

the ad could come out on a particular day and the meeting 

could be held that evening or the next day and not give people 

sufficient time, sufficient notification, to be aware of the events 

that are happening within their community. 

 

My amendment would provide that it would have to be placed 

in that newspaper three times.  This would allow everyone 

within the community to have adequate notice that something 

was happening within their community dealing with the third 

school board.  And I believe that people should have a proper 

amount of time to become aware of such things.  Even within 

other official forums in this province there are more time limits 

than simply one advertisement. 

 

So I would move the following amendment: 

 

 Amend clause 10 of the printed Bill at clause 



2168 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1993 

21.1(a) by deleting "at least one issue of a newspaper" and 

substituting: 

 

 "at least three issues of a newspaper". 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Once again, Mr. Chairman, this 

would be contrary to what we're trying to implement here and 

that is following the principle that The Education Act applies 

equally to any school jurisdiction that is in existence in the 

province of Saskatchewan and not make exceptions. 

 

It presently is in The Education Act that if a separate school is 

going to be established, there is a requirement for one 

publication.  The proposal in this Bill is exactly the same as 

what presently exists in the Act.  If we were to agree to this 

amendment, then, Mr. Chairman, I say through you to the 

members of the Assembly, we would be inconsistent with how 

it applies in other school jurisdictions as in the case of the 

establishment of the separate school.  And I really think that 

that would not be appropriate.  It would once again make two 

classes, which is something I'm sure the members opposite 

would not want to see created, and therefore I am asking the 

members to oppose the Bill. 

 

And I do apologize, Mr. Chairman, for referring to the Chair 

earlier. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I will continue to 

attempt to convince the government of the error of some of 

their ways.  This amendment would ask that the . . . in the 

proposal to establish a third and a conseil scolaire within an 

area, a third school within an area, that when the advertisement 

is placed to let the public know that an event is happening that 

it describe the proposal rather than simply saying that a 

proposal has been made, that it describe the proposal and 

outline that proposal, the boundaries of the proposal, etc. 

 

(1715) 

 

So I would read this amendment: 

 

 Amend clause 10 of the printed Bill at section 21.1 by 

adding immediately after clause (a) the following: 

 

 "(a.1) cause a notice of their intention and, as far as is 

possible, a description of the proposed francophone 

education area to be published in the French and English 

language in at least two consecutive issues of the 

Saskatchewan Gazette, with provision for the public 

hearing of objections from any voter resident in the 

proposed francophone education area; and". 

 

I so move, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Once again, Mr. 

Chairman, I'm advised that this would turn the process into 

once again a group rights issue and under section 23 it's an 

individual rights issue and therefore the amendment is 

unacceptable and once again could be challenged and 

overturned, and therefore I urge that it be defeated. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  This 

amendment deals with the number of people who can make a 

proposal to establish a francophone school within their area.  

The minister talks all the time of group rights versus individual 

rights and under his criteria it would seem that if a single 

individual comes forward and proposes a francophone 

education area, that that single individual should be allowed to 

establish or ask for the establishment and have it established a 

francophone school system within his district without any 

regard to the numbers that may wish or may not wish.  And 

clearly within the Charter of Rights and Freedoms it outlines 

where sufficient numbers warrant. 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, where sufficient numbers 

warrant means that there should be more than one.  Under your 

proposal you have proposed more than one.  You have 

proposed two.  Mr. Chairman, I would submit, Mr. Minister, 

that two is not sufficient.  And I believe that to at least be 

somewhat reasonable financially that a minimum of 10 should 

be the criteria. 

 

So I would move the following amendment, Mr. Chairman: 

 

 Amend clause 10 of the printed Bill at subsection 21.1(1) by 

deleted "Where two or more" where it appears in the 

general words preceding clause (a) and substituting: 

 

 "Where ten or more". 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, once again I'm 

going to have to suggest that this amendment be defeated 

because it is clear, as I indicated in our first exchange in 

consideration of this Bill, that there were certain requirements 

that were clarified and imposed by the Manitoba decision of 

the Supreme Court.  And in that decision it makes it very clear 

that a number such as 10 could be challenged in the courts as 

arbitrary.  That has been made very clear by the Supreme 

Court. 

 

In Manitoba they had a requirement for 23.  Because they had a 

specific number, it was struck down.  And this is simply . . . 

And I want to go further and say that under this provision that 

we're considering in this section, this is simply an initial notice 

of interest.  It does not mean that two parents can force the 

establishment of a francophone education area.  It's simply a 

notice.  And because of the legalities and the Supreme Court 

decision and because it is not an establishment of a school 

system, I want to suggest 



June 2, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2169 

that the House should defeat the amendment. 

 

The Chair: -- Question.  The amendment moved by the 

member for Souris-Cannington was not worded precisely the 

same as the sheet I have before me.  So let me read the 

amendment I have before me for the information of the 

Committee, and I'll ask the member for Souris-Cannington to 

follow carefully to see if I have got the accurate record. 

 

 Amend clause 10 of the printed Bill at subsection 21.2(1) by 

deleting "Where two or more" where it appears in the 

general words preceding clause (a) and substituting: 

 

 "Where ten or more". 

 

Is that correct?  That is the amendment before the committee.  

Are you ready for the question? 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I had three 

other amendments dealing with clause 10 that . . . because the 

minister has already refused to accept them, I see no real point 

in bringing them forward.  So I would move on to amendment 

0-39-10(h). 

 

This clause deals with the proposal to have a francophone 

school set up within a community and how the public becomes 

involved in this.  And I would . . . I'm anxious to hear how the 

minister is going to define this as a group right or an individual 

right.  Because it asks that a public hearing take place within 

the community before the establishment of a francophone 

school board takes place. 

 

I move the following amendment, Mr. Chairman: 

 

 Amend clause 10 of the printed Bill at subsection 21.5(1) by 

deleting "who submitted the proposal" and substituting: 

 

 "of the proposed francophone education area in a public 

hearing". 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The member made my point for 

me.  Once again, Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendment 

incorporates the idea of a group right.  It is not acceptable, 

because section 23 talks about individual rights and therefore 

this would be contrary to section 23 of the charter and the 

ruling of the Supreme Court, and therefore should be defeated. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 10 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 11 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 16 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  This deals 

with the . . . again comparable to another clause 

earlier where the Bill states "has a child who is to be enrolled . . 

."  I believe that should be who "has a child that could be 

enrolled" in the francophone school system, when it comes to 

making determinations as to part . . . of being part of the 

process. 

 

I would move the following amendment, Mr. Chairman: 

 

 Amend clause 16 of the printed Bill at clause 33.2(2)(d) by 

deleting "is to be enrolled" and substituting: 

 

 "could be enrolled". 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Once again, Mr. Chairman, I will 

be brief.  The current Bill will allow only parents to be 

candidates in the first election of a conseil scolaire.  For 

subsequent elections, minority language adults who are not 

parents with school children will be allowed to stand as 

candidates.  For the first election, it is important that parents 

who are committed to the francophone component be part of 

the election.  I think that that's a legitimate argument to defeat 

the amendment and leave the proposed Bill as it is. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 16 agreed to. 

 

Clause 17 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  This deals 

with who is eligible to sit as a trustee on the board of the 

conseil scolaire.  The Bill proposes that a member would cease 

to become eligible to sit as a trustee if he failed to enrol one of 

his children on the school board.  If he is eligible to have his 

children on the school board, if the voters of that proposed area 

select him to be on that school board, Mr. Chairman, we don't 

see any reason why he should not be allowed to continue to 

stand on that school board, providing he maintains good 

standing within the community. 

 

My amendment would allow him to do just that.  One of the 

clauses that the government has proposed is that if he ceases to 

own property within the district, he would no longer be allowed 

to sit on that school board . . . or not own; I should say, to be 

resident on a land within that school board.  I believe that is 

reasonable, that you should be residing within the area that you 

wish to represent. 

 

But the fact that the person no longer has children enrolled in 

the system should not disqualify that person from being part of 

that school board when the parents of the area have already 

chosen that person as their representative.  And my amendment 

would allow that person to remain there until his term has 

expired. 

 

I would move the following amendment: 



2170 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1993 

 Amend clause 17(d) of the printed Bill at clause 34(e) by 

deleting subclauses (i) and (ii) and substituting: 

 

 "ceases to be a resident on the land that is in the francophone 

education area under the jurisdiction of the conseil scolaire 

to which the person was elected as a member."; and" 

 

I so move, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I think maybe the 

member misunderstands what the provision here really is all 

about.  This is a case where a parent has indicated that they or 

he or she will enrol their child in the francophone school.  Then 

if that parent decides after the establishment that they're not 

going to enrol their children in that school, then this provision 

would apply, for example.  And I think that that's really quite 

reasonable. 

 

A member of conseil scolaire must vacate office if the member 

either moves or fails to enrol the child.  I don't think that that is 

an unreasonable provision.  They do not have to violate both 

requirements before they must resign from the board, the 

conseil. 

 

And so I think, Mr. Chairman, I want to again suggest to the 

members of the House that the amendment is inappropriate and 

should not proceed. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Chairman, if I might make a 

suggestion that we proceed from clause 17 to clause 195 

inclusive on the vote. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Clause 17 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 18 to 195 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 196 agreed to on division. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move 

that the Bill be reported without amendment. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to thank the member, the 

critic, and other members who have spoken on this, and the 

opposition.  And I want to thank my staff as well for the 

assistance that they have provided here.  I want to thank the 

member opposite for his contribution.  Although we don't agree 

on some of this, I respect the views and the feelings that 

members opposite have.  Obviously with the amendments that 

we've considered there's been some considerable work done in 

the preparation of them, and I appreciate that. 

 

So I want to once again thank everybody involved for 

proceeding with this Bill which, in my opinion, is an extremely 

important Bill; something that I think is doing in Saskatchewan 

a very important thing that is long overdue.  And we should all 

be proud of the fact that it is proceeding and correcting a wrong 

that has 

existed for a long time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair: -- I will remind visitors in the galleries that you're 

not allowed to participate in the proceedings of the Assembly. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like 

to thank the minister's officials for coming in today and aiding 

him in Committee of the Whole.  But I must say that I'm 

disappointed that he was unprepared to accept some of our 

amendments which I felt were very reasonable amendments 

and which could have made this Bill better in the view of a 

good number of people in this province.  It would have made it 

a more democratic Bill rather than simply being exclusionary 

and including only very few people in this Bill. 

 

I would like to thank the minister for his cooperation in 

answering some of the questions, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 39 -- An Act to amend The Education Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 

be read a third time. 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and fellow 

members of the legislature.  I want to take my place here today 

very briefly to speak in support of this particular Bill.  I think 

it's been a long time coming and certainly I think for 

francophone parents right across the province it's something 

that certainly I'm sure they're going to cherish, and it's going to 

be a very important part of the future of francophone 

community and the viability and the expansion of the French 

minority in this province. 

 

The reasons I support this Bill, certainly number one is I 

believe that Saskatchewan has a constitutional right as outlined 

in the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, section 23, towards the 

official minority in Saskatchewan.  I think that's number one. 

 

But secondly, most importantly, Mr. Speaker, I support this 

particular piece of legislation because as a francophone MLA 

and also a parent of francophone children in Saskatchewan, I 

can tell you that the assimilation rates and the pressures being 

placed on the French minority in this province are incredible as 

evidenced by the latest report from the Commissioner of 

Official Languages in Canada.  I think it demonstrates quite 

clearly that we as the francophone minority need some kind of 

tools to protect us against assimilation and promote . . . 

preserve and promote our culture and our language. 

 

I want to take this opportunity though to thank the former 

minister of Education, Carol Teichrob, for the great amount of 

work she did . . . Oh, sorry. 



June 2, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2171 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I believe the member realizes he 

cannot use the proper names of the individuals but refer to 

them by their constituencies. 

 

Mr. Roy: -- I apologize to you and the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As I was saying, I want to thank the former minister of 

Education for the great amount of work she has done. 

 

M. le président et mes chers homologues dans la législature.  Je 

voudrais vous remercier pour me donner l'opportunité de me 

mettre debout ici aujourd'hui pour brièvement parler un peu sur 

le projet de loi qu'on va passer ici aujourd'hui.  Certainement 

c'est très important pour les francophones, la minorité 

francophone dans la Saskatchewan d'avoir un outil comme on a 

aujourd'hui ici. 

 

La gestion scolaire va être très important dans le 

développement de la minorité francophone dans la province de 

la Saskatchewan.  Comme j'ai dit tantôt on voit après le rapport 

le commissaire de les langues officielles du Canada, M. 

Goldbloom, que des taux d'assimilation dans le Canada sont la 

pire dans la Saskatchewan.  Alors ça démontre très clairement 

que on a besoin des outils comme la gestion scolaire.  C'est une 

chance pour nous les francophones d'être capable de gérer nos 

propres systèmes d'éducation et pour nous ça c'est très 

important. 

 

Je vais vous dire comme le seul député francophone dans la 

législature et aussi un parent francophone avec des enfants qui 

vont à une école franchise, mais malgré tous nos efforts comme 

parents et certainement comme le système d'éducation comme 

on a, on a accord, on voit clairement que nos enfants ont de la 

difficulté à garder leur langue et à garder leur culture. 

 

Alors je supporte ce projet de loi complètement.  Je suis très 

heureux d'annoncer à mes . . . les gens francophones dans la 

province, je suis très fier de leurs dire que aujourd'hui c'est une 

journée très importante pour eux dans leurs vies et dans le 

développement de la communauté francophone. 

 

Alors je veux aussi dire un grand remerci à l'ancienne ministre 

d'éducation pour le dévouement, l'ouvrage qu'elle a fait pour 

avancer ce projet de loi-là.  Je veux la remercier et je veux 

remercier tous mes homologues pour l'accueil qu'ils ont montré 

pour la communauté francophone et ce projet de loi. 

 

Alors je vous remercie de m'avoir donner l'opportunité. 

 

(Translation: Mr. Speaker and hon. members of the legislature, 

I would like to thank you for giving me the opportunity to 

stand today to briefly speak about the Bill we are going to pass 

today.  Certainly it's very important for francophones, the 

francophone minority in Saskatchewan to have a tool such as 

we 

have here today. 

 

French governance is going to be very important in the 

development of the francophone minority in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  As I've just said, the report of the 

Commissioner of Official Languages of Canada, Mr. 

Goldbloom, the level of assimilation in Canada is worst in 

Saskatchewan.  That shows very clearly then, that we need 

tools such as French governance.  It's a chance for we 

francophones to administer our own education system, and for 

us that is very important. 

 

I speak as the only francophone member in the legislature, and 

also as a francophone parent with children who go to a French 

school, that in spite of all our efforts as parents and certainly in 

an education system such as we have, we agree, we see clearly 

that our children have trouble keeping both their language and 

their culture. 

 

So I support this Bill completely.  I am very happy to tell the 

French people in the province; I am very proud to tell them that 

today is a very important day in their lives and in the 

development of the French community. 

 

I also would like to extend great thanks to the former minister 

of Education for the dedication, the work that she has done to 

advance this Bill.  I want to thank her and I want to thank all 

my colleagues for the reception they have shown to the 

francophone community and this Bill. 

 

Thank you for having given me this opportunity.) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I thank you and the members of the legislature for 

giving me this opportunity to rise here today.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 5:38 p.m. until 5:39 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Tchorzewski Trew 

Shillington Whitmore 

Teichrob Flavel 

Kowalsky Roy 

Carson Scott 

Hagel Wormsbecker 

Koenker Stanger 

Lorje Harper 

Lautermilch Keeping 

Murray Carlson 

Hamilton Langford 

-- 22 

Nays 

Muirhead Britton 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd Goohsen 

Toth  

-- 7 



2172 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1993 

The Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:41 p.m. 

 

 


