




















































Hansard: May 28, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2021 

 May 28, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, before presenting petitions I 

move this House now adjourn. 

 

The division bells rang from 10:02 a.m. until 10:12 a.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Britton 

Muirhead D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

Boyd Haverstock 

Toth t  

-- 9 

Nays 

Romanow Murray 

Van Mulligen Hamilton 

Thompson Trew 

Simard Serby 

Teichrob Flavel 

Shillington Scott 

Solomon Wormsbecker 

Goulet Kujawa 

Kowalsky Crofford 

Carson Knezacek 

Hagel Harper 

Koenker Carlson 

Lyons Renaud 

Pringle Langford 

Lautermilch Jess 

-- 30 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to lay a petition on the Table.  I would like to read the 

petition to you, sir. 

 

 

To the Hon. Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in 

legislature assembled. 

 

The petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth that diabetics have been 

recently singled out by the government drug plan as being 

unique by virtue . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I just want to ask the member.  

Is the member . . . I assume the member's only reading the 

prayer. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- That's right. 

 

The Speaker: -- The member may proceed. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Speaker, what I'll do, if it's all right, I'll just 

go down to the bottom paragraph.  I don't know what your 

problem is up there but apparently . . . 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I think that comment is totally out of 

order and I ask the member to retract that statement. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- I really do.  I'm sorry, it was just . . . I'm sorry, 

Mr. Speaker, but I was under the understanding I could read the 

prayer. 

 

The Speaker: -- The member may proceed with the prayer. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

 

Therefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

reverse its decision to single out diabetics in the drug plan 

by asking them to pay the cost of the medication; and that 

your Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal which will have the effect of 

discriminating against diabetics compared to those others 

who use the drug plan to sustain life that is mandatory. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I now move this House adjourn. 

 

The division bells rang from 10:16 a.m. until 10:26 a.m. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

 

Swenson Toth 

Muirhead Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

Boyd Haverstock 

-- 10 

Nays 

 

Romanow Serby 

Van Mulligen Flavel 

Thompson Scott 

Shillington Wormsbecker 

Kowalsky Kujawa 

Penner Crofford 

Hagel Knezacek 

Murray Renaud 

Hamilton Langford 

Trew Jess t 

-- 20 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I seek leave on behalf of certain 

members to introduce guests at this time. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr.  



2022 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1993 

Speaker, I am pleased to introduce to you and through you to 

the members of this Assembly Mr. Hermanus Kasper.  I'm 

going to ask him to stand if he would in your balcony, Mr. 

Speaker.  He is the deputy permanent secretary in the Ministry 

of Finance in Namibia. 

 

I had the opportunity to visit with Mr. Kasper a few minutes 

this morning and had some interesting exchanges about what's 

happening in his country.  You may recall the Premier 

introducing two of Mr. Kasper's colleagues last Tuesday.  The 

three officials are participating in a mentoring program being 

sponsored by the Institute of Public Administration of Canada, 

the Canadian International Development Agency, and the 

South African Trust Education Fund. 

 

We're most pleased to be part of this opportunity to enable Mr. 

Kasper to study the systems of budgeting, accounting, and 

finance in our province.  I hope you'll find your stay with us 

enjoyable as well as informative. 

 

I would ask all members of the Legislative Assembly to join 

me in welcoming Mr. Kasper. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's my 

pleasure today to introduce to you and through you to the rest 

of the Assembly 29 students from McLurg High School in 

Wilkie.  It's a real pleasure for me because we don't get a lot of 

school visitors down here; it's quite a little ways. 

 

And I would like to introduce you to the teachers, Jim Wickett, 

Eloise Johnson, and the chaperon is Florence Ward and their 

bus driver is Jim Smart.  I would like to tell the students that I 

will have to leave and my colleague, Mr. Boyd from 

Kindersley, will be meeting with you later, and I hope you give 

him a hard time. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would ask everyone here to give 

these students a warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To you, and through 

you to the Assembly, I would like to introduce in your gallery 

26 young adults from Porcupine Plain, Saskatchewan.  Their 

teacher, James Bergerman and Barry Leier and their companion 

and driver Helen Kwasney. 

 

Porcupine Plain, as you know, Mr. Speaker, is a beautiful 

community of about 1,000 people in north-east Saskatchewan, 

right near Greenwater Provincial Park; it's known as the home 

of the world's largest porcupine, Quilly Willy, and it's the 

reigning home of the schoolboys' provincial champions.  And 

so I would like everyone to join with me in wishing them a 

splendid day in Regina and a safe trip home. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

I'm very pleased to introduce on behalf of my colleague, the 

member from Saskatoon Westmount, 50 grade 5 students who 

are seated in the west gallery.  They are accompanied by their . 

. . (inaudible interjection) . . . oh.  They are accompanied by 

their teachers, Aline Korol and Clément Bertoncini, their 

teacher assistant, Diane Duret and their chaperon, Donna Kish.  

I'm sure they'll have some very interesting questions to ask 

after the proceedings here this morning, so I look forward to 

meeting with them, and I ask all of us here to join me in giving 

them a warm welcome to Regina. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I move 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  That motion is not in order.  It's 

not an intermediate proceeding, and therefore the motion is out 

of order. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I understand that any time 

special leave is requested and granted that that in itself will be 

intervening business. 

 

The Speaker: -- I refer all members to Beauchesne's, 6th 

Edition, paragraph 385 and subsection (1) and subsection (2), 

and Beauchesne's is very clear in what an intermediate 

proceeding is.  And for the edification of the members, I will 

read those two sections to them so that we do not have any 

further misunderstandings.  On Beauchesne's it says: 

 

 

The term "intermediate proceeding" used in Standing 

Order 60, means a proceeding that can properly be entered 

on the Journals.  The true test is that if any parliamentary 

proceeding takes place, the second motion is regular and 

the Clerk ought to enter the proceedings to show that the 

motion in question is regular. 

 

Referring of course to the first sentence, that they have to be 

entered into the Journals, and this introduction of guests is not. 

 

Beauchesne's goes on in no. (2) to say: 

 

 

It has never been understood in the House of Commons 

that the words "intermediate proceeding" covered 

speeches; it is not applied to arguments but it covers such 

things as utterances bearing directly on making motions, 

moving amendments, presenting reports, putting the 

questions, answering questions placed on the Order Paper, 

voting, naming a Member; it is construed as relating to 

procedure and not to debates. 

 

The introduction of guests therefore is not, according to 

Beauchesne's, an intermediate proceeding and the member's 

point of order is not well taken. 



May 28, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2023 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that the House now 

adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: -- That point of order is also out of order 

because, as of May 14, the member knows that I made a ruling 

in this House instructing the Clerks, and I again want to read to 

the members the last paragraph of my ruling: 

 

 

To avoid the prospect of misinterpretation in the future, I 

have instructed the Clerks at the Table not to record in the 

Votes and Proceedings points of order and to record 

Speaker's rulings only when the Speaker makes a 

statement from a prepared text.  I hope this will in future 

avoid the necessity of raising a point of order like that 

raised by the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Since my ruling this morning was not from a prepared text, it is 

not entered into the Journals; therefore it is not an intermediate 

proceeding and the member's point of order is not well taken. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I will read the 

prayer to the Assembly of these petitioners: 

 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

reverse its decision to single out diabetics in the drug plan 

by asking them to pay the costs of their medication and 

that your Hon. Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to which will have the affect of 

discriminating against diabetics compared to others whose 

use of drugs to sustain life is mandatory; 

 

 

The diabetics have recently been singled out in the 

government's drug plan as being unique by virtue of the 

fact that they must now pay virtually the full cost for 

insulin, syringes, and needles and that these costs imposed 

without consultation are an undue and unfair burden on 

this unique sector of our society, and that diabetics must 

bear huge costs associated with their medication and 

treatment and sheer survival which is without comparison 

to other disease and that this unfair and regressive 

initiative is totally contrary to the principles of medicare, 

namely universality, accessibility, and comprehensiveness; 

 

 

And that this measure is in direct contradiction to the 

government's stated objective of implementing a wellness 

model. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have people here from Moosomin, Saskatoon, 

Fleming, who have asked me to present this petition to the 

Assembly. 

 

And I move adjournment of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

The division bells rang from 10:37 a.m. until 10:47 a.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

 

Swenson D'Autremont 

Muirhead Goohsen 

Martens Haverstock 

Toth t  

-- 7 

Nays 

 

Van Mulligen Trew 

Thompson Flavel 

Simard Scott 

Teichrob Wormsbecker 

Shillington Kujawa 

Solomon Crofford 

Goulet Knezacek 

Carson Harper 

Hagel Carlson 

Lyons Renaud 

Lautermilch Langford 

Hamilton Jess t 

-- 24 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I wish 

to present a petition this morning on behalf of Saskatchewan 

citizens, and I'll start with the prayer, Mr. Speaker. 

 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage and 

universal access to chiropractic treatment; and that your 

Hon. Assembly withhold consent from any government 

proposal to discriminate against chiropractic patients by 

charging them fees not assessed for any other medical 

treatment. 

 

That back pain and other highly prevalent neuromuscular 

skeletal disorders are extremely costly to the Canadian 

economy; that scientific evidence clearly illustrates that 

chiropractic treatment is the most cost-effective and 

efficient therapy for such disorders; that in the face of an 

ever-increasing pressure to adopt extensive new forms of 

high-technology treatment, chiropractic care has proven to 

be a low-technology, low-cost, conservative, and safe 

form of treatment consistent with a true wellness model of 

health care. 

 

That the government publicly asserts it remains committed 

to the basic principles of medicare, namely universality, 

comprehensiveness, accessibility, portability, and public 

administration. 

 

As in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And this morning, Mr. Speaker, I have citizens from the city of 

Saskatoon.  It looks like they're fairly well 



2024 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1993 

distributed through that city.  The town of Cudworth, the town 

of Colonsay.  As I say, Mr. Speaker, people in the Saskatoon 

and area that have a tremendous amount of difficulty with the 

government programs in health care. 

 

And I so table, Mr. Speaker, and ask that this House now 

adjourn. 

 

The division bells rang from 10:52 a.m. until 11:02 a.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

 

Swenson Toth 

Muirhead D'Autremont 

Neudorf Goohsen 

Martens Haverstock 

Boyd t  

-- 9 

Nays 

 

Van Mulligen Murray 

Thompson Hamilton 

Simard Trew 

Shillington Serby 

Solomon Flavel 

Goulet Scott 

Carson Kujawa 

Hagel Harper 

Lyons Carlson 

Lautermilch Langford t 

-- 20 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a petition 

from some of the citizens from the province of Saskatchewan: 

 

 

Wherefore your petitioners . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I think the members know full 

well that they are not to interrupt if the member . . . when the 

member is presenting a petition.  So I ask the members to 

please give her the privilege of presenting her petitions. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I shall read the 

prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage and 

universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Hon. Assembly withhold consent from any government 

proposal to discriminate against chiropractic patients by 

charging them fees not assessed for any other medical 

treatment. 

 

That scientific evidence clearly illustrates that chiropractic 

treatment is the most cost-effective and efficient therapy 

for such disorders; 

 

That in the face of an ever-increasing pressure to adopt 

expensive new forms of 

 high-technology treatment, chiropractic care has been 

proven to be a low-technology, low-cost, conservative and 

safe form of treatment consistent with a true wellness 

model of health care; 

 

That the government publicly asserts it remains committed 

to the basic principles of medicare, namely universality, 

comprehensiveness, accessibility, portability and public 

administration. 

 

The individuals who have signed this, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Wynyard, Saskatchewan; several people from Regina and 

Balgonie.  And I so table and ask that this House now be 

adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Could I maybe suggest to 

those two members that they get closer together, so they don't 

have to yell across the floor. 

 

The division bells rang from 11:05 a.m. until 11:15 a.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

 

Swenson Toth 

Muirhead D'Autremont 

Neudorf Goohsen 

Martens Haverstock 

Boyd t  

-- 9 

Nays 

 

Van Mulligen Lautermilch 

Thompson Murray 

Simard Trew 

Lingenfelter Flavel 

Teichrob Scott 

Shillington Kujawa 

Solomon Crofford 

Goulet Harper 

Carson Carlson 

Hagel Langford 

Lyons t  

-- 21 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I have a 

petition that I'd like to present to the legislature this morning.  

And I'll just read the prayer into the record: 

 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

reverse its decision to single out diabetics in the drug plan 

by asking them to pay the costs of their medication and 

that your Hon. Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to which will have the effect of 

discriminating against diabetics compared to all others 

whose use of drugs to sustain life is mandatory. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are petitioners from all over the 

south-western part of the province, particularly from the  



May 28, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2025 

Gull Lake, Maple Creek, Shaunavon areas of south-western 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I present this petition now, and I also move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The division bells rang from 11:18 a.m. until 11:28 a.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

 

Swenson Toth 

Muirhead D'Autremont 

Neudorf Goohsen 

Martens Haverstock 

Boyd t  

-- 9 

Nays 

 

Romanow Lautermilch 

Van Mulligen Murray 

Thompson Hamilton 

Simard Trew 

Lingenfelter Flavel 

Shillington Scott 

Solomon Kujawa 

Goulet Crofford 

Carson Harper 

Hagel Carlson 

Lyons Langford t 

-- 22 

 

The Speaker: -- The Leader of the Opposition, why is he on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of privilege. 

 

The Speaker: -- What's the member's privilege? 

 

PRIVILEGE 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, I've just been informed that the 

Associate Minister of Finance, the minister responsible for CIC 

(Crown Investments Corporation), is at this very moment 

speaking with the media pertaining to a Bill which has not been 

tabled in the legislature yet. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the practice of this House, the fundamentals 

of the British parliamentary system, have always been that that 

courtesy be afforded to members of the Legislative Assembly 

before members go and talk to the press about items that 

haven't been before the eyes of all members of the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that it is incumbent that you put an end to 

this practice before it gets practised by this government on a 

regular basis, because I consider this, sir, to be an affront to my 

privilege as a member of this Assembly, an affront to the 

privileges enjoyed by all 66 members of this House.  And it is a 

practice, I think, Mr. Speaker, which all members of the 

Assembly should feel abhorrent about and one that would 

almost negate this Assembly sitting in any 

formal manner at all if this is to be a practice practised in the 

province of Saskatchewan by any government. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that it is proper that you would call 

that member into this Assembly and ask that they explain 

themselves. 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member from Rosthern on his 

feet? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to speak to the 

question of privilege that has been raised by my colleague from 

Thunder Creek. 

 

The Speaker: -- Usually in this House I don't say that the 

member can't speak, but usually if a member brings up a point 

of privilege we allow the other side to speak and then revert.  

But I have no . . . it doesn't . . . both members were up at the 

same time, but it doesn't make any difference to me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I just want to speak 

very briefly to the question of privilege at this time.  Other 

members from the government side may want to add as we 

would get into this discussion, if the discussion goes on.  But I 

just want to make it clear that what is happening here today is 

unusual in a number of ways.  I think the most clear unusual 

part of today's exercise is the bell-ringing that is taking place 

yet again in the Saskatchewan legislature. 

 

I want to say very clearly that the question of privilege that is 

raised by the Leader of the Opposition, that is that Bills not be 

released before they are tabled in the Assembly, is one that has 

been dealt with in this Assembly a number of times and 

Speakers have ruled on a number of times. 

 

I want to say again, Mr. Speaker, though that the most, I think, 

upsetting thing to the public is not whether the Bill is released 

or not.  I think the public wants the Bill released.  The most 

upsetting thing is the fact that the members of the opposition 

are again ringing the bells to keep the democratic process from 

going ahead in the legislature.  And I say the interesting thing 

about that today is the member from Greystone is now involved 

in the bell-ringing exercise which is the first time she has 

lowered herself to that level. 

 

I want to say that the ruling made by Mr. Speaker, by Speaker 

Tusa, back in June 2, 1988, Mr. Speaker, and I would ask that 

you would review the Hansard of that day, page 1,773 clearly 

indicate that release of Bills is perfectly within the purview of 

the government at any time and is not necessarily done in the 

House, and I quote: 

 

 

However, neither the rules or the precedents require that 

the Bills are to be kept confidential until introduction in 

the Assembly.  For further clarification on this point, I 

refer the hon. members to other precedents of this House, 

namely dated January 19, 1976 and April 5, 1976. 

 

 

I therefore rule that the hon. member for Regina  



2026 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1993 

North East (at that time) does not have a point of privilege, 

but caution all hon. members that the usual courtesies 

shown to the Assembly should be maintained. 

 

Now in that order, Mr. Speaker, before anything was said 

outside of the Assembly, I took the opportunity to meet with 

the Leader of the Opposition and the leader of the third party, 

the member from Greystone, and met with her at her bench and 

in fact handed them directly -- before it was handed to anyone 

else -- copies of the Bill.  So I think that all requirements of 

sharing the Bill with the Leader of the Opposition and the 

member from Greystone actually took place. 

 

Now the press is coming to ask questions about the Bill that has 

been released to the members of the opposition and now all 

members of the Assembly.  That's fair, and the minister in 

charge will respond to it. 

 

So I just want to say in closing, Mr. Speaker, that the ruling has 

been made on this very issue at a number of times in the past, 

and I think we're perfectly within our right to share with the 

opposition the Bill that is in fact written and in place by the 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Before I 

take umbrage with the Government House Leader's remarks, I 

want to thank you, sir, for allowing us the privilege of the point 

of privilege without the two-hour normal notice.  And I know 

it's within your parameters to waive that two-hour notice on the 

question of privilege, so I just want to make that comment to 

you, sir. 

 

But what we have just heard now, with the Government House 

Leader trying to justify an act that is almost unprecedented in 

this legislature is just shocking.  When he tries to justify what 

this government has done this morning, Mr. Speaker, on the 

pretence that it is legally within their rights . . . Of course it is 

legally within your rights, but it is morally detestable, sir, for 

you to have taken this route and then to get up sanctimoniously 

and say, well just prior to doing this, we gave it to the Leader 

of the Liberal Party and the Leader of Her Majesty's Loyal 

Opposition is utter nonsense.  That is utter nonsense. 

 

We have not, under the normal rules of this legislature, Mr. 

Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order.  I think the . 

. . Order!  Order.  Order!  Will the members please come to 

order.  I ask the Leader of the Opposition to apologize to the 

House for his actions.  That is simply unacceptable in this 

House. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, I apologize for throwing that 

paper on the floor, but I am not going to be part of some kind 

of duplicity in this legislature. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I've asked the member, the 

Leader of the Opposition, to unconditionally 

apologize to the House with no further statements.  Order!  I'll 

make the decision; I don't need the Government House Leader 

to tell me.  Order.  I ask the Leader of the Opposition to please 

apologize to the House unconditionally. 

 

Order!  I ask the member from Maple Creek, I think he's been 

in the House long enough to know that when the Speaker is on 

his feet to please not interrupt.  Order.  I ask the Leader of the 

Opposition to please apologize to the House unconditionally. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, I apologize to the House 

unconditionally. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I think what we have witnessed, Mr. Speaker, 

is an act of character on the House Leader's . . . or the Official 

Opposition leader's part that is not characteristic of the 

government . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member is speaking to a 

point of privilege and I ask him to please address his words to 

the point of privilege -- only the point of privilege, okay?  

Order.  Order!  Order.  Please have some respect for the Chair.  

Order. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for bringing the . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I ask the Government House Leader 

please to come to order . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I will 

warn the Government House Leader one more time.  Please 

come to order. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you for calling the Premier and 

Government House Leader to order. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Will the member from Rosthern please 

come to order.  The member is to . . . I will recognize the 

member from Rosthern one more time to speak to the point of 

personal privilege.  If he refuses to do so, I will not recognize 

him again.  Speak to the point of personal privilege. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 

appreciate your ruling.  Now what I want to do is address the 

points that the House Leader brought up.  And I want to 

address them specifically, and also what our leader brought up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he says that they have done it according to the 

rules.  My point, Mr. Speaker, is that you have no moral 

justification for it.  Legally you may be within your rules.  But 

morally it is detestable.  We have not yet, Mr. Speaker -- and 

this is part of my argument -- we have not yet . . . In the blues 

we have a list of things and items under which items are 

carried.  We have not reached the point of introduction of Bills.  

And yet we find now that the Bill is introduced, the media has a 

hold of it, the public has a hold of it.  And now because they 

feel that they're doing us a privilege, the Bill has been given to 

members in this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he also brought up the idea that the bell-ringing, 

the people don't like the bell-ringing.  Mr. House Leader, Mr. 

Premier, Mr. Speaker, I agree, the 



May 28, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2027 

people of this province do not like bell-ringing.  They do not 

like what we had to do this morning. 

 

But I suggest to you, Mr. Premier, that they find it detestable, 

detestable what this legislation purports to do, which is to 

remove the rights and the freedoms . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  Order, order.  

Order.  Order.  Would the Premier please come to order. 

 

I want to say I will give the member from Rosthern a few 

minutes to speak to the point of order.  If he gets into the debate 

on the Bill, I will rule him out of order and I will accept no 

further comments from the member from Rosthern after that.  

Please speak to the point of personal privilege. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- The point of personal privilege, Mr. Speaker, 

that I am addressing, is in direct response to comments made 

by the member, the Government House Leader, who initiated 

the bell-ringing episode.  And I take your direction, Mr. 

Speaker.  If it's out of order for me to react to his comments, 

then I am obviously out of order. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Would the member just be seated.  

The member was getting into the debate of the Bill.  That is 

what I've ruled out of order.  You cannot debate the Bill. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition's personal privilege was that the 

Bill was presented outside the House before it was presented to 

the House.  That is the point of personal privilege and that is 

what you are to address yourself to if you wish to speak to the 

point of personal privilege.  And I recognize the member from 

Rosthern to do so. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- The point of personal privilege, Mr. Speaker, 

is the fact that we have been witnessing here a government that 

is on a steamroller bend trying to do indirectly what they were 

not able to accomplish by the direct method. 

 

Now it is a written rule, and I haven't got my finger on it but 

I'm sure my colleagues will be able to give me that citation, 

that you cannot do in this Legislative Assembly indirectly what 

you cannot do directly.  That's a rule.  That's an accomplished 

rule over periods of time that has been established through 

precedent and I believe has been also established in the written 

rules either of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan or 

through Beauchesne's in Ottawa. 

 

And this government in its arrogant attitude, its undemocratic 

attitude, its steamroller attitude, has decided now that this Bill 

is going to be brought forward today.  And our argument has 

been . . . And that's why we had this episode of bell-ringing.  

It's not because we wanted it; it's not because the people 

wanted it.  They don't like it.  But they detest the mannerism 

and the breaking of the privilege of us as members of this 

Legislative Assembly representing a million people in the 

province. 

And 240,000 adult members of our society are saying it is 

wrong, and as an opposition we were trying, Mr. Speaker, to 

address those concerns of those individuals.  And the 

government in its arrogance has circumvented that process, 

legally correct but morally apprehensible, I suggest to you, Mr. 

Speaker, and they will pay the price. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order.  Order.  I ask the 

member from Regina Rosemont to please come to order and 

withdraw the statements that he referred to the opposition as 

being hypocrites.  I ask him to apologize to the House. 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Speaker, with no disrespect to your . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I ask the member to unconditionally 

withdraw the statement and apologize to the House. 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Sir, I apologize for standing up to the taxpayers 

and the people . . . 

 

(1145) 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Order.  I ask the member to 

please withdraw the statement that he referred to the opposition 

as being hypocrites, and to apologize to the House.  And this is 

your second warning. 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- I accept your ruling, Mr. Speaker, withdraw. 

 

The Speaker: -- And apologize to the House. 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- And I apologize to the House. 

 

The Speaker: -- I thank the member.  I have heard two 

members from the opposition.  I will hear one more member 

from, if a member wishes to speak, from the government side, 

and then I will take into consideration the comments made by 

members. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Mr. Speaker, speaking to the point of 

privilege . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- No, I will not take any more from the 

opposition.  I'll take one more from the government side, and I 

think I've heard sufficient on the point of privilege. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

I want to just speak for a moment to what's happened this 

morning.  The rule, I believe fairly interpreted, is that the 

government must make every effort to bring to the attention of 

the opposition first, before it makes a public statement.  We did 

that.  It was on the order paper.  They knew that. 

 

We never got to it because the opposition prevented us from 

doing so.  But we made every effort to get to it.  It is patently 

obvious, Mr. Speaker, the opposition is trying to avoid the 

introduction of the Bill and therefore the dissemination of the 

Bill.  Because once it 



2028 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1993 

is public . . . once it is tabled, the Bill is public and everyone's 

going to know what it is. 

 

It is patently obvious to me and to everyone else who's 

observing the proceedings, the opposition are attempting to 

obstruct and prevent that of which they complain, that they're 

not getting the Bill and that the public aren't getting the Bill. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, for this House to give any credence to 

the point of privilege raised by the member from Thunder 

Creek is simply to play into their hands.  And this House 

should not be an instrument of a silly, foolish game by the 

opposition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker,  I'd just like to address the point 

regarding the point of privilege.  I believe we're into a very 

serious matter in this Assembly . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- I've listened to two members from each side 

and I think that is sufficient for the Speaker to examine the 

comments that have been made and make his decision.  Give 

me a minute; I want to consult with my Clerk. 

 

The matter of personal privilege that the member from Thunder 

Creek, the Leader of the Opposition, has brought forward is 

certainly a very serious . . . a point of privilege.  And no 

member brings it forward very lightly.  I think therefore it is 

incumbent upon the Speaker to review all the comments that 

have been made by members on both sides, and what other 

Speakers have said on this particular topic, not only in our 

jurisdiction, but in other jurisdictions.  Therefore I will reserve 

my judgement and bring forth my arguments early next week. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I move this House adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The point of adjournment is not 

well taken at this time because there has been no intermediate 

proceeding taking place, and therefore we will move on to the 

next item on the order paper. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I don't follow that at all, Mr. Speaker.  

Not at all.  Mr. Speaker, I'm on my feet for reading of petitions. 

 

The Speaker: -- I think the member knows that a ruling made 

by former Speaker Tusa allowed only one hour for the 

presenting of petitions and that hour we have well exceeded.  

Therefore we are on to the next item, of reading and receiving 

petitions. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 

Tuesday next move: 

 

 

That an order of the Assembly do issue for return showing 

a list of all meetings held 

between any member of the Government of Saskatchewan 

and the business community regarding changes to 

workmen's compensation and occupational health and 

safety legislation since November 1, 1991 -- (a); and (b) a 

list of all organizations and representatives contacted 

previous to drafting amendments to workmen's 

compensation and occupational health and safety 

legislation since November 1, 1991; (c) a copy of all 

correspondence between the Government of Saskatchewan 

and all labour organizations or representatives consulted 

regarding the workmen's compensation and occupational 

health and safety legislation since November 1, 1991; and 

(d) a copy of all correspondence between the Government 

of Saskatchewan and the Saskatchewan Chamber of 

Commerce, the Canadian Federation of Independent 

Business, and any such organization representing the 

business community regarding changes to workmen's 

compensation and occupational health and safety 

legislation since November 1, 1991. 

 

And I present this to the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, in my duty as House Leader of 

Her Majesty's Loyal Opposition it's incumbent on me to know 

precisely what your feelings and interpretations of rulings are.  

And I would ask if I could have a clarification on a previous 

ruling made, because it's very germane to proceedings. 

 

So if I could just refer you back, sir, to a ruling you made on . . 

. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I think the member is out of order.  

We are on the presentation.  There are no clarifications on 

Speaker's rulings, and that precedent has been set a number of 

times by former Speakers -- a number of times by former 

Speakers, and certainly also by Beauchesne's.  We are on . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- Pardon me? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- On a point of order. 

 

The Speaker: -- What's your point of order? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, my point of order is that prior to 

the proceedings a member asked leave to introduce guests and 

that leave was presented, Mr. Speaker.  Now in no. 385 of 

Beauchesne's, 6th Edition, 385, no. (2) . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I think the member knows full well 

that if he had a point of order on the introduction of guests, he 

should have brought it up at that time when he was in the 

House, which he didn't do.  So I think the member is out of 

order on this point of order.  We are on notices of motions and 

questions. 



May 28, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2029 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that I 

shall on Tuesday next move that an order of the Assembly do 

issue a return showing: 

 

 

(a) a list of all contracts currently under review or that 

have been reviewed since November 1, 1991; (b) a list of 

all contracts that have been broken or rewritten by the 

Government of Saskatchewan since November 1, 1991; 

(c) a list of all individuals who held contracts that have 

been broken or rewritten since November 1, 1991; (d) a 

list of all court cases that have resulted from the 

Government of Saskatchewan breaking contracts or 

rewriting agreements since November 1, 1991; (e) a list of 

all expenses incurred by the Government of Saskatchewan 

in legal fees, departmental costs, etc., as a direct result of 

rewriting or breaking of contracts. 

 

As a motion (debatable). 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I give 

notice that I shall on Tuesday next move than an order of the 

Assembly do issue a return showing: 

 

 

(a) a list of all individuals hired by order in council in the 

fiscal year of 1991; (b) a list of all individuals hired by 

order in council in the fiscal year of 1992; (c) a list of all 

individuals hired by order in council in the fiscal year of 

1993; (d) the total cost of salary paid to the individuals 

hired by order in council in the fiscal year of 1991; (e) the 

total cost of salary paid to the individuals hired by order in 

council in the fiscal year of 1992; (f) the total cost of 

salary paid to the individuals hired by order in council to 

date in the fiscal year of 1993; (g) a list of individuals 

hired by order in council receiving salary hikes in the 

fiscal year of 1991; (h) a list of individuals hired by order 

in council receiving salary hikes in the fiscal year of 1992; 

(i) a list of individuals hired by order in council receiving 

salary hikes to date in the fiscal year of 1993; (j) a list of 

individuals hired by order in council employed by the 

ministers' offices; and (k) the total cost in salary paid to 

individuals hired by order in council and employed in 

ministers' offices. 

 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on Tuesday 

next move that an order of the Assembly do issue for a return 

showing: 

 

 

A list of all fees and charges levied by the Government of 

Saskatchewan; and amount of increase in each fee and 

charge from March '91 to March '92; an amount of 

increase in each fee and charge from March '92 to March 

'93; total revenue raised by fees and charges in the fiscal 

year of '91; total revenue raised by fees and charges in the 

fiscal year of '92; total revenue raised by fees and charges 

to date in the fiscal year of '93; the projected revenue of 

the fees 

and charges of the fiscal year of 1991; the projected 

revenue for the fees and charges of the fiscal year of 1992; 

the projected revenue for the fees and charges of the fiscal 

year of 1993; a list of studies conducted, analysed, and the 

impact that these fees and charges have on the taxpayer of 

Saskatchewan; statutory authority for each fee and charge; 

and where applicable, the order in council number 

authorizing the increase; the date the fee or charge first 

came into existence; the purpose of each fee and charge; 

the minister responsible for each fee and charge; a list of 

all fees and charges that are income tested; and a list of all 

fees and charges that are waived for seniors, low income 

people, and other special interest groups. 

 

I so present to the Assembly. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave, to introduce 

guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In the east 

gallery I would like to introduce to you and through you to the 

Assembly, a citizen of Regina who is very interested in the 

procedures of the House and who I believe has never before 

been in the Assembly.  I'd like to introduce to you Mr. Glenn 

Caleval and ask that the Assembly welcome him here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, on a point of order with regards 

to introducing guests. 

 

The Speaker: -- What's your point of order? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- My point of order, Mr. Speaker, is that on no. 

385 in Parliamentary Rules and Forms of Beauchesne's, 

pages 112 and 113, 385(2), Mr. Speaker, and I quote parts of it 

for you: 

 

 

It has never been understood in the House of Commons 

that the words "intermediate proceedings" covered 

speeches . . . 

 

So intermediate proceedings do not cover speeches. 

 

 

. . . it is not applied to arguments . . . 

 

Which I would suggest is debate. 

 

So intermediate proceedings do not cover speeches.  They do 

not cover debates, but it covers such things as: 

 

 

. . . utterances bearing directly on making motions, moving 

amendments, presenting reports, putting the questions, 

answering questions placed on the Order Paper, voting, 

naming a Member . . . 

 



2030 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1993 

The Speaker: -- Could I ask the member what his point of 

order is, as far as introduction of guests is concerned.  Could 

you clarify that for me please? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- My clarification is that introduction of guests 

by leave is intermediate business, and that's the point I'm trying 

to make for you, sir.  So what we just have witnessed is an 

intermediate business because it concludes the quotation that I 

was presenting to you, Mr. Speaker.  It is construed as relating 

to procedure and not to debates. 

 

So I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that any time a procedural 

event takes place, it is intermediate business that is recorded in 

the Journals and therefore is fair game to any kind of motion of 

adjournment following.  It's very precisely listed here for you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- I take the member's point of order, but we 

have checked also with the House of Commons and that is 

certainly not the interpretation that the House of Commons 

have placed on this.  And the House of Commons only have 

regarded intermediate proceedings anything of a substantial 

nature that takes place in the House as it pertains to motions. 

 

Certainly introduction of guests is not considered as a 

substantial undertaking by members in this House.  It does not 

bear on the proceedings that take place in the House as such, 

and it is not an intermediate . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Mr. Speaker, it's been moved for leave -- 

that's the point.  You're missing the point. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  Order.  Order. 

 

(1200) 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice 

that I shall on Tuesday next move that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for a return showing: 

 

 

(a) provide the number of notice of . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Will the Premier please come to 

order.  Order.  Will the Premier please come to order. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

 

(a) provide the number of notice of farm foreclosures 

delivered to individuals in Saskatchewan for fiscal year of 

1991; (b) provide the number of notice of farm 

foreclosures delivered to individuals in Saskatchewan for 

fiscal year of 1992; (c) provide the number of notice of 

farm foreclosures delivered to individuals in 

Saskatchewan to date for fiscal year of 1993; (d) the 

number of farm foreclosures for the fiscal year of 1991; 

(e) the number of farm foreclosures for the fiscal year of 

1992; (f) the 

 number of farm foreclosures to date for the fiscal year of 

1993; (g) the amount of land owned by Agricultural Credit 

Corporation of Saskatchewan; (h) the number of farmers 

in arrears with the Agricultural Credit Corporation of 

Saskatchewan for the fiscal year of 1991 and the total of 

the arrears; (i) the number of farmers in arrears with the 

Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan for the 

fiscal year of 1992 and the total of the arrears; and (j) the 

number of farmers in arrears with the Agricultural Credit 

Corporation of Saskatchewan to date for the fiscal year of 

1993 and the total of the arrears. 

 

I present this. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that I 

shall on Tuesday next move that an order of the Assembly do 

issue for a return showing: 

 

 

(a) a list of all the trips by any minister of the government 

of Saskatchewan since November 1, 1991; (b) a list of all 

costs incurred by the trip including salaries of pilots, 

expenditures for food and accommodation, incidentals, 

and any other expenses involved with each trip; (c) a list 

outlining the purpose of each trip . . . 

 

Does the Premier want to talk? 

 

The Speaker: -- The member has the floor and he should 

continue with his motions. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thought perhaps 

they wanted to talk. 

 

 

(c) a list outlining the purpose of each trip taken by the 

minister or associate minister, since November 1, 1992; 

(d) a list of those accompanying the minister including 

departmental officials, ministerial assistants, and the like; 

(e) a list of accomplishments or agreements signed or met 

directly as a result of each trip; (f) a copy of an agenda 

which lists the organizations, governments, or individuals 

which the minister or officials met with on each trip. 

 

I hereby submit. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a notice 

of motion for return.  I give notice that I shall on Tuesday next 

move that an order of the Assembly do issue for a return 

showing: 

 

 

(a) a copy of all polls and services conducted by the 

Government of Saskatchewan since November 1, 1991 

regarding the issue of establishing a French education 

school system and all costs incurred by conducting these 

opinion polls; (b) a list of estimated cost involved with 

establishing a third education system in the province of 

Saskatchewan including administrative costs, departmental 

costs, text books, supplies, hiring of educators  



May 28, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2031 

and all other projected costs; (c) a list of public meetings 

that have been held regarding the establishment of a third 

education system in Saskatchewan since November 1, 

1991; (d) a list of all parental organizations, local 

government officials, and others that have been consulted 

regarding the establishment of the French education 

system in Saskatchewan; (e) a list of all meetings attended 

by the Minister of Education regarding the establishment 

of the French education system in Saskatchewan. 

 

I so table. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that I 

shall on Tuesday next move that an order of the Assembly do 

issue for a return showing: 

 

 

(a) a list of all consultations or meetings that the Minister 

of Economic Development attended regarding negotiations 

with Federated Co-operatives Ltd. since November 1, 

1991; (b) a copy of all correspondence including letters 

and memorandums regarding the Co-op upgrader and 

refinery between the Department of Economic 

Development, the office of the minister responsible for 

Economic Development, the Crown Investments 

Corporation, and Federated Co-operatives Ltd. since 

November 1, 1991; (c) a copy of meeting minutes in 

which Mr. Don Ching was in attendance regarding 

negotiations with Federated Co-operatives Ltd. since 

November 1, 1991; and (d) a copy of all meeting minutes 

taken in which the Minister of Economic Development or 

a representative of the Economic Development department 

or a representative of the Crown Investments Corporation 

were in attendance regarding negotiations with Federated 

Co-operatives Ltd. since November 1, 1991. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and while I'm on my feet I would say that we're 

ready to go into question period after which, by agreement with 

the Government House Leader, there will be a member's short 

statement of three minutes, after which the House will adjourn. 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Co-op Upgrader Review 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, I'd 

like to follow up with you where we left off a few days ago in 

question period.  You keep asking me, and the question is, do I 

support the Estey recommendations? 

 

Now the Estey report is a well written and comprehensive 

document that recommends an infusion of funds is necessary to 

keep the project afloat.  But try as I might, I cannot find the 

words, expropriate or legislate, in order to obtain those funds.  

Neither do I find the words, bad deal or sweetheart deal, used 

by Justice Estey in describing this agreement.  Those are your 

words and your 

judgements. 

 

The rightness or wrongness of the agreement with FCL 

(Federated Co-operatives Ltd.) is not the issue.  The issue was 

and continues to be, how can the debt be restructured in order 

to make this project financially sustainable from the province's 

perspective. 

 

So, Mr. Premier, I'm asking you why it is that you and your 

government refuse to extend an olive branch to Federated 

Co-operatives in an attempt to resolve this impasse.  And why 

do you insist on this charade of willingness and openness to 

negotiate while waiting for FCL to make the first move? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, this question is a 

question which has been asked many times by the members of 

the House.  And I've given the same answer many times, the 

effect of which is to say that we do not refuse to negotiate.  We 

have negotiated.  You'll recall just a few moments ago the 

Conservative opposition gave notice of motion of a question 

detailing the times and the dates of meetings, and we'll be very 

pleased to provide that in due course. 

 

I have attended meetings.  I've been present at a meeting that 

Mr. Justice Estey convened where members of FCL were at 

and members of the federal government were at.  This has been 

going on and on and on. 

 

Mr. Justice Estey failed in getting an agreement and thus he 

recommended the solution which is set up there.  And I repeat 

again, we are prepared to, at some initial cost, adopt that 

solution.  I've said that to FCL.  And if you think it's a 

reasonable conclusion of Mr. Justice Estey -- as you say, it was 

a well-written report -- if you think that's a reasonable way out, 

we would need your assistance to say that you too would urge 

FCL to buy the Estey recommendation. 

 

Now what happens -- and I'll close on this answer -- if one of 

the parties or the other party, FCL, simply says, I'm sorry, I'm 

not going to even negotiate on the principles of Estey?  What 

do we do? 

 

The other alternative, I say to the member, is to just let the deal 

lie as it is.  And I won't raise my voice or the rhetoric when I 

say, I cannot do that for the taxpayers of Saskatchewan and the 

hundreds of millions of dollars which are at risk as a result of 

this deal.  I cannot do it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, there's no such 

thing as only two alternatives to anything.  You and your 

fellow members had a chance to oppose this deal when it was 

being written, but you chose not to.  And please don't keep 

claiming that you didn't know the details of the 



2032 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1993 

deal.  There is more than enough evidence to the contrary, and 

in fact I have that evidence written. 

 

The member from Quill Lakes, in the Committee of Finance in 

May of 1986, cited all of the details of the deal.  Similarly, the 

previous leader of your party and the MLA (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly) for Regina Elphinstone, he too knew all 

the details of the deal in July 16, 1987 in Hansard. 

 

So when you tell me that you did not oppose this, because in 

quotes, as you stated last Tuesday, ". . . the deal was made (in) 

secret" and that it was only when, and I quote again, ". . . the 

Gass Commission opened up all (of) the books and said that 

this was a bad deal . . ."  You, sir, are rewriting history because 

you've known all along the details of this particular deal. 

 

So I ask you again, you who accuse others of flip-flopping, 

what was your stand on this deal when you had a chance to 

oppose it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member's 

factual base is a country mile off the facts -- a country mile.  

Now I don't know if the hon. member knows how long a 

country mile is but it is pretty long. 

 

August 14, 1987, quote, Hon. Mrs. Smith, July 16 . . . August 

14, quote: 

 

Mr. Chairman, we undertook to do that (Mrs. Smith says).  

We contacted verbally and with a letter, and the answer 

that I received from Federated Co-operatives Ltd.  I would 

like to quote one line and it simply says: 

 

The disclosure of these agreements would have significant 

commercial prejudice to both NewGrade and CCRL 

(Consumers' Co-operative Refineries Ltd.) 

 

She then goes on to cite other sections, quote: 

 

We do not feel it is reasonable to expect us to disclose 

operational information to competitors which competitors 

are not required to disclose . . . 

 

And I have the entire transcript here where my former leader 

and other members of my caucus were asking, including Mr. 

Speaker if I may so, not to drag him into the debate, when he 

was in the official opposition, time after time for the tabling of 

the documents.  We were flat out turned down, not only prior to 

1986 but after 1987.  There can be no disputation of that fact. 

 

So I just don't know how the hon. member can concoct any 

indication that the agreements were tabled when the record . . . 

All you have to do is check the record of the House to see if 

they've been tabled.  They're not there. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, 

may I suggest that not only did you not oppose the deal which 

you now so vigorously condemn, but your fellow members 

went out of their way to hail this agreement, including Mr. 

Speaker, I could quote . . . I'd like to quote the Deputy Premier, 

the member from Regina Dewdney, who stated on August 25 

of 1987: 

. . . the New Democratic Party members and the New 

Democratic Party caucus support whole-heartedly the 

involvement of Co-operative refineries in this project.  We 

support it because this is a good example in Saskatchewan 

of a Saskatchewan company, with Saskatchewan people, 

using Saskatchewan talent, initiative, and energy, to build 

in the interests of Saskatchewan people. 

 

 Hansard, August 25, 1987.  He went on to say: 

 

. . . this project is positive.  We have supported it from the 

beginning. 

 

August 25, 1987, Hansard. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Who said that? 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- The Deputy Premier said that, sir.  Now, 

Mr. Premier, without rewriting history, as you are known to do 

periodically, do you still contend that you and your colleagues 

were opposed to this agreement with Federated when it was 

struck? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- The answer to that is so simple that 

I'm surprised the hon. member would have the audacity to raise 

the question.  I can endorse those words today if I had not 

known today what the agreements are.  These documents will 

be tabled for you to see in full, Madam Member. 

 

What the Deputy Premier said when he was in opposition was 

based on the statements made both in terms of press releases 

and other information that the government tabled.  But the 

point that is key to this discussion is this: that at every turn 

when the official opposition asked for the release of the 

documentation, namely the operating agreements, the 

fundamental agreements, they were denied. 

 

And if you dispute what I say, I challenge you to go to the 

Clerk's Table right now to that period and get the tabling of the 

documents.  They never were tabled.  So what do you expect 

any opposition or any hon. member to do after a while except 

to make statements of either support or rejection based on the 

information which is got to them?  That information was not 

got to them. 

 

When that information got to them was when we assumed 

office and Gass looked at the books and the operating 

agreements were put forward.  And I repeat to you again, 

Madam Member, do you support Estey's way out of this or not?  

That's the key.  Because his fundamental resolution is that the 

financial project of this deal has run aground.  That's what he 

said.  You cannot avoid that. 

 

So please don't run.  Please don't flip-flop.  Please don't hide.  

Tell us, in the interest of the taxpayers, do you as the Leader of 

the Liberal Party want to continue to endanger $600 million 

and more of the taxpayers of this province of Saskatchewan, 

contrary to what your oath as MLA should be? 



May 28, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2033 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I'm glad to hear you say, Mr. Premier, that 

you concur that the Deputy Premier in August of '87 stated 

those words.  Because in July of '87, the previous leader of 

your party, Mr. Allan Blakeney, stated: we have $610 million 

of a project, 100 per cent of which is at risk of the taxpayers; 

about 400 million of that money of provincial taxpayers' risk 

and the other with federal taxpayers' risks. 

 

Now you are saying that the Deputy Premier in fact didn't 

know when he made his comments, one month after Allan 

Blakeney made these comments in Hansard in this particular 

Assembly? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- What are you saying, Mr. Speaker, 

you're saying we have the documents?  Are you saying . . . 

Make that allegation, make the allegation that the documents 

were tabled when they were kept secret totally.  They were 

never released. 

 

We made the statements based on what these people told us, 

which as you should know, rather than joining them today in 

this unseemly protest and joining them in this unseemly attack 

on the taxpayers' interests, what you should know based on 

what they were telling the people of Saskatchewan was 

absolutely, virtually false in almost every other respect.  Now 

all of a sudden you flip-flop and you accept the position that we 

should follow their numbers. 

 

Well I'm sorry, Madam Member, you can perhaps want to do 

that.  I'm not going to do that; Gass said we shouldn't do that; 

Estey says we shouldn't do that.  We say today as a government 

that we can't do that and we say the taxpayers say that it 

shouldn't be done.  So join us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's 

most interesting to hear about flip-flops when all we've been 

talking about is the last several years when this particular 

government will not take responsibility for comments it made 

in the past. 

 

Mr. Premier, the member from Regina Albert North was quoted 

on August 25, '87 as well, as saying: 

 

 

I'm sure that the Co-op pioneers must be pleased as Punch 

just to see this happening now -- the expansions over the 

years.  And the NewGrade upgrader is certainly in keeping 

with that very fine Co-op tradition. 

 

Mr. Premier, do you think the co-op pioneers in this province 

are pleased as Punch to see you legislating an agreement, 

legislating an end to a contract with Federated which is 

essentially the same as tearing up a contract with co-op 

members throughout our province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- No, Mr. Speaker, I don't believe that 

the members of the co-op movement support FCL's 

management decisions in signing up a 

deal of this nature which is unconscionable and immoral. 

 

I believe that the co-op movement wants the FCL as members 

of this province, responsible citizens, to strike a fair deal for not 

only FCL but for the taxpayers. 

 

And while we're on flip-flops, I remind the hon. member that 

she said, according to the Regina Leader-Post of April 16 when 

in the debate on hospital cuts, the following.  This is what you 

said: 

 

 

"I don't like game-playing at taxpayers' expense.  It's 

$10,000 per day in this legislature to pay the per diems of 

those of us sitting in this house," she said.  "This is a 

ridiculous waste of people's money." 

 

At the time that bell-ringing went on.  Today you, Madam 

Member, flip-flopped and now you like the games-playing at a 

further cost of taxpayers. 

 

I tell you, that is very consistent with your position, very 

consistent, that we ought to allow the taxpayers' money to go at 

risk with the upgrader.  And I am not going to accept that and I 

do not believe that the rank-and-file co-op members are going 

to accept that either.  And frankly you disappoint me that you 

are. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question this 

morning is to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, the issue this morning 

is you breaking a contract with 240,000 co-op members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 240,000 co-op members in this province are 

paying for an ad in newspapers all over the province today that 

says that their Premier is a threat to democracy.  That's what it 

says, Mr. Speaker -- a threat to democracy, in the paper today. 

 

Mr. Premier, Tommy Douglas was never categorized as a threat 

to democracy by co-op members in this province.  Allan 

Blakeney was never categorized as a threat to democracy by 

co-op members in the province. 

 

We have just seen in this legislature this morning, Mr. Premier, 

where you will transgress on the time-honoured traditions of 

this Legislative Assembly to take away the rights of 240,000 

co-op members to have legal and binding contracts; that you 

would take a Bill out into the rotunda before members of this 

Assembly have a chance to look at it in order to break that 

contract.  That's why they say, Mr. Premier, you are a threat to 

democracy in this province. 

 

How do you answer those 240,000 co-op members who paid 

for this ad today?  How do you do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I can only hope that the 

Leader of the Opposition does not throw that document at me, 

at the members of the legislature, as  



2034 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1993 

he did a few seconds ago.  So I would ask him to contain his 

emotional approach on this thing because this certainly is not -- 

this certainly is not very much in support of a democratic act. 

 

Just a few moments ago, sir, you're the one who scattered paper 

all over the legislature, and now you stand up and say you are a 

defender of democracy.  You ask me how Douglas and how 

Blakeney escaped by virtue of not being accused in this 

context.  They escaped because they never had preceding them, 

a government that would enter into such a crazy-quilt deal and 

such a crazy aspect of financing as we inherited, thanks to you, 

sir. 

 

And if the co-op movement thinks . . . I won't say the co-op 

movement.  If the FCL management thinks in those ads that we 

are doing something to them, I repeat my offer. Today -- I will 

even advance them the $1 -- they can take the upgrader, lock, 

stock, and barrel for $1.  Whole thing.  Won't take a thing from 

them.  I'll sign the deal right now.  We'll drop the legislation 

right now. 

 

Why don't you advance that?  They'll take on the liabilities and 

the operations.  This is such a good deal, I'll turn all of it over 

to FCL right now.  That's the promise. 

 

I say to FCL, give me your response.  You can take it for $1 

right now.  How do you like that?  Would you support that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, any time that your 

House Leader comes over and dumps a pile of garbage on my 

desk, I'll certainly stand in this legislature and throw it back 

because that's what that is. 

 

Let me tell you what co-op members are saying about you, Mr. 

Premier, and why that was a pile of garbage.  And I quote: 

 

For a duly elected government to even consider this sort of 

legislation is truly frightening.  Every person and every 

business in Saskatchewan should be alarmed at this action.  

It is a blatant and unethical abuse of power. 

 

Mr. Premier, that is what 240,000 co-op members are saying 

about you today, that they're paying for to send the message in 

this legislature.  And that's what they're saying about that pile 

of garbage that your minister came over and plunked down on 

my desk.  They don't like it one bit.  They're willing to 

campaign against it.  What they want from you, Mr. Premier, is 

for you to keep your word, the word that you would sit down 

and negotiate, not legislate.  Why won't you do that for 240,000 

co-op members? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I repeat again, 

I am prepared at all times to negotiate.  I'll make two offers to 

FCL.  I will sign a deal based on Estey and the principles of 

Estey.  Here's a public offer of negotiation.  If they don't like 

that, I will make an offer of giving them the FCL refinery as it 

is, the upgrader, for a buck -- lock, stock, and barrel.  There's 

another offer. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- It's theirs already. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- They can take it.  It's theirs already.  

The member from Moosomin says, it's theirs already.  At $600 

million of your taxpayers, that's how flippant you are.  It's 

theirs already, theirs already.  And he says . . . We take all the 

risk, they take the profits that go up.  Here are two offers that 

I've made, I say to the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

He will continue to throw objects, he says, in this legislature.  

Please, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, stand up and tell us how 

that squares with your professed love for democracy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Premier.  Mr. Premier, in my eight years in this legislature 

I've never seen a government try to sneak a piece of legislation 

into the rotunda out there when they wouldn't give it . . . when 

they wouldn't give it to the members of the Assembly first. 

 

You, Mr. Premier, are so afraid of what the people out there are 

saying that you would try to use duplicity in this House this 

morning in order to threaten 240,000 co-op members.  You say 

that you didn't know. 

 

The member from Greystone has outlined where your party 

stood on it.  The co-op members say today that this process has 

been going on since the NDP (New Democratic Party) were in 

power back in 1981, that you've known all along about 

everything. 

 

But today, Mr. Premier, and yesterday and the day before, you 

try to say to co-op members around this province that it's all 

their fault.  Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, there are 240,000 

co-op members that don't want their dividends taxed by your 

government because you can't keep an agreement.  Mr. 

Premier, why don't you give the commitment today that you'll 

walk out of this legislature this morning and go and pick up the 

phone and start doing some honest negotiation, rather than 

simple politics all the time, that you're now taking out on 

240,000 co-op members.  Why don't you do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm not going to try to 

elevate the rhetoric around this debate except to note that when 

the Leader of the Opposition gets up in this House and says that 

he has never been associated in eight years with a government 

which would not table its legislation in the House, is patently 

incorrect. 

 

The ruling of Mr. Speaker Tusa in 1988, that the House 



May 28, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2035 

referred you to, sir, was exactly because when we were in 

opposition we complained, and Speaker Tusa said, oh no, you 

could do it.  And they did it . . . he did it. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I have before me here July 17, 1987 

Leader-Post, headline: Smith refuses to disclose agreements on 

oil upgrader.  If you don't believe me, maybe you'll believe the 

Leader-Post.  Then I have July 18, 1987: Smith refuses to give 

in about releasing contracts.  Pretty shaky, the hon. member 

says.  You see, I mean the facts simply are ignored by these 

people. 

 

You know what this is all about?  They are afraid to get into the 

debate of this legislature because they're afraid of the facts 

which are going to come out about the dealings and the 

finances.  But they'll get those facts in any event. 

 

And I say to you and I say to the people of Saskatchewan as I 

close this answer, Mr. Speaker, I say to the 

Liberal-Conservative coalition trying to prevent this 

information and debate -- this coalition, this violent display 

coalition which we saw -- I say, you're not going to thwart the 

taxpayers' interests.  We're elected.  We took an oath to defend 

the taxpayers.  You did too, Madam Member from Greystone; 

you did too, Leader of the Official Opposition.  And it's frankly 

shocking that your oath means nothing; your histrionics and 

your defence of a rotten deal means more.  Shame on you!  

Shame on you! 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, your 

political agenda means nothing to me.  The defence of a 

contract signed on behalf of 240,000 Saskatchewan citizens 

does mean something to me -- 240,000 Saskatchewan citizens 

who expect more out of their Premier than simply using the 

easy way out to walk into this Legislative Assembly and use 

the threat of expropriation, to use the power of his majority to 

take away the rights of Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

Mr. Premier, my oath has nothing to do with you taking away 

the contracts of 60,000 farm families, taking away the contracts 

of civil servants, taking away the contracts of co-op members.  

My oath has nothing to do with that.  My oath, sir, is to defend 

people against those actions of your government. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, instead of doing it one more time, as you 

have done throughout your career, why don't you take away the 

hammer of legislation and negotiate?  Why take this easy way 

out, Mr. Premier?  Is it simply to satisfy the political agenda of 

the member from Riversdale?  Is that what we're talking about, 

Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member says, 

take the easy way out.  I've been in this legislature off and on 

for 22, 23 years, and I want to tell 

you, the last 18 months can be categorized in any way that it 

wants, but easy is not the description. 

 

Trying to clean up the mess facing the province of 

Saskatchewan and the debt of $16 billion, this deal which is the 

most difficult and worst of all negotiations is not easy.  

Introduction of legislation is not easy.  These are difficult and 

tough decisions, not easy decisions.  They're right decisions; 

they're responsible decisions. 

 

Because FCL refuses to negotiate, refuses to change, and 

therefore endangers not only that project but the sensibilities 

and the viabilities of the taxpayers of the province of 

Saskatchewan.  He refers to that FCL ad, he says at risk, at risk.  

What that ad missed was the most important category at risk, 

and that is the taxpayers and the fiscal stability of the province 

of Saskatchewan.  That is our responsibility, and by golly we're 

going to do it.  And that's not easy.  It requires leadership. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave, the Minister 

of Education has a statement to make at this point. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 

statement I am about to make is a difficult one for me, the most 

difficult that I have ever made.  I have today asked the Premier 

to relieve me of my duties and responsibilities as the Minister 

of Education, Training and Employment effective immediately.  

The Premier has accepted my resignation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my reasons for resigning my position as a 

member of the cabinet are personal, and I want to share these 

reasons with members of the Assembly and with my 

constituents. 

 

My husband and I, as many of you know, have been involved 

in farming since the late 1960s.  We, like thousands of other 

farm families, spent many years building up a successful 

farming operation.  Moonvale farm is a mixed farming 

operation which includes both commercial turkey production 

and a cow-calf operation.  We expanded our farm in the 1970s 

with a 15-year loan from farmstart which was paid off in full in 

1989.  Our farm produces 30,000 birds per year and enjoys 

gross revenues of about $400,000.  It has been a strong and 

successful farming operation.  My husband and I built it up 

ourselves with the help of our family, and we're still involved 

in the operation. 

 

In the early 1980s, my husband and I guaranteed loans for our 

two daughters and their husbands to begin their own farming 

operations.  One farm was a 28,000-bird table egg operation; 

the other farm produced hatching eggs for the Saskatchewan 

industry, one and a half million eggs per year.  Over the years, 

in an effort to keep their operation going, my 



2036 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1993 

husband and I helped both of our daughters' farms in amounts 

of more than a quarter million dollars.  This was in addition to 

substantial loan guarantees with ACS (Agricultural Credit 

Corporation of Saskatchewan) and the Farm Credit 

Corporation. 

 

Unfortunately these new farms faced many of the same 

difficulties thousands of other farms faced during the 1980s and 

although the farms were productive, financial success was 

limited.  As a result, in 1989 one of our daughters and her 

husband voluntarily transferred their farm back to the Farm 

Credit Corporation.  The other farm remained in operation, 

managed by our son. 

 

In early 1991, however, before I became a member of the 

legislature, my husband and I moved from Moonvale farm and 

turned its operation over to our daughter and son-in-law.  At 

this time our family sat down with ACS and FCC (Farm Credit 

Corporation) to agree on an arrangement to consolidate all loan 

guarantees in an attempt to stabilize the financial situation. 

 

From that arrangement until today there have been no material 

changes in these loans.  However, low commodity prices and 

high costs have rendered the projections we made in early 1991 

unrealistic.  The situation has reached a point where my family 

and I must sit down with our advisers and the lenders to review 

the arrangement made in 1991 and find a resolution, whatever 

it may be, to this outstanding problem. 

 

I met yesterday with the Premier to brief him on the difficulties 

and to tender my resignation from cabinet so that my family 

and I can pursue these alternatives without any suggestion or 

even a perception that I might be in a conflict of interest 

situation.  It is my priority to maintain my family's reputation 

and integrity and to help my family through this difficult 

financial situation. 

 

I will not use my position as a member of the cabinet to in any 

way influence the outcome of these discussions.  Because the 

matter will soon be at a crucial stage in the negotiations with a 

provincial Crown corporation, it is not appropriate for me to 

continue in cabinet while these matters are being addressed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier and I have known each other for 

nearly 40 years.  We went to high school and university 

together in Saskatoon.  I know the Premier as a man of 

decision, honesty, and integrity.  I would never do anything to 

cast even the slightest shadow over him, his government, or my 

family.  And this is the reason why I have asked to step aside at 

this time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have been in public life for more than 25 years 

as a reeve, RM (rural municipality) councillor, as a member of 

the University of Saskatchewan Senate, director of the 

Canadian Egg Marketing Agency, the Saskatchewan Research 

Council, and many other elected and volunteer positions. 

My husband and I have always worked hard to put our family 

first and have done whatever we could to contribute to public 

life and to make our province a better place.  I believe strongly 

that the key to making a contribution to public life is one's 

ability to maintain their personal integrity.  Mr. Speaker, that is 

why I have taken this course of action today. 

 

I have informed the Premier that it is my intention to continue 

as a member of this Assembly for Saskatoon River Heights and 

to represent my constituents to the best of my ability.  I remain 

firmly committed to the actions and the directions of this 

government and intend to continue to play whatever role I can 

in or out of cabinet to see our policies come about. 

 

At this time, Mr. Speaker, I would like to take the opportunity 

to thank my personal staff for all their hard work and support 

and to also thank the staff of the numerous departments, 

agencies, and Crown corporations I have worked with over the 

past 18 months for their cooperation with me and for their 

commitment to our province. 

 

I want to acknowledge the presence of my husband in the 

gallery of the House today in support of my decision. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank all my caucus and 

cabinet colleagues, and particularly the Premier, for the help 

they have given me and the wisdom and leadership they have 

shared with me.  I take a great deal of pride in believing that 

my time spent in cabinet has made a contribution to this 

province which we all love so much. 

 

I thank the Assembly for its indulgence, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 12:41 p.m. 


