




















































Hansard: April 07, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 895 

 April 7, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: — According to order, the following petition has been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7), it is hereby read and 

received: 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that the Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to order SaskPower to facilitate the production of 

non-utility generated power in areas of increased demand. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to 

introduce to you and to the Assembly a friend of mine who is 

sitting in your gallery. He's a constituent of mine and he's just 

here to observe proceedings today, Henry Fehr from Swift 

Current. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Renaud: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you 

and to the Assembly a former speaker, Mr. John Brockelbank, 

Jr., sitting in your gallery. He controlled this House almost as 

good as you do, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Brockelbank has a lot of 

common with the Kelsey-Tisdale constituency. His father 

represented the Tisdale area for many years. And we do have a 

large area of land in Kelsey-Tisdale that's called the 

Brockelbank hill. And we do have a student's scholarship 

known as the Brockelbank scholarship. So I'd ask the House to 

welcome John today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to 

introduce to you and through you to the House, Vonda 

Kosloski and Amy Manz and another pair of ladies and a 

gentleman up in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. They wear white 

ribbons to protest Bill No. 38. And I would ask that the 

Assembly welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 

also like to take this opportunity to welcome John Brockelbank 

to the legislature. As the MLA (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) for many years for Saskatoon Westmount I'll tell 

you he left behind very big shoes to follow in. And when I'm in 

the constituency, I still have people asking where you are, so 

they would love to see you back in. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — It is my pleasure today to introduce 

somebody who is sitting in the Speaker's gallery. May 

I also add my words of welcome to the former Speaker, John 

Brockelbank. That's not the person that I do want to introduce. 

 

I do want to introduce another Speaker in another Assembly 

who is going to be our guest speaker this evening at our annual 

CPA (Commonwealth Parliamentary Association) meeting, and 

of course I'm referring to Arthur Donahoe who was the Speaker 

of the Nova Scotia Assembly for I believe a period of 10 years. 

 

And he had a most difficult task of being Speaker because 

while he was Speaker his brother was a cabinet minister. So he 

had a very difficult task. But I had the pleasure of meeting 

Arthur in The Bahamas last September or October and it was at 

that time that Arthur became the first Canadian secretary 

general of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. 

 

And I welcome you here today, Arthur, and I'm sure the 

members will join me in making sure that you have an 

excellent stay here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Changes to Rural Health Care 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question is to the minister responsible for bringing in closure 

into this House to force closure at rural hospitals, namely, the 

Minister of Health. 

 

Madam Minister, last night you finally screwed up the courage 

to go and listen to people, to Saskatchewan people, and what 

they are saying about your wellness model. You didn't have to 

run an expensive ad; you didn't have to do an expensive poll; 

all you had to do was go out, meet, and listen to the people. So 

maybe now you understand people want more time, people 

want more information, and people want more input into this 

massive restructuring of our health care in this province. 

 

And I ask the minister, don't the people of Saskatchewan 

deserve that much? Will you withdraw your plan to invoke the 

heavy-handed use of closure and will you delay passage of this 

Bill until a full public debate can be held on this matter? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the member is correct, the 

Minister of Health was in Weyburn last night; also the Minister 

of Labour was there. Mr. Speaker, I was in Moose Jaw last 

night meeting with people involved in health care. The evening 

before the member from Melfort and I were in Melfort. 

Members of this caucus have travelled the province extensively 

talking to people about health care and health care reform, not 

only just currently but for the past many months, Mr. Speaker. 



896 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1993 

And what the people of Saskatchewan are telling us from 

border to border is that health care reform is important to 

preserve our medicare for future generations and they want to 

be on about the task, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I say to the hon. 

member with the greatest amount of respect that the people of 

Saskatchewan are not interested in speaking to the B team, they 

want to speak to the minister, the real minister. And she has up 

until now — and I give her credit for being in Weyburn 

yesterday — has been ducking the people of this province. 

 

Over the past few weeks, Mr. Minister, you have repeatedly 

suggested the town-hall meetings being held around the 

province are being orchestrated by the opposition. Well finally 

your minister went to a meeting in Weyburn last night. And 

that was a meeting in an NDP (New Democratic Party) riding 

organized by CUPE (Canadian Union of Public Employees), I 

might add, hardly a traditional ally of the PC (Progressive 

Conservative) Party. 

 

Now you understand that these meetings are not political. 

These are not being held by political people. Apolitical people 

are the ones that are attending these meetings. They're 

concerned, Mr. Minister, about what you and your government 

are doing to the health care of this province. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, there are going to be more public meetings. 

There's one in Kerrobert on the 14th, Eston on the 15th, 

Kindersley on the 19th, Codette on the 20th. Will you assure us 

that Madam Minister will be at these meetings, will be there to 

listen to the people and will not be ducking these meetings that 

are so critical to the rural well-being of this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it is the fact that we are 

involved in major health care reform in our province, a major 

health care reform that is long overdue and welcomed by the 

people of Saskatchewan. Understandably, Mr. Speaker, 

understandably there are many questions, there are many 

questions being asked and many questions to answer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as meetings unfold, just as meetings have been 

conducted over the past number of months, as meetings unfold 

I can assure the member opposite and all members of this 

House that government will be represented at those meetings. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — No, no. That's not good enough, Mr. Speaker. 

That's not good enough, Mr. Member. We don't, and the people 

don't want government represented at these meetings. They 

want the government there. Your Minister of Health should be 

there. The Premier should be there. The Minister of Finance 

should be there. People of this province are saying, we want to 

give this message to the province. 

 

And they are wanting to know one other thing, Mr. Member. 

So far, except for Weyburn, the rural hospitals of this province 

don't know where they stand as far as finances are concerned. 

The budgets have not been released to them as yet. They don't 

know where they're at. Why don't you come forward? Why 

don't you make a commitment that these hospital budgets for 

rural Saskatchewan will come out forthrightly so that, indeed, 

the full impact of your plans are going to be known to the 

people of this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can assure the member that in the days and 

weeks ahead, all of that important financial information will be 

provided and provided in detail, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I want to say this. I want to say this about the need and the 

desire of members of this government, this caucus, and this 

cabinet to be at public meetings. We need to be there, Mr. 

Speaker, because members of that opposition are turning up 

and misleading the people of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that's simply unconscionable, unconscionable when we're 

talking about something as important as the health care of 

Saskatchewan people and health care reform. And we will be 

there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I will 

then assume, and my colleagues will inform the various towns 

and the various people in rural Saskatchewan, that you have 

made the commitment that the Minister of Health will be 

attending the meetings that I have just listed. Nothing else will 

do, Mr. Member. Nothing else will do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the former chairman of the health board in the 

Swift Current area offered this comment. He said that when a 

horse raises its tail, it's time to take a step back. I want to let 

that sink in, Mr. Member. 

 

What has happened in Swift Current is that your appointed 

wellness team health board has resigned. They've resigned. The 

reasons that are being given are that there was no homework 

done by the government; there was random planning. 

Everything that they thought they would have a chance to have 

an opportunity to make a decision on had been preplanned, had 

been decided on where the areas would be, their areas of 

responsibility . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. Does the member 

have a question? I want the member to put his question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — The question, Mr. Minister, is very simple. 

The people of Swift Current area want to know what you are 

going to do as a government when board 



April 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 897 

members are starting to resign en masse because they have 

utterly lost any faith in the process that you have implemented. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make it very 

clear to the member because apparently he does not 

understand. The group of people in Swift Current who have 

resigned their work at this point have been members of the 

planning committee. They are not board members. Mr. 

Speaker, these are individuals who have volunteered to be part 

of the planning process. 

 

Now the member talks about Swift Current. But what he does 

not talk about of course is the group of people that formed a 

planning committee in the mid-west district and have planned 

and established a health care board. He does not talk about the 

group of people that planned and established the board at Twin 

Rivers. He does not talk about the group of people who have 

planned and established a board in Moose Jaw and Thunder 

Creek, the first rural-urban board in the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Across the province people are working together. Sure, there 

are bumps. This is a difficult process, Mr. Speaker. But I tell 

you, across the province people are working together to build 

reform for the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To the 

same minister. I think the public caught on to your response. 

You did not answer any of the reasons that the board members 

gave for resigning. You just simply ignore the reasons. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, the tally is going up higher and higher. And 

we are asking you, along with other members of the public of 

Saskatchewan, to reconsider. All is not well with your wellness 

plan. Opposition is growing on a daily basis. The momentum is 

increasing. You're feeling the heat; you're feeling the pain of 

the pressure that the public of Saskatchewan is bringing upon 

you and your government. That's why your House Leader is 

going to invoke closure. No debate on this issue. You want to 

get it through before all of the people in Saskatchewan realize 

the momentous implications that your wellness program is 

going to have on them, Mr. Minister. 

 

Now what we're asking you on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan is: whoa, slow up, back off a step; give the 

people a chance to have a true input into this wellness plan of 

yours. Will you make that commitment, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, again members of the 

opposition, in this question period and elsewhere, are not 

giving accurate information to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. It is suggested by 

members opposite that the legislation we're now debating is 

somehow legislation that will form district boards or ram 

district boards — I've heard that kind of language come from 

members opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan know that the 

legislation that's being debated in this Assembly today is 

framework legislation, enabling legislation that will enable 

communities to come together and form boards of their own 

free will, Mr. Speaker. That's quite a different process that's 

been used in other jurisdictions. We believe in the process of 

communities working together of their own free will to make 

their own decisions. The legislation we're debating in this 

House is framework legislation to enable it to happen, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now why in the world this opposition would want to obstruct 

and delay that kind of tool for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, is beyond me. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I sincerely believe that the NDP 

government don't understand what they're doing. They don't 

exactly know where they're going. With closure on their health 

Bill, they are not just quashing the official opposition, they are 

quashing the voices of the people they've been elected to serve. 

 

Mr. Speaker, allow me a moment just to read a letter that we 

received recently in response to the minister's comments. It 

represents just one of the voices that the NDP government is 

silencing. It's from the rural municipality of Antelope Park and 

contains a resolution that was passed at ratepayers' meetings in 

Marengo and Hoosier. And it reads in part: 

 

 Whereas the provincial Health department has indicated its 

intention to . . . reduce health care funding, particularly in 

rural Saskatchewan; 

 

  . . . which presents severe hardship for these communities; 

 

  . . . be it resolved that the Minister of Health be petitioned to 

grant an extension of the August 17, 1993 deadline for health 

district formation to at least December 31, 1993. 

 

The question to the Premier. My question is to the Premier, 

and, Mr. Premier, I believe you are a principled man. I ask you 

to draw on those principles — rather than oppressing these 

people, will you withdraw your closure motion and allow free 

speech to prevail, allow for the deadline to be extended? Will 

you do that, please, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the process leading up to 

the formation of districts by August 17 will have been a 

process extended over a period of 12 full months — a full year, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The member quotes a letter. Indeed we have a variety 



898 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1993 

of letters from important health care organizations in the 

province. We've had expressions of support from SUMA 

(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) and SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) for health 

care reform. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are anxious to 

proceed with health care reform. There has been a year of time 

spent in terms of planning and preparing, and it's clear that we 

want the districts to be in place. It's urgent that they be in place 

so that we can begin to reshape, reshape health care, not just 

for next year and next year, but for the next generation, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

think that the Premier of this province knows exactly what he is 

doing. He knows what he's doing, Mr. Speaker, because he did 

this same thing to farmers last year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — He knows what he's doing, Mr. Speaker, 

because he did exactly the same thing to the farmers of this 

province in the last session. He took away their rights, and he 

took away their safety programs. This time he's turning his 

back on everyone. Now he is closing debate on the closing of 

hospitals. Mr. Speaker, I too have an example of how he is . . . 

and the NDP government are trying to silence these people. 

This is a letter from a registered nurse at Watson. 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I don't need the help 

from the member. I just want to remind members that you can't 

take all that time introducing your question and then wanting to 

read from a letter. You've already taken 50 seconds, and I ask 

the member to put his question. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Mr. Speaker, I have to quote from this lady 

because it's imperative to my question. 

 

The Speaker: — I'll ask the member to put his question. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister is 

simply based on the letter that this woman writes where she 

says that you are taking away the rights of the people. And she 

says you should reconsider your position. You won't allow me 

to quote the letter so I'll pose my question. 

 

Mr. Minister, this is not a question about the Tories against the 

reds. This is about the government against the people. People 

like the registered nurses . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Does the member have a 

question? Ask your question, please. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Will you allow the people to speak, Mr. 

Minister, or are you going to turn your backs on them as well? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the whole process of 

health care reform from the very beginning, and if I may say, 

even prior to a change of government in this province, many, 

many discussions were held across this province regarding 

health care reform. 

 

Now members opposite, when they were on this side, did not 

have the courage or the foresight or the ability to move forward 

and reform. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, since the beginning of all of the reform 

discussions, people of this province have been fully involved 

and have had many, many opportunities to participate in those 

discussions. And, Mr. Speaker, the shape of health care reform 

that is before us today is largely a result of the wide 

consultation process that has gone on throughout this province, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it strikes me that really what is happening here, is 

a group of members sitting in the opposition looking for more 

political grandstanding opportunity. Mr. Speaker, that will not 

serve health care and it will not serve the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to quote. 

And I quote: the NDP government has always said that they 

support the concept of rural living. But your actions, but your 

actions would indicate that you are not prepared to support the 

communities with less than 2,000. 

 

In talking with my fellow workers, I find they share the same 

ideas and feelings about your changes to the health care 

system. You should reconsider your position on health care 

before you do irreparable damage to rural health care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister in charge, whoever 

has the nerve to answer this question: are you going to listen to 

the people of this province? Are you going to take a step 

backwards now, reconsider your position, give them a chance 

to be heard? Will you do that for the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the member talks about 

steps backward. We lived with 10 years of backward-stepping 

in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, health care reform that is 

happening in this province is a reform, Mr. Speaker, that is 

pioneering again in Saskatchewan, across Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to share with the member opposite, I want 

to share with the member opposite a 



April 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 899 

quote, Jane Fulton, a leading health care expert in Canada — 

widely, widely recognized. Ms. Fulton says, in regard to health 

care reform that is happening in Saskatchewan, she says, and I 

quote, Mr. Speaker: the province will be better off in terms of 

its balance sheet and people will get better care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is our goal, that's what it's all about — 

assuring quality and better care for the people of Saskatchewan 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a simple 

question for the minister. Is your outside-of-the-province 

expert more intelligent and more in tune with what's going on 

in Saskatchewan than a registered nurse from Watson? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated earlier, the 

reform that is happening in Saskatchewan was born in 

Saskatchewan, born in the hearts and minds of Saskatchewan 

people in communities across this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one thing is for sure, Ms. Jane Fulton knows more 

about health care and health care reform than anyone I see 

across the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to address my 

questions and comments to the Premier. Mr. Premier, we are 

not leading this outrage; we are merely passing it on to you. 

People all over this province are speaking out and you are not 

listening. In fact, Mr. Premier, you are trying to drown them 

out with political rhetoric and Draconian legislative tactics. 

 

A citizen from Leader wrote to us and implored us to help them 

in their fight to preserve health care and stop the destruction of 

rural Saskatchewan. Mr. Premier, your closure motion is aimed 

at the Tory opposition but you are hitting everyone in this 

province, people you swore to protect, not to hurt, people like 

this individual in Leader. Mr. Premier, will you make the 

commitment today to this Legislative Assembly that you will 

attend those meetings that are being held all over this province 

protesting against your destructive changes to the health care 

system? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

mentions the community of Leader. He should know that just 

last night the member from Moose Jaw Palliser, the member 

from Prince Albert, met with a group of people from Leader to 

discuss health care reform. And I'm told it was a very 

productive and fruitful meeting. 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, again I say to members of this 

House that what health care reform is all about . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I cannot hear the minister. 

Please, let's just calm it down a bit. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I say again to this House, 

what health care reform is all about is the goal of preserving 

and improving this health care system that we have enjoyed in 

our province and that we want to leave as a valuable 

inheritance to our children and those who come after us. That's 

what it's all about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Education Department Firings and Hirings 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, the government claims to 

be acting to save money. However, the people of Saskatchewan 

no longer believe this government and I'd like to show you 

why. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as part of the NDP's iceberg budget, 16 top 

officials in the Department of Education were terminated. A 

number of these people were praised by the NDP when they 

were hired by the previous government. Mr. Speaker, the 

Minister of Education defends these cuts in the Regina 

Leader-Post by saying: a downsizing exercise designed to save 

taxpayers an estimated $585,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Education and it 

deals with the part of the budget which is beneath the surface. 

Madam Minister, can you confirm that at least two of these 

positions have been back-filled by NDP supporters? Orran 

Reiman and Jack Lloyd in the positions of assistant deputy 

minister and principal of the correspondence school. Will you 

confirm these appointments, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for 

that question. I can confirm that there are acting people in some 

of the positions. None of the positions that were terminated 

have been permanently filled. They will be advertised within 

days. And I want to say this, that we are attempting to set an 

example in this province to school boards and the education 

system in this province. We have reduced our administration 

by 22 per cent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Unfortunately cuts of that magnitude 

in the size of government cannot be achieved without costing 

some jobs, unfortunately. But I am astonished that the members 

opposite want to retain the status quo in education. We have a 

lot of good things happening in education. We have to build on 

those. But we have over 20 per cent of people that drop out of 

high school, over 90 per cent of aboriginal people that do not 

complete, over 40 per cent of first-year university students that 

fail, and you don't want education reform? We do. 



900 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1993 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, when the minister talks of 

acting, she's just fiddling around with semantics. Because that's 

all you have to talk about, Madam Minister. 

 

The facts remain that you fired these people under the guise of 

restraint and then you turned around and immediately 

appointed NDP partisans into these positions. Contrary to what 

you think, that kind of upsizing doesn't save the taxpayers a lot 

of money, Madam Minister. In fact, these two individuals may 

be costing the taxpayer more than the two they replaced 

because of the cost of reorganization, replacements, and 

severance. 

 

Madam Minister, can you confirm that these two individuals 

whom you've hired are also drawing government pensions 

while they're under your employment? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, if the member will refer 

to page 33 of the Estimates he will see that the amount for 

administration allocated in this year's budget is $585,000 less 

than the previous year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — We are reducing the size of our 

administration. The department is being restructured, will have 

a new role, will be a facilitator to the education community. 

We are continuing to restructure the organization in the 

department. In the meantime we have people acting in 

positions. They will all be advertised. They will all be filled in 

open competitions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, you talk 

about estimates. We already asked you a few days ago to go 

into Education estimates and you refused. We're prepared to go 

into Education estimates this afternoon if that's what you wish. 

Will you answer the question that I asked you last time? Are 

these people receiving government pensions while in your 

employment? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, some of the people who 

we have put in acting positions on a temporary basis are 

experienced people, are well known and well respected 

throughout this province for their contribution in the 

educational field. They were available; they are acting until we 

reorganize the department and fill the positions available on a 

public basis. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 48 — An Act to amend The Police Act, 1990 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

amend The Police Act, 1990 be now introduced and read the 

first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 49 — An Act respecting Correctional Services 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill 

respecting Correctional Services be now introduced and read 

the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE 

 

Conditions at the Regina General Hospital 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, earlier today I gave you notice that I would be rising 

pursuant to rule 17 asking for priority of debate to raise a 

definite matter of urgent public importance, and as required by 

that rule, I will now state the matter. 

 

In the Regina Leader-Post an orthopedic surgeon, Dr. John 

Kim, reported to the people that in his professional opinion, the 

situation at the Regina General Hospital has deteriorated to the 

point that we may see — and I quote the doctor — "sudden 

death in young patients as well as old". 

 

Mr. Speaker, so that this grave crisis facing our children and 

seniors may be at least debated and faced in this Assembly, I 

move: 

 

 That this Assembly demands the government immediately 

appoint an emergency task force to look into the statements 

of Dr. John Kim and that all necessary actions be taken to 

prevent avoidable fatalities among children and the elderly 

resulting from health policy. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the member from 

Thunder Creek. 

 

The Speaker: — Let me first of all inform members that I 

think we are a few steps ahead of ourselves under rule 17. 

Under rule 17 the member is to state the matter and then seek 

leave for priority of debate, and I assume that that's what the 

member has been doing. 

 

I want to state to the House that a notice of this matter on 

priority of debate was received in my office at 10:25 a.m. for 

which I thank the member for Rosthern. I find the member has 

provided sufficient reason for me to allow the Assembly to 

decide whether the member has leave to proceed with this 

matter. 

 

Therefore, pursuant to rule 17(6) I now ask whether the 

member from Rosthern has leave of the Assembly. 

 

The member does not have leave. I ask those members 



April 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 901 

. . . Order. Now according to rule 17(7), I ask those members 

who support that motion to rise in their place. Order. 

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, 11 members have risen. 

 

The Speaker: — Be seated, please. 

 

According to rule 17(8) the member does not have leave. Give 

me just a minute here. This is a very complicated rule. Okay, 

does the member have leave to proceed? 

 

Members, we . . . I just want to inform members I am following 

the rule as we have it, the motion that I will put before the 

members now. Does the member have leave to proceed? 

 

The division bells rang from 2:37 p.m. until 2:47 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Toth 

Muirhead Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

Boyd Haverstock t 

— 10 

 

Nays 

Thompson Lautermilch 

Wiens Calvert 

Tchorzewski Johnson 

Teichrob Draper 

Shillington Serby 

Koskie Whitmore 

Anguish Sonntag 

Goulet Flavel 

Atkinson Cline 

Carson Scott 

Mitchell McPherson 

MacKinnon Wormsbecker 

Penner Kujawa 

Cunningham Stanger 

Upshall Knezacek 

Hagel Harper 

Bradley Keeping 

Koenker Carlson 

Lorje Langford 

Pringle Jess t 

— 40 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Time Allocation 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

At the conclusion of my comments I will read the motion set 

out as item no. 1 in the Routine Proceedings. It's fairly lengthy 

and I won't read it now. It will however, allocate the time 

available for the discussion of this Bill. 

 

The province is facing two separate but not unrelated realities. 

One is the fact that with our current financial 

problems, budgetary cuts in the health sector are unavoidable. 

The second reality is that without the legislative framework for 

a restructured delivery system in this province, the people of 

this province will not be able to move forward with the first 

critical step in health care reform. 

 

Only through the establishment of these district boards will 

Saskatchewan people, working in their local communities, be 

able to meet the challenges involved in these two realities by 

doing more with less. 

 

With the passage of this legislation and the establishment of 

these district boards, our communities will have the capacity to 

conduct the appropriate assessments of regional needs, to 

reduce the cost of duplication of services, and to plan and 

develop cooperative lead programs and services that 

Saskatchewan people want. 

 

Members opposite and the member from Maple Creek last 

night in Weyburn, stated, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill is all about 

closure of hospitals. They may so represent the case if they 

like, Mr. Speaker. I guess no one can stop them from that, but I 

want to say that in my experience those who misrepresent the 

facts usually get caught on their own misrepresentations. 

 

I do not think members opposite can say as they do say, I'm in 

favour of wellness, but this is about closing hospitals, and 

make that last very long. Mr. Speaker, this legislation is all 

about giving local people a say through district health boards in 

dealing with the financial problems created by 10 years of the 

worst financial mismanagement this country has ever seen. 

 

This is all about allowing local people to participate in 

fashioning a solution to a problem which we didn't create and 

which to a large extent they didn't create, but which members 

opposite created through their mismanagement. 

 

To date, Mr. Speaker, this Assembly has spent 12.5 hours in 

second reading debate on Bill 3, An Act respecting Health 

Districts. This motion to schedule the remaining debate on this 

piece of legislation is not overly restrictive. 

 

The motion suggests that the Assembly devote five full days to 

debate on this one Bill — five full days. Under ordinary sitting 

hours this will amount to a further 21.5 hours of debate for a 

total of 34 hours on this single piece of legislation. 

 

I know, Mr. Speaker, that members opposite have a great deal 

of difficulty in collecting their thoughts, but surely in 34 hours 

they ought to be able to collect their thoughts and make . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order. I would 

ask the member to direct his remarks through the Chair please. 

And I ask all other members to please let the minister make his 

presentation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that 



902 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1993 

most people in the province would agree that 34 hours is 

sufficient time to enable the members opposite to state their 

case. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under the . . . Mr. Speaker, with the current 

opposition in place, they I think have really lost sight of the 

function of an opposition. An opposition . . . The function of 

the opposition is not to stop the government dead in its tracks 

with respect to every controversial piece of legislation. Their 

function is to oppose but not to obstruct. They have, Mr. 

Speaker, been obstructing. 

 

In addition to the 50-plus hours available to the opposition, it 

should be noted that this piece of legislation was introduced 

and distributed to members of the Assembly and made 

available to the people of this province on March 3, fully five 

weeks ago. The minister made her second reading speech on 

March 10, the first day available for government business 

during the session. That was four weeks ago. The legislation is 

not something that the members opposite should be surprised 

about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if it is the intention of the Tories opposite — and 

the Liberal member apparently, although we have not heard her 

position on this Bill and we await that with interest — if it's the 

intention of the Tory opposition opposite to derail this 

initiative, then I want to be very clear about this government's 

intention. 

 

The people of this province have . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I will have to ask the member 

from Rosthern to please come to order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The people of this province have 

watched before as Liberals and Tories alike have made every 

effort to undermine the planning, the development and the 

establishment of a modern health care system which has not 

only been the national model, but the world model for over 30 

years. 

 

Over the course, Mr. Speaker, of the next three years the 

government and the people of this province will move forward 

with health care reform into what has been called the second 

generation. Most people in the province, as my colleague from 

Moose Jaw Palliser said today, most people in this province 

agree wellness is a useful reform. And where they are free of 

the misrepresentations and the nonsense spread by members 

opposite, Mr. Speaker, by and large they're understanding and 

supportive and want to work with us to make these changes, 

which are inevitable, as painless as possible. 

 

I must say, Mr. Speaker, members opposite are able to create 

some mischief. They have done so before; they will create 

mischief again. But I say, Mr. Speaker, that members opposite 

will not stand in the way of this government preserving health 

care for the future generations. And that's what the health 

districts is all about. 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation isn't the end of the debate on 

health reform in this province. On the contrary, Mr. Speaker, 

the debate has been going on for over five years. And for over 

five years members opposite have done whatever they can to 

restrict the reform of health care. Just as members opposite 

include . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Members can't constantly 

interrupt. I ask them again, please let the minister make his 

presentation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, over 30 years ago the 

former premier of the province, Allan Blakeney, stood in this 

place and introduced medicare. Members opposite opposed it 

with everything they had. They made the work of the 

government as difficult as they could. Mr. Speaker, well I may 

say, it's not obvious what you've learned in the ensuing years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the decades which have followed, 

members opposite have opposed and obstructed every single 

improvement of reform to health care. It is expected by the 

people of this province that members opposite will go on 

obstructing everything this government tries to do to make 

health care a better system and a system we can preserve. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Who did he talk to — you or us? 

 

The Speaker: — Order. If the member from Arm River wishes 

to make a comment, at least he should know he's got to do it 

from his seat. Order. Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — As I said, Mr. Speaker, this is not the 

end of the debate on health reform. The debate has been going 

on for over 30 years, but on the current system for over five 

years. We fully expect that members opposite will go on 

obstructing the progress and reform of health care in this 

province. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, puts in place a cooperative framework for 

action, cooperation with the local communities. The debate will 

continue, as it has over the last decade, on the basis of 

individual self-interest and turf protection for the special 

groups which members opposite take such pride in 

representing. 

 

Under this legislation, true health reform is going to be possible 

and real debate on how we undertake the massive challenge 

can begin. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I therefore move, seconded by the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview: 

 

 That notwithstanding the rules of the Assembly and 

following the adoption of this motion, when the order is 

called for resuming the adjourned debate on the motion for 

second reading of Bill 3, An Act respecting Health 

Districts, not more than two sitting days shall be allocated 

to debate on such order and that at 15 minutes before the 

time set for adjournment of 



April 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 903 

the second sitting day, unless sooner concluded, the Speaker 

shall interrupt the proceedings and put every question 

necessary to dispose of the order; and, 

 

 That there shall be two sitting days allocated to the 

consideration of the said Bill in Committee of the Whole, 

and that at 15 minutes before the time set for adjournment 

on the second sitting day, unless sooner concluded, the 

Chairman shall put every question necessary to dispose of 

every section of the Bill not yet passed and shall report the 

Bill forthwith to the House, and the question for the first 

and second reading of any amendments shall be put 

forthwith and decided without amendments or debate 

thereto; and, 

 

 That there shall be one sitting day allocated to consideration 

of motion for third reading of the said Bill, and that at 15 

minutes before the set time for adjournment, unless sooner 

concluded, the Speaker shall interrupt the proceedings and 

put every question necessary to dispose of the order for 

third reading of the Bill; and, 

 

 That consideration of the Bill, pursuant to this motion, be a 

special order of the Assembly to be called immediately 

after orders of the day. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise as the seconder for 

this motion. And I want to make a few brief remarks in support 

of the motion. 

 

As my colleague, the Minister of Labour, has pointed out, this 

House has debated this Bill on a number of occasions so far, 

and we have heard from the members opposite, about twelve 

and a half hours of debate, I think. Which even, even in such a 

short time as twelve and a half hours, Mr. Speaker, has been a 

very repetitive, a repetitive debate. You boil down the 

arguments of the members opposite, the points are simple, 

they're easily comprehended. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as I was indicating, there has already been 

twelve and a half hours of debate on this Bill, most of it, the 

bulk of it containing speeches, the speeches of the members 

opposite. And from the speeches that they have made, it is clear 

what their points are. Their points are already before this 

legislature and in that way, before the people in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

There has been already, after such a . . . after twelve and a half 

hours, the debate has become repetitive, Mr. Speaker. So that 

the allocation that is being proposed in the motion is, I submit, 

in the minds of all fair-minded people, an adequate opportunity 

for the opponents to this Bill to get their points of view in front 

of this Assembly and in that way in front of the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The allocation of five more days, Mr. Speaker, should  

be more than adequate to complete the members' points of view 

with respect to this debate and get the question decided by this 

Assembly. That's what we're elected to do. We're elected to 

decide things like this. We're not elected to fan the air with 

speeches that go over and over the same points and try in 

different ways to make the same points. 

 

So I would suggest that these time allocations are quite 

adequate, Mr. Speaker, for the kind of debate that we have with 

respect to the health district Bill. 

 

As the Minister of Labour pointed out, Mr. Speaker, this matter 

has been before the public of Saskatchewan in a very active 

way for at least the last five years. 

 

I want to also say that the members opposite are of the same 

view of the government when it comes to the question of 

whether or not health reform is necessary. I want to quote from 

a document, Mr. Speaker, and I'll identify the document at the 

conclusion of my remarks. But I want to quote from this 

document: 

 

 Health care represents the most difficult financial challenge 

facing my government and the people of Saskatchewan 

today. 

 

 The challenge is straightforward. How do we maintain the 

system while, at the same time, controlling the 

ever-increasing costs? 

 

 Our primary goal over the next decade will be to ensure 

effective and relevant delivery of health care. It will require 

setting priorities to accurately forecast our needs so we can 

adequately fund the system. It will require drafting a 

blueprint for health care into the year 2000. 

 

 It is a challenge for all of us. 

 

And later in the document, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 The questions we must answer include those surrounding the 

specialization of services in major hospitals; regional health 

care services; the most effective use of nurses and other 

health care professionals; the role of home care in the 

system; services in rural Saskatchewan; life-style programs 

and preventative medicine; the special needs of seniors; and 

the urgent requirements of funding. 

 

 Our system is now 25 years old. It needs major renovations. 

We must all get involved in making the changes. 

 

Now this was not a speech of the Minister of Health nor the 

Associate Minister, nor the Premier. These are direct quotes 

from the throne speech of the then Conservative government 

delivered by Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor on March 

21, 1988. 

 

This is the task that they set before the Murray Commission 

which was announced in that same 



904 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1993 

throne speech. The Murray Commission went across this 

province and heard testimony, and received briefs from 

practically everybody having any kind of an interest in health 

care, and then at the end of that time delivered a report to this 

government. Now we did not agree with all aspects of that 

report. 

 

We did not agree with all aspects of this report, Mr. Speaker, 

but the government who received that report — the former 

Conservative government — just simply didn't act on it at all, 

just run and hid on the issue because they didn't have the nerve 

to take it on. They didn't know what to do so they decided to do 

nothing because they were then running in fear of the electorate 

of this province, running in fear. And so they didn't act at all, 

Mr. Speaker, but just simply left the problem, which they 

clearly identified, for the next government to handle. 

 

And here we are — elected for, among other reasons, to handle 

that problem, to get some fiscal responsibility back into the 

public affairs of this province and that is what we are seeking 

to do, Mr. Speaker. That's what we're seeking to do. That 

requires of necessity some reform to the health care system, but 

let me remind members opposite that the system needed reform 

anyway. Their own document clearly identifies the need for 

reform and so we set about that task. 

 

Now it puzzles me, Mr. Speaker, why the idea that district 

health boards would be created by legislation is wrong. Is it 

better that those decisions be made in Regina by bureaucrats in 

the Department of Health, or is it better that these decisions be 

made by people out in the districts? Appointed and then 

elected. Of course, everyone of a fair mind must agree that it 

would be better for these decisions to be made at the local 

level. And that's what we're seeking to do. 

 

Now there's a great deal of support for that idea, a great deal of 

support. It may not exist on the other side of the House. I don't 

care about that, Mr. Speaker, but it does exist out in the 

communities. It does exist in the communities and we are 

seeking to accomplish that by this health district Bill. 

 

Now the point, Mr. Speaker, is what will this House decide to 

do? It will vote as to whether or not this Act should pass and 

these districts ought to be formed. And that debate, Mr. 

Speaker, can be held, and can be held effectively within the 

time limited by the motion which I am proud to second today. 

 

And so I would urge members of the House to support this 

motion so we can get about the business of considering this Bill 

and voting on it in the House, and hopefully to implement it 

across the province so that, I repeat, so that local people, 

people living in the districts, will have the opportunity to make 

their own decisions with respect to the kind of health care 

system that they should have within the fiscal realities of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — What's the member's point of order? 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As an opposition 

we're being throttled and we have closure being threatened and 

forced down our throats. And we find that the government 

members are taking the valuable time that is left for debate by 

trying to demonstrate the need for this. 

 

And I find it ironic, Mr. Speaker, that first of all, they are 

saying there is going to be a limited time for debate and then 

the Minister of Justice attempts to . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I think the member knows that 

that's not a point of order. That's a point of debate. That's not a 

point of order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — So, Mr. Speaker, having made my 

point, that the motion will allow sufficient time in the minds of 

all fair-minded people for all points of view to be stated on this 

Bill within the time limited by the motion put forward by the 

Minister of Labour, I hereby give notice, Mr. Speaker, pursuant 

to rule 34, that at the next sitting of the Assembly, immediately 

before the order of the day is called for resuming the adjourned 

debate on the motion to allocate time for the proceedings on 

Bill No. 3, An Act respecting Health Districts, and on any 

amendments or subamendments proposed thereto, I will move: 

 

 That the said debate be not further adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I want to draw members' 

attention to rule 34. And rule 34 does say that no closure 

motion can be introduced or can be given notice of until the 

debate and time allocation has at least been adjourned. And I 

do not believe that that has happened. So at this time we cannot 

accept that motion. 

 

Order. Order. Order. The debate will continue on the motion 

moved by the member from Churchill Downs and seconded by 

the member from Saskatoon fairway . . . Fairview. It's a little 

early. Order. Order. It's a little bit early. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to speak on this 

motion with a considerable amount of disgust for the type of 

action that a government has had to bring forward today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we see the Minister of Justice on his feet, the 

minister who has talked about reform in the past, reform of this 

system, and he brings in the heavy hand of government like 

we've never seen before in this province — never seen before. 

And he can't even bring it about into this House properly. 

 

He's so anxious, so anxious to cut off debate, Mr. Speaker, that 

he goes about it the wrong way. He's so used to having his 

massive majority ram through legislation at any cost that they 

don't even respect the principles of this House any longer. 

Invoke superclosure, that's the way to stifle any debate, Mr. 

Speaker. That's the way to close 



April 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 905 

off debate. That's the way to shut up the opposition. That's the 

way to close off the debate in town halls all over this province. 

 

That's the way that this government is reacting to every time 

there's a controversy. Every time this government feels that 

they're in a position where they're in some difficulty — invoke 

closure, shut off debate, absolutely . . . absolutely stifle all 

debate, don't allow anyone to speak, don't allow anyone to have 

any voice of opposition. Simply allow the government to move 

forward at all costs. 

 

This is a mean-spirited motion, a mean-spirited government, 

brought down by the member from Riversdale — a 

mean-spirited government like never been seen before in this 

province. 

 

They say, Mr. Speaker, they say, Mr. Speaker, that there's been 

adequate debate. Well, Mr. Speaker, there's been five hours of 

debate in this legislature, actual debating time on this motion, 

five hours. 

 

Three opposition members have spoke on health care reform in 

this province, Mr. Speaker. The member for 

Souris-Cannington, the member for Rosthern, and myself, the 

member for Kindersley, are the only ones, the only ones in this 

entire legislature that have spoke on this Bill. The only ones. 

 

Mr. Speaker, five hours of speeches on this is all it's been 

given. Not weeks and weeks and weeks of debate, as the 

minister says. Not adequate time. Very inadequate time. 

 

And we've asked this government time and time and time again 

to allow for adequate debate, to allow the public their 

opportunity to discuss this. And that is why, Mr. Speaker, that 

meetings are being organized all over this province as we 

speak. 

 

Meetings have been organized, upcoming meetings in Eston, in 

Kerrobert, in Kindersley, Codette, a number of other 

communities around the province, Mr. Speaker. They all want 

an opportunity for input into this health care reform. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the minister likes to say that everyone is in 

favour of health care rationalization. Well, Mr. Speaker, the 

point is, people are not against health care rationalization. 

People want an opportunity to try and develop a system that we 

can all live with, that we can all develop, that we can all be 

proud of in this province. But no, this government cannot allow 

that debate to take place. This government cannot allow 

people's input into this. 

 

This is fiscally driven. This is the only thing that they have on 

their mind, Mr. Speaker. They're not concerned about health 

care in this province. They're concerned about the bottom line, 

the fiscal numbers that they hope to be able to bring in a 

balanced budget at some point, and then stand up before 

everyone in the province and say we've balanced the budget; 

aren't we the good guys in all of this process. 

 

Well in the meantime, in the meantime, Mr. Speaker, people's 

health care is being stripped away from them 

in this province by a mean-spirited government. 

 

People are demanding debate, absolutely demanding debate of 

this Bill. People are demanding that the opposition holds forth, 

holds strong against a government that's gone completely off 

the agenda, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The member talks about Mr. Allan Blakeney and how he, how 

he brought forward things into this legislature. Well, Mr. Allan 

Blakeney didn't bring forward closure on things after five hours 

of debate, Mr. Speaker. After five hours of debate, I say to you, 

Mr. Speaker, that Allan Blakeney would not be forcing through 

legislation of this type. You members should lower your heads 

in shame at the kind of despicable actions that you're bringing 

before this legislature. 

 

Allan Blakeney brought about closure on one occasion that I'm 

aware of, Mr. Speaker, and that was with respect to the potash 

debate. And that was after 72 hours of debate, actual debating 

time, Mr. Speaker. And that debate, if we can focus on that for 

a moment, that debate was about potash mines — 

nationalization of holes in the ground. That's what it was about. 

 

And what we are seeing here is such a more fundamental, 

important, important measure, important concern to the people 

of Saskatchewan. It's about the closure of rural Saskatchewan, 

closure of rural hospitals, closure and destruction of rural 

Saskatchewan. That's what this is about. It's about holes all 

right, Mr. Speaker, holes of a different kind — graves for rural 

Saskatchewan residents. That's what we're talking about. 

 

And if any of you had the courage to come out to public 

meetings, you would find that people are opposed to your 

actions; you would find that people are concerned; you would 

find that they do not believe what you people are telling them. 

 

This motion was brought before this legislature, Mr. Speaker, 

by a minister in his normal arrogant fashion — brings it 

forward and laughs at the opposition. Absolutely laughs at 

people who are opposed to this motion. He laughs at the people 

of Saskatchewan. He laughs at the residents of this province 

that demand adequate health care services. 

 

He talks about misrepresentation. Well, Mr. Speaker, maybe 

we could lay out a few of the facts with respect to this. What 

their plan involves is reducing the number of acute care beds in 

this province from approximately 4.5 per thousand to 1.5 per 

thousand which is a reduction — and I want to point this out to 

members — this is a reduction of some 65 per cent of the 

health care services in my constituency alone. Sixty-five per 

cent of the acute care beds in my constituency will be done 

away with with a stroke of the pen by this government — 65 

per cent of the acute care beds and approximately 25 per cent 

of the long-term beds. 

 

And that is grossly, grossly inadequate to meet the 



906 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1993 

needs of the health care services in that area. And I invite you, 

every member of this legislature and particularly the member 

chirping from her seat, Cut Knife-Lloydminster, to look at your 

constituency and see how many beds will be reduced; what 

kind of level of service will be left in your constituency. And I 

invite each and every member to look at their constituency and 

see what level of health care service will be left at the end of 

the day when this government gets its way and rams through 

this legislation. How many will be left? How many hospitals 

will close? 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my constituency there are five hospitals. 

There's one in Eston, there's one in Eatonia that was just 

opened last summer, there's one in Kindersley, there's one in 

Kerrobert, and there's one in Dodsland, in the proposed health 

care unit that is being talked about. And four out of those five 

are small hospitals, Mr. Speaker — small hospitals, but yet 

they bring about a critically important service to those areas, 

absolutely critically important. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I've had opportunity in the last few days to 

visit with literally hundreds of people in my constituency about 

this. There was 400 in Eatonia, there was 500 in Leader, there 

was something in the order of a hundred at Brock, and dozens 

of phone calls and letters since then and meeting people on the 

street, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I haven't found one person, not one that agrees with this 

government and agrees that the level of health care services 

need to be cut back to the extent that you people are talking 

about. Not one, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In fact I would like to quote from a letter from one lady at 

Eatonia, Saskatchewan. And it's really quite lengthy and I 

won't read the entire thing. But I think the important point is is 

she is opposed to what you people are doing. Absolutely 

opposed. 

 

And she speaks from a lot of experience when it comes to 

health care services in this province, Mr. Speaker. Her husband 

had a heart attack a couple of years ago — Mr. Theaker, at 

Eatonia. And I know the gentleman and know the family well, 

Mr. Speaker. And he was rushed to the hospital in Eatonia. He 

was rushed to the hospital in Eatonia by his wife. They 

stabilized him, Mr. Speaker — there was a doctor there — 

stabilized that man and then sent him on to a larger health care 

facility, I believe it was in Saskatoon. And he made it, Mr. 

Speaker. He lived. He lived. 

 

And the point is, Mr. Speaker, that the attending physician that 

day said that that man would not be alive today had we not 

been able to stabilize his condition. He would be dead, Mr. 

Speaker. And that isn't overstating it. That is what the doctor, 

the attending physician that day, said: he would be dead. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and following the meeting in Eatonia, she took 

the time to sit down and talk about health care services in this 

province and, as I said, she wrote a lengthy letter about the 

involvement that her family 

has had. And then, Mr. Speaker, the very next day, upon 

questioning from the member from Rosthern to the Minister of 

Health in this province, she said the people of Eatonia are in 

favour of health care reform. She got up and went on about 

fearmongering and the member from Kindersley doing all of 

those kinds of things, Mr. Speaker. And I just want to read one 

paragraph of Enid Theaker's letter, and this is a direct quote: 

 

 Louise Simard's deplorable temper tantrum on CBC news on 

April 2 was very unprofessional. The people of this 

community deserve an apology, public apology. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that's what people of rural Saskatchewan 

are saying to this government: not only are you going to 

destroy our health care system, not only are you setting about a 

systematic process of the destruction of all services and all 

health care services and agricultural safety nets and almost 

every other thing you can think of rural Saskatchewan, but you 

stand in the legislature and you lecture them. You stand in the 

legislature and you tell them what is good for them. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this lady and along with a whole bunch of 

other people in this province want you to apologize, want you 

to change your direction, want you to apologize for the kinds of 

destructive things that you are forcing on the people of rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the very first phrase of this motion has in fact 

become the manifesto of the NDP government, the single 

characterizing principle about what this government lawyer 

from Riversdale is all about — the phrase, the NDP motto, 

something that the Premier uses on regular basis, 

"notwithstanding the rules". Notwithstanding the rules — one 

of the favourite phrases of this government. These are the 

words that the member from Riversdale lives by, Mr. Speaker, 

notwithstanding the rules. And he's used it frequently. 

 

(1530) 

 

And this motion before us, Mr. Speaker, is simply one more 

manifestation of the Premier's hunger for authoritarianism. The 

day he walked into the Premier's office is the day the hand of 

oppression reached into this legislature, and that hand of 

oppression rests heavy on the Saskatchewan people today, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Let us be clear that this motion is simply part of a pattern, a 

pattern of oppression that started from November of 1991 and 

sees as one of its great triumphs, one of its great moments of 

expression, this exercise of superclosure. 

 

Let me review, Mr. Speaker, this pattern that gives context and 

meaning to this motion. Shortly after the member for 

Riversdale ascended the stairs to power, he immediately set 

about denying the rights of people — denying the rights of 

farmers, denying the rights of the business community, denying 

the rights of his own 



April 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 907 

employees, and, Mr. Speaker, denying the rights of this 

honourable Assembly. This has been one of his mainstays and 

his joys, the dark and heavy hand of oppression, and he wears 

it like a man possessed. 

 

Let us review just some of the man's great achievements, his 

contribution to the saga of Saskatchewan history. This motion, 

Mr. Speaker, is the fruit from the same tree that saw the 

constitution of this province suspended and the rights of this 

Assembly overruled so that the member from Riversdale could 

bring in a phoney budget with deceptive numbers and 

outrageous harm to the good credit of this province. 

 

This motion is the fruit of that same evil tree that actually saw 

the constitution of Saskatchewan suspended for the first time in 

history outside of wartime. And you will recall, Mr. Speaker, 

that the people in the media were so shell-shocked with the 

outlandish and irresponsible rhetoric of the leader of the NDP 

that they barely noticed that the constitutional order had been 

overthrown in this province. 

 

They saw the same phrase that appears in the motion, the 

phrase that says: "notwithstanding the rules." And they heard 

the NDP leader say it like it was a necessary measure that 

simply set aside the rules of this Assembly for a temporary 

moment. 

 

But they did not understand and the Premier did not have the 

courage to acknowledge not only the rules of this Assembly 

were set aside, but the very constitution of this province itself 

had been set aside. The constitution is both written and 

unwritten, and its most important elements are the unwritten 

elements, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps the very most fundamental 

constitutional law is the unwritten law. And that is the law that 

there shall be a budget, and no government shall tax or spend 

without presenting and having approved a budget before the 

people's elected representatives of this province. 

 

But the Premier, the NDP leader set aside the constitution and 

defied 700 years of parliamentary democracy saying, find it in 

writing. And he is, Mr. Speaker, a clever constitutional lawyer. 

The NDP leader . . . And he knew that the people are not 

constitutional experts, so he could get away with it. He just 

hopes he can get away with this dastardly motion today. 

 

One more time . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . exactly, he says 

from his seat. Just one more time is all I need. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Maybe twice. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Maybe twice — exactly. Doesn't matter how 

many times this Premier brings in this type of closure motion. 

You've made it a tradition in this province, Mr. Premier. 

You've made it a tradition in this province, this type of 

superclosure. 

 

This is the motion that comes from a poisoned tree, Mr. 

Speaker. While it is not a question of grievance 

before supply, the principles are clearly related and based on 

the same principles of democracy. The principle here is that the 

government should not, must not engage in massive legislative 

change without allowing the widest and most detailed debate 

and public exposure before the Legislative Assembly . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . And the Premier speaks again from 

his chair and he says, debate. Well, Mr. Premier, with all due 

respect, we would like to debate. We would like to debate this 

Bill but we're not being allowed to. We have arguments and the 

people of Saskatchewan have arguments, sir. They want you at 

a meeting, and you don't have the intestinal fortitude to make it 

to one of them. You haven't gone to any public meetings. You, 

sir are not fit . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order, order. Will 

the Premier please come to order. Order! Will the Premier 

please come to order. Order, order, order. I would like to ask 

the member to please direct his remarks through the Chair and 

not to any particular member in the House; direct them through 

the Chair. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. And the member from 

Riversdale talks about being run out of Brock. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the only one that was run out 

of that town that night was the people who were concerned 

about your type of legislation. The people of that community 

that night are opposed to your government, sir. 

 

They are . . . the minister never even spoke that night, Mr. 

Speaker. The minister didn't speak that night. I took the 

opportunity to speak that night. And you weren't there, how do 

you know what happened? The fact of the matter is, Mr. 

Speaker, that the people of that community are very concerned 

about health care. 

 

They are very concerned about your measures, sir, and they're 

even more concerned now that they know about the type of 

legislative action that you're doing today. Superclosure, 

superclosure that you are invoking upon the people of this 

province, Mr. Speaker, are going to turn rural Saskatchewan 

against you and your government like you've never seen 

before. 

 

You, sir, Mr. Speaker, this is a one-term government. You can 

cling to that chair all you like, Mr. Premier, but I'll tell you, sir, 

the people of Saskatchewan are going to rip you from your 

position before very long. The very first opportunity, Mr. 

Speaker, they get, I predict that you, sir, will no longer be 

Premier. 

 

The chair that you have coveted since the day you walked into 

this Assembly will not be there for you very much longer, sir. 

The chair that you have coveted since the day you walked into 

this Assembly, is about to evaporate before your eyes. Yes it is, 

Mr. Speaker. The people of the province of . . . (inaudible 



908 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1993 

interjection) . . . Well and he said, he chirps from his seat, it 

won't be me over there. Well that's fine, Mr. Speaker, as long 

as you aren't there that'll satisfy me. As long as this Premier 

isn't there, it'll satisfy me, Mr. Speaker. It'll satisfy me and the 

people of this province. 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. I would ask the 

Premier once more to please not intervene when the member is 

trying to make his remarks. Order. The Premier full knows the 

rules of this House, that when the Speaker is on his feet, he is 

not to interrupt. I ask the Premier to please come to order. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Premier doesn't like to hear these kinds of things, and it's 

obvious. He doesn't like to hear about democratic principles. 

He doesn't like to hear about what the people of rural 

Saskatchewan are saying about him and his government. He 

doesn't like to hear the fact that his government is going to be 

ripped from that chair before very long, Mr. Speaker. 

 

He doesn't like to hear that his government's credibility is 

slipping. He doesn't like to hear, Mr. Speaker, that the people 

of this province don't believe him; they don't believe in his 

democratic principles; they don't believe in the fact that he's 

going to help rural Saskatchewan. They don't believe him any 

longer, Mr. Speaker, and it's becoming obvious. 

 

Rallies all over this province, Mr. Speaker, are beginning to 

illustrate clearly what people think about health care and health 

care reform as presented by this government, Mr. Speaker. This 

motion is to shut up anyone who is opposed to this government 

and that member from Riversdale. That's what this motion is 

about, Mr. Speaker. He chirps from his seat about adequate 

debate, Mr. Speaker. He isn't interested in adequate debate. I 

know that and the people of Saskatchewan know that. 

 

The member from Riversdale, the constitutional lawyer with a 

flair for deception, just as that member puts in his motion, just 

as he suspended the constitution, let us remember the law he 

passed in this Assembly removing the rights of government 

employees before the courts. Fruit off that same poison tree, 

Mr. Speaker, fruit off that same poison tree, this motion, and 

his attack on the rights of employees of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in his classic, nefarious style, the man with the 

poison tongue sent his minions into the Assembly to 

assassinate the character of dozens of individuals denied by the 

law from any defence for themselves. 

 

And the Premier and his minions did their unseemly work. And 

from the tree this motion springs, Mr. Speaker. And you will 

remember that the law that contains this decree, that no 

government employee could have the protection for law. And I 

quote: 

 

 . . . any claim in damages or debt for unjust dismissal, breach 

of contract, inducing breach of contract, interference with a 

contract, mental distress, loss of reputation, defamation or 

any other cause of action in contract, tort or equity arising 

from or incidental to the creation, termination or expiration 

of a Crown employment contract. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's the type of action that this Premier brings 

before this Assembly. That's the type of motions that he brings 

before this Assembly. Talk about poisoned fruit from the same 

tree the member from Riversdale planted, Mr. Speaker, and the 

motion before us is similarly minded. Just as the NDP leader 

ripped the rights of his own employees from under them, he 

now aims to rip the rights of the Assembly out of the hands of 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

It is a government and a leader that will stop at nothing, 

absolutely nothing to have their way with this province. And 

this motion, Mr. Speaker, is an utter, unmitigated act of shame. 

The constitution stands in the man's way, so he has to throw it 

out. His employees stand in the way, so he takes away their 

lawful rights. This Assembly stands in the way, he brings 

forward this superclosure motion. He will stop at nothing and 

the pattern is clear. It is deep, it is reprehensible, Mr. Speaker. 

 

After he eliminated the rights of employees, the fruit from the 

tree from which this motion grows continued to be fertilized by 

the miscreant behaviour of the NDP leader, Mr. Speaker. The 

pattern continued. You'll remember, Mr. Speaker, the rash of 

legislation that took the power from the people, power from the 

law, and placed it solidly in the hands of cabinet ministers and 

their appointees. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just think of the environmental Act for a moment 

that gave NDP appointees the right to enter private property 

without a search warrant, another example, Mr. Speaker, of this 

government that wants to be able to do whatever it wants in 

this province. This is the same putrid fruit that falls from the 

tree which this motion grows from. The member for Riversdale 

passed into law a situation where one of their appointees has 

more power than a police officer in pursuit of a murder case or 

looking for narcotics. And that, Mr. Speaker, is the mentality 

and corruption that this Bill represents. 

 

This NDP government passed into law provisions that give 

lone, individual ministers the power to create laws out of thin 

air. But one of the most nefarious and dastardly precursors of 

this vile motion, Mr. Speaker, was the massive 

disenfranchisement of all farmers across Saskatchewan. This 

motion comes from the same principle the Premier used when 

he unilaterally removed the rights of all farmers to go to the 

court to seek protection from the government. 

 

And we all remember that last spring, Mr. Speaker. Everyone, 

every farmer in this province now realizes exactly the type of 

action that this government is prepared to bring before this 

Assembly. Any type of opposition has to be quashed — simple 

and fast. As quickly as possible they bring forward a motion 

into 



April 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 909 

this Assembly to cut off all debate, to not allow anyone — not 

allow anyone to oppose them. 

 

(1545) 

 

The very fact, Mr. Speaker, that the courts are the cornerstone 

of the people's protection from government tyranny, the very 

fact that it entirely irrelevant to this constitutional lawyer. 

Instead of valuing the fundamental protection, instead of 

cherishing it for the people, he stands and destroys it. 

 

This motion, Mr. Speaker, is an act of destruction at the hands 

of the destroyers. And, Mr. Speaker, the government shouts to 

try and silence me and my colleagues, and the government 

members shout to try and silence the people. That's what's 

happening, Mr. Speaker, in this Assembly. 

 

There isn't an opportunity for debate any longer. This 

government doesn't want debate. They don't want people to 

stand up and outline what kinds of things are happening in this 

province. They don't want anyone to be able to stand and say 

that these changes to the health care system — the health care 

system that they so proudly say they created and so proudly 

protected all these years — they don't want people of rural 

Saskatchewan to know the truth, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

They don't want people to know the truth about this Bill. They 

don't want people to know what is going on, Mr. Speaker, with 

respect to acute care bed levels. And it's good to see that the 

member from Elphinstone agrees with that, Mr. Speaker. He 

knows, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of what he does and what his 

government does. He knows that this is an important issue. He 

knows how important this is to rural Saskatchewan, and indeed 

the entire population of Saskatchewan. He knows how 

important it is and he also knows how critically important it is 

to get this Bill through as quickly as possible before there's any 

more erosion of the support that the member from Riversdale 

and his government has. 

 

Your support is absolutely eroding before your eyes. And I'm 

surprised, Mr. Speaker, with all of the experience that this 

government has, that they don't see that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of this Saskatchewan . . . the people of 

this province, Mr. Speaker, are opposed to what this 

government is doing. They're opposed to the actions of this 

government. They're opposed to this motion. 

 

It was interesting, Mr. Speaker, yesterday I was in my 

constituency and people . . . the phone continued to ring all day 

long. People coming into our office, people phoning, voicing 

their displeasure. They'd already heard, already heard in rural 

Saskatchewan that this government once again was going to 

force its way, force its way onto the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an act of destruction by a government that 

seems bent on destroying anything, anything at all that offers a 

shred of hope in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But I want to remind them, Mr. Speaker, I want to remind them 

that the right to debate in this Assembly is a fundamental right 

that this democracy has . . . democracy has protected since the 

beginning of time. 

 

It's not about silence. It's about debate. It's not about the hand 

of oppression reaching from the Premier's office. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we will not be silenced. We intend to go to public 

meetings all over this province and tell the people of 

Saskatchewan what this destructive legislation is going to do to 

them. We are prepared, Mr. Speaker, to go to every meeting 

that is . . . public meeting that is held in this province and 

debate and ask and tell the people of this province what kind of 

legislation this is all about. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Shameful legislation. Shameful 

legislation. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Absolutely shameful legislation, brought about 

by a government that shows no shame for anything they do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the loyal opposition does not speak up, if Her 

Majesty's Loyal Opposition does not use every ounce of their 

strength to say no, we respectfully refuse, if we do not speak 

up, then who shall speak for freedom in this province? 

 

Let me paraphrase an old but very wise quote from history, Mr. 

Speaker. And it goes as follows. They came first for the 

government employees, and I didn't speak up because I wasn't 

a government employee. They came next for small-business 

people, and I didn't speak up because I did not have a small 

business. They came next for farmers, and I did not speak up 

because I wasn't a farmer. They came next for rural hospitals, 

and I didn't speak up because I lived in the city. They came 

next for me and by that time there was no one left to speak up 

for me. That, Mr. Speaker, is what our opposition to this 

motion is all about. It is speaking up for the people of 

Saskatchewan, speaking up for the most fundamental principles 

of our democratic system. 

 

Look at the track record, Mr. Speaker, look at the fruit on this 

poison tree that this government has planted and nurtured since 

it started in office. The poison tree that is wrapped in a strange 

and mystical chant from the Premier's . . . from the Premier 

himself: notwithstanding the rules — notwithstanding the rules, 

Mr. Speaker. This man is above the rules in this legislature. 

This is a man that has shown no respect for this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker. This is a man who tells everyone, at every occasion, 

that he is going to uplift the principles of democracy. He is 

going to uplift the principles of government. And, Mr. Speaker, 

then he comes down the stairs into this Assembly and puts 

forward this type of legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how can the members of this government stand 

this? How can you sit in this Assembly day after day after day 

and watch this Premier destroy democracy before our eyes? 

How can 



910 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1993 

you do that? What brings you here every day? What motivates 

you in the morning to get up and bring yourself to this 

Assembly? 

 

And the member from Biggar, he sits back in the corner there, 

as he always does, and he laughs, Mr. Speaker. He laughs 

about the principles of democracy. And I ask him, I ask him: 

where was he, where was he when it came time to go to a 

health care meeting in Leader? I offered him a ride, Mr. 

Speaker. I offered him the opportunity to come there and 

defend his . . . the actions of his government. But no, no, it was 

a Friday, Mr. Speaker, he had better plans, better things to do. 

He was too busy. He was too busy that he couldn't go and listen 

to the concerns of rural Saskatchewan that day. 

 

And my guess is, Mr. Speaker, that him along with a whole 

bunch of other back bench MLAs are getting literally dozens of 

calls about this type of legislation. I'll bet they are getting . . . 

I'll bet they are hearing from the people of Saskatchewan. And 

the financial wizard from . . . the financial wizard from Swift 

Current, in the credit union out at Swift Current, holds his hand 

up zero. That's about what you know about this subject, sir. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Zero. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Zero, right. Mr. Speaker, that's about what's left 

of the credit union that you used to chair. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of this province are opposed to this 

legislation. Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member for Maple Creek 

on his feet? 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — With permission of the Assembly, to 

introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, in the Speaker's gallery this afternoon we have with us 

a former member of this Assembly, the former MLA from the 

Rosthern constituency, Ralph Katzman. Mr. Katzman has 

informed me that he has just been the recipient of a 125 medal, 

along with many other distinguished people in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And we're very happy that he was a recipient of 

that award. 

 

We also would like you to know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that Mr. 

Katzman is now just retired from the city of Saskatoon, another 

great service to the community. Has worked for many years in 

the city and doing a great job up there. He also still participates 

in some local government. He's involved with the local 

recreation board and helps his community in that respect. 

 

I believe that he was a member of the Assembly from '78 to 

'86, or was it '75? — '75, yes, a goodly number 

of years in this Assembly, representing his people and serving 

the people of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

would ask that the folks in the Assembly join with me in 

welcoming Mr. Katzman today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to add my 

voice of welcome as well to Mr. Katzman. A long and 

distinguished career in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Time Allocation 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Boyd: — The business at hand, Mr. Speaker, is a closure 

motion that's been presented to this legislature. 

 

In the last session of this Assembly, the NDP government . . . 

the government member for Riversdale invoked closure on the 

Assembly more times, Mr. Speaker, more times than has been 

done before in the entire history of this province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want members to think about that for a 

few moments — think about it very seriously. In one session 

the Premier has left his indelible mark of darkness, this 

Premier's hand of oppression, more times than in the entire 

history of the legislative democracy of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

This is an enormous thing — a terrible and dreadful thing, Mr. 

Speaker. From the beginning of this Assembly's existence no 

Premier has been willing to use the degree, the frequency and 

the severity of oppression or debate as this Premier has — no 

one, no one before him. Even when you add it up collectively 

the whole number of governments that have been in this 

province before, have not used this type of legislative action 

more than this government has. 

 

And it seems incredible, Mr. Speaker. They have a massive 

majority. They have a absolute massive majority in this 

province. They have the ability to send 20 or 25 members at 

least, if not more, around this province to debate health care. 

 

These are the great orators of modern day, as they like to think 

of themselves. These are the people, Mr. Speaker, that like to 

say they hold democracy as an important value, Mr. Speaker. 

But yet where are they? Where are they? You've developed an 

absolute bunker mentality, absolute bunker mentality with 

respect of legislature in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And they all chirp from their seat now. They're all very 

encouraged to get into the debate, Mr. Speaker, all interested in 

debating this. But where are you when it comes time to talk 

about closure? Where are you? Where are they, Mr. Speaker? 

 

You bring forward this type of destructive action into this 

province and then you sit there and don't say a 



April 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 911 

word. Mr. Speaker, it's absolutely incredible that members of 

that government would take the opportunity not to speak in this 

legislature about this closure motion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the member from Cut Knife-Lloyd chirps from her seat 

and she says, if I sat down, she would stand up and talk about 

this motion. Well, Mr. Speaker, I would challenge that 

member, I would challenge that member to get on her feet and 

talk about this closure motion. Even though it would be an 

ill-informed contribution to the debate, Mr. Speaker, I'm sure 

the people of Saskatchewan would like to know her thoughts 

when it comes to closure in this province. 

 

When you look at this motion, Mr. Speaker, try and put it in a 

historical context. Consider what happened when the 

government of the day wanted to sell a potash mine. The 

debate raged on and on and on for days and days and days, 

weeks, dozens and dozens of hours. In fact I recall the debate, 

Mr. Speaker, of selling potash mines, lasted in excess of 70 

hours, Mr. Speaker. And only after 70 hours of debate did the 

government consider even invoking closure, even consider it. 

 

When did this government invoke closure, Mr. Speaker? After 

five hours of debate. Three speakers, three opposition people 

have had the opportunity to speak. Look it up, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The important thing to recognize here is that they invoke 

closure whenever they want. It doesn't matter what anyone 

thinks any more. They've done it so often it's become a 

practice. It's a habit, absolute habit. No problem with it 

whatsoever. They've become so used to it, so used to using this 

destructive tool of government, so used to it that it doesn't even 

bother them any more. 

 

(1600) 

 

And it's amusing, Mr. Speaker, because they used to all stand 

in this legislature when previous governments . . . even after 70 

hours of debate, even after that length of time, Mr. Speaker, 

even after that length of time those members would stand up in 

their holier-than-thou attitude that they all have and say that 

closure was a bad thing. 

 

But now, Mr. Speaker, no problem whatsoever. One member 

spoke for 16 hours on closure one time, Mr. Speaker. I think it's 

one of the members from Moose Jaw. 

 

An Hon. Member: — No, member from Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Member from Rosemont, pardon me. He 

probably could have done the same thing, I expect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this arrogance, the lack of respect for this 

institution is absolutely breathtaking. Mr. Speaker, I say plainly 

that I'm tired of the pretensions of this Premier. He stands in 

this Assembly and he has the bald audacity to talk about the 

institution as if it means anything to him. 

And I'll be the first to concede, Mr. Speaker, that that 

constitutional lawyer is a fine orator, a fine speaker, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And when you listen to him and his speeches 

about his great concern for the Legislative Assembly and 

parliamentary democracy, when you listen to his finely crafted 

words, you might think this guy actually believes it. He's such a 

great actor in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, that you would 

think for everyone collectively has . . . when they have the 

opportunity to listen to that man, they believe it, because he 

puts such conviction into it. 

 

But look at his legacy, Mr. Speaker. Look at what he has done. 

Look at what he has done to the province of Saskatchewan. 

Check his efforts against his fine words and you'll find the 

worst streak of cynical hypocrisy recorded in the Hansards of 

any legislature . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Obviously the member for 

Kindersley feels strongly about the question before us, but he 

should not allow his emotions to override his judgement as to 

what language is appropriate in debate. And I caution the 

member to respect the rules of the Assembly which caution us 

to use language which is appropriate for this House. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Speaker 

. . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member from Maple 

Creek on his feet? 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — I think I have a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — What is your point of order? 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — I thought there was some kind of a rule, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that members of the government were 

supposed to stay awake while the debate was on. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Point of order is not well taken. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I apologize if I was outside of the rules of this 

legislature. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it's important that we 

all recognize the importance of the rules of this Assembly. But, 

Mr. Speaker, I think this motion, this motion that we see before 

the House is an affront to those very rules of democracy, the 

very rules of this legislature, Mr. Speaker . . . Deputy Speaker. 

 

The legacy that this Premier has left this province . . . Just have 

a moment to check his efforts against the fine words that he 

brings forward in this legislature. The legacy of this Premier 

when it comes to institutional and democratic values 

fundamental to the process of this institution, that legacy is 

shameful, hurtful, and profoundly anti-democratic, Mr. 

Speaker. 



912 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1993 

That's the legacy that the member from Riversdale has left in 

this Assembly — completely anti-democratic, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the Justice minister waves his hand because he . . . it's 

maybe not as bad as we like to point out. Maybe not as bad as 

we like to point out, Mr. Speaker. But the fact of the matter is, 

is it's very, very serious. We are being chastised and not 

allowed the opportunity to speak in this legislature about an 

extremely, extremely important piece of legislation, legislation 

that sets forth in this province the type of change, the type of 

destructive actions that will set back rural Saskatchewan to the 

'30s. 

 

People in the province of Saskatchewan in my constituency, 

Mr. Speaker, will have to travel something in the order of 75 

miles one way to get health care services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this province we have an agricultural base. We 

have people that are engaged in agriculture. We all know the 

kind of things that can happen in agriculture, the high rate of 

accidents because of the type of job it is, Mr. Speaker. And 

those people will have to go forward 75 miles if they're hurt in 

an accident or something of that nature to get health care 

services now as a result of this government's actions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it's important for the members opposite to 

realize, just take a moment to realize what 1.5 beds per 

thousand will mean to rural Saskatchewan. In my constituency, 

Mr. Speaker, it will mean the closure of a bunch of hospitals. 

That's simply what it means. There will be hospitals all over 

this province forced to close as a result of the actions of this 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it's important that we just take a moment 

to touch on a few of these things. And I'd like to quote from an 

editorial that just came out today in the Kindersley Clarion, 

Mr. Speaker. It's important to realize that people all over this 

province now are beginning to see through the destructive 

actions that this Bill will bring forward. And I'll read parts of 

this editorial. "Too much too soon," it's entitled. 

 

 Can Health minister Louise Simard be serious about her 

plans for rural health care? Does she really believe she can 

chop, slash, and hack to the point where people have very 

serious concerns about their well-being? Does she really 

think Saskatchewan is so depressed economically that we 

will agree to this without a fight — a big, big fight? 

 

Well that's the first paragraph of this editorial, Mr. Speaker. 

That's what people are saying about your plans for change now, 

Mr. Speaker. That's what they're saying about the wellness plan 

that you people are saying is going to be the saviour of health 

care in this province. That's what they're saying. 

 

According to the provincial government, the proposed Prairie 

West health care district which includes Kindersley, Kerrobert, 

Dodsland, Eatonia, and Eston does not rate more than 22 acute 

care beds. This is less than what is now available in just one 

hospital, the Kindersley Union Hospital. Kindersley's hospital 

will be reduced . . . Get this now. Just pay 

attention for a moment. This is how much the Kindersley 

hospital alone will be reduced — 72 per cent, from 29 beds to 8 

beds. Mr. Speaker, 29 beds to 8 beds is what the reduction will 

be — 72 per cent. Eston will see their hospital reduced from 

seven beds to three; Kerrobert will be reduced 60 per cent from 

14 beds to 6; and Eatonia and Dodsland will be turned into 

glorified first-aid stations. 

 

And that's not my words, Mr. Speaker. Those are not my 

words. These are the words of the people of rural 

Saskatchewan. This is an editorial that came out today in the 

Kindersley Clarion. This, Mr. Speaker, is what people think 

about your changes. 

 

An Hon. Member: — This is rural revenge. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Rural revenge, exactly, Mr. Speaker. The people 

of rural Saskatchewan now realize exactly the hidden agenda 

that this government has in mind for them. And I quote again: 

 

 Simard assures us that none of us will be in any mortal 

jeopardy because of the massive cutbacks. Heck, she has 

her wellness plan which she seems to be aimed at forcing 

us to stay well or else. 

 

Stay well or else. And it's that or else that's got a lot of people 

in this province concerned. It's that or else what? Or else there 

isn't any health care services? Or else we don't need you any 

longer in this province? Or else what? 

 

 But the Health minister must realize we are not the same as 

the large urban centres. Our population is much more 

dispersed and on the whole much older. We need more 

health care here than they do in the cities, and improved 

roads and more ambulances is not the answer. 

 

Is not the answer, Mr. Speaker, absolutely not the answer. And 

we heard at the meeting in Brock . . . It was interesting to note, 

Mr. Speaker, there was a representative, I believe his name was 

John Borody, representing the Department of Health that night. 

And when asked whether ambulance services in rural 

Saskatchewan would receive more funding to help with the 

increased load that's going to be forced upon them, he said no. 

He said no, there won't be increased funding available for 

ambulances. We're only going to . . . we're just going to make it 

better, he said. We're going to make the service better. 

 

We're going to provide them with better training. We're going 

to provide them with all of these glorious kinds of things so 

that they'll be able to rush out 75 miles and pick up a heart 

attack victim and save him or her, Mr. Speaker. And that isn't 

what's going to happen. 

 

When asked if home care will be able to pick up the number of 

people that are going to have to move from level 1 to 4 care in 

rural Saskatchewan into home care situations, when asked if 

home care could do that job, that same representative of the 

government that night 



April 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 913 

said, I hope so. He hopes. Well the hopes of rural 

Saskatchewan aren't being addressed very well by this 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And they go on to say in this editorial: 

 

 As can be expected, rural Saskatchewan is not going to sit 

back and take the assault on the most sacred of all sacred 

cows. Meetings have already taken place in Leader, 

Eatonia, Brock, and in this area. Others are slated for April 

14 in Kerrobert, April 15 in Eston, and Monday, April 19 in 

Kindersley. No one disputes that given the province's 

financial position some economies are necessary. 

 

No one disputes that. But the government must assure us that it 

has cut everything else to the bone before attacking rural health 

care. It's just too important to too many people. Mr. Speaker, 

absolutely too important to too many people in this province, to 

let this just slide through, as the government's hoping will 

happen. 

 

And other articles, other articles in the same paper today, Mr. 

Speaker. "Eatonia fighting hard against health care cutbacks." 

Mr. Speaker, Eatonia citizens want to preserve their hospital. 

 

We are losing our hospital if we accept this — let's fight it. 

That's what one person said that night in that hall, Mr. Speaker, 

in the school gymnasium that night. And there were 500 people 

there. 

 

And it was interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that there wasn't 

one single person that night that stood up and said, I'm in 

favour of cutting back acute care beds. Not one. Not a single 

person stood up and said that. 

 

What happened that night was . . . and it's unfortunate that the 

government members didn't have the courage to go to that 

meeting, Mr. Speaker, because people stood up and they 

become very, very emotional about what their hospital's future 

is. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it's interesting to note as well, their hospital 

was just opened last August, just opened. And as I recall that 

day . . . And I was there and the member from Biggar was there 

as well that day in Eatonia, Saskatchewan, and the entire 

community turned out that day. They closed down school. And 

in rural Saskatchewan that doesn't happen very often, let me 

tell you, as the Minister of Education knows. They closed 

down the schools that day because of the historic importance of 

that opening of that hospital that day. And the band was there. 

They had the whole school band there, and they played a 

number of selections that day, Mr. Speaker, and the whole 

community turned out. It was a beautiful summer afternoon, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And person after person that were allowed to speak that day, 

and I had the pleasure of being one of those people, and so I'm 

sure the pleasure was also of the member from Biggar. He had 

the pleasure that day of standing up and speaking and opening 

. . . taking part 

in that hospital opening. I think he even took part in the ribbon 

opening, if I recall correctly. I think he took part in that; I'm 

quite sure he did. He's nodding his head in agreement. He did 

take part in it, I'm sure, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1615) 

 

And he talked that day about wellness. He talked about the 

importance of health care in rural Saskatchewan. He talked 

about how critically important it was to have adequate health 

care services in rural parts of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. He talked about all of those kinds of things in the 

most, I guess you'd say, important way he could possibly think 

of. He talked about the importance of the wellness plan and 

how it'll bring about a renewed sense of vigour in the rural 

areas of this province and in health care in general. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, now what's happening? When the fight of 

their lives in Eatonia is taking place to save their hospital, 

where is that member? Where is that member the other night in 

Eatonia? Where was he to come and talk in such glorious terms 

about the wellness system, the wellness model that your 

government is creating? Why, Mr. Speaker, would he not come 

out there that evening to rural Saskatchewan in Eatonia and 

inform all of the people about the great things that this 

government is doing in health care? 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker — I think I know the reason — because 

he's ashamed of it. He's absolutely ashamed of these changes 

that are being forced upon people of rural Saskatchewan. Either 

that or he doesn't have any courage. If he had the courage of his 

convictions, he would come out to that . . . would have came 

out to that meeting and would of spoke to those people. And 

they would have given you the opportunity. 

 

They were wondering that night, Mr. Speaker, they were 

wondering that night where you people were. You were 

invited. The minister was invited. I invited her no less than four 

occasions in this Assembly to that meeting. The good people of 

that community asked me, on their behalf, to invite her. They 

asked me to invite her to that meeting and I did so on four 

occasions in this Assembly. And then that minister stands up 

and says, it's not good enough; it's not good enough for the 

MLA for that constituency to invite me. We have to have an 

invitation from the people of that community. She was too 

busy, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So what happened? I simply picked up the phone, called the 

administrator of the hospital — Mrs. Debbie Cook out there — 

asked her if she wouldn't mind inviting the Minister of Health 

to that meeting. And they said, well I thought that's what you 

were going to do. And I said, I have. On four occasions I've 

asked that minister to come to that meeting in Eatonia. On four 

occasions I've done it and every single time she's denied us. So 

maybe it would be a good idea if you would send, as quickly as 

possible, a fax to that member, to the Minister of Health. 

 

And they did that. They a sent a fax as quickly as 



914 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1993 

possible after question period that day. And they did receive it. 

The minister acknowledged that they received it. But she 

couldn't make it. She was too busy. It didn't fit into her 

schedule, even though she knew and had been invited on a 

number of occasions. She could have cleared her calendar. 

 

What was more important? What was so important that evening 

that she couldn't make it? She has access to government 

aircraft. She has access to getting out there within . . . it's about 

30 minutes on the government aircraft that are available to her. 

She had plenty of opportunity to clear her schedule. She had 

plenty of opportunity to go there that evening and talk to the 

people of rural Saskatchewan, but she refused. 

 

An Hon. Member: — She was afraid. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — She was afraid. That's exactly the case. She 

knows, she knows how destructive these policies are. That's the 

same member. And it's interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, when 

she was on the opposition side she used to be the champion, the 

absolute champion of health care protectors in this province. 

She would stand in this legislature on a frequent basis and point 

to people in the galleries and say to them to say to the rest of 

the Assembly how important health care services were and how 

the government was hurting them in some way. She did it on a 

regular basis, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And now when she has the opportunity to actually do 

something about these type of changes, when she has the 

opportunity, Mr. Speaker, when she has the opportunity to help 

Saskatchewan health care, what does she do? She brings in the 

most destructive policy that could ever be brought into rural 

Saskatchewan and indeed health care in general in this 

province. 

 

And it's no wonder, it's no wonder that the headlines in the 

papers out there are saying: Eatonia fighting hard against health 

care cut-backs. That's what the papers in those areas are saying, 

Mr. Speaker. And they go on and they go on and they go on, 

column after column after column of people that are opposed to 

these types of things, letter after letter after letter. 

 

It's not surprising, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite 

have to bring in this type of closure legislation because they 

know how important this is as an issue to them. Their seats, the 

very constituencies that they represent, are about to turn on 

them. They're about to turn on them, Mr. Speaker. They're 

about to throw them from office at the very first opportunity 

they get. 

 

And here's another letter, Mr. Speaker, that I'd like to read into 

the record from people in my area: 

 

 I'm writing to you at this time to express my concern at your 

health care centre's lack of funding in our area. I live 

approximately 30 miles from the hospital and doctor on 

gravel roads that are not always in the best shape for fast 

trips. The age of our population is getting older and the 

need for this type of facility in the 

future years will be more critical than ever. You can't expect 

people not to have health care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it goes on to say: 

 

 I'm concerned that if this facility is reduced in size, staffing 

will no longer meet my needs or the needs of the 

community in the future. We are in a large area with 

hospitals at least 30 to 40 miles away from any other 

facility. We are in critical condition with the farm economy 

and our towns, businessmen and women in hard times, and 

this is the last thing we need now. Please do not downsize 

this facility. 

 

This comes from a constituent of mine, Mr. Speaker. And he's 

so opposed to this type of legislation that he's taken the time to 

write to me. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, we see a government that brings 

forward this type of legislation to cut off debate. 

 

I recall seeing this gentleman, Mr. Kevin Butt, at the meeting 

in Eatonia that night; him and his wife were both there. I've had 

the pleasure of meeting those people and talking to them over 

the years, Mr. Speaker. I have had the pleasure of meeting all 

of the people in that area, and I haven't found a one — not one 

— that's in favour of these changes, these cut-backs. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would venture to say that they wouldn't be 

in favour of this action either if they knew about it, and I'm 

sure they do now. The media has picked up on it in rural 

Saskatchewan. They know what's happening now, Mr. Speaker. 

They know what's happening. They know that this government 

is bringing forward the heavy hand onto the opposition once 

again. 

 

The process of this institution, the legacy of this government is 

shameful, hurtful, and profoundly anti-democratic. I say again 

— and we want it to sink in — in all recorded history since the 

birth of this legislature, all of the words from the very first 

premier to the words of the last premier to come before this 

one, in all that time, no premier, not one of them, has had the 

absolute disrespect to impose closure like a narcotic to a drug 

addict, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I find it incomprehensible that the back benches of the NDP are 

prepared to participate in this dangerous series of attacks, one 

after another, session after session, attack after attack on the 

institution, on our people, on our fundamental values. How can 

the people sit in their seats and allow the member for 

Riversdale to continue on this destructive path? 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is a sad statement that we have had to look 

forward to the basic overthrow of the legislative process, for 

that is what this man has brought us. Where just two years ago 

it would have been considered unprecedented for a government 

to invoke closure — an action, Mr. Speaker, that would have 

been considered highly unusual and out of the ordinary — now 

the Premier has made such a 



April 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 915 

grievous action commonplace. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say shame on the Premier of this province for 

doing that. Shame on the man who speaks so highly of 

democracy in this institution. Shame on him, Mr. Premier. 

Rarely have so few deceived so many. And the NDP members, 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP members shout and they insist that the 

opposition not complain. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, it reminds me of the words the 

NDP leader said in the Leader-Post a few short days ago. In 

preparation for imposing the motion he had the witty wisecrack 

from the press when they asked him why the rush, why not 

allow the people some time to be heard. And the response to 

those legitimate concerns, the NDP leader wisecracked, and I 

quote: the train has left the station. The train has left the 

station, he said, so just quit your complaining, was the 

implication. 

 

What arrogance. What dismissal of the legitimate worries and 

heartfelt concerns of our people. The train has left the station, 

so sit down and shut up. That is the wisdom of the lawyer from 

Riversdale. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if the train has left the station, I suggest to 

you that it's a funeral train. That's what it is — it's a funeral 

train. And that is the member from Riversdale who is the 

engineer driving the funeral train over rural Saskatchewan and 

blowing the signal as he crushes their communities. And the 

signal blows, Mr. Speaker — sit down and shut up. 

 

And the Premier knows, Mr. Speaker, the meaning of the 

words of Dylan Thomas who wrote: "After the first death there 

is no other." And after this man has dismantled rural 

Saskatchewan, there shall be no other. And this is what this 

motion is all about. This motion is the final signal blowing 

from the Premier's funeral train after the death of rural 

Saskatchewan, and there shall be no other. 

 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, in a different poem Dylan Thomas 

wrote something else. In a very famous poem he wrote what to 

do on the approach of death and his advice was this: 

 

 Do not go gentle into that good night . . . 

 Rage, rage against the dying of the light. 

 

And I want this Premier to know that the rural communities 

will not go gentle into the night, and he and his government 

will be swallowed by their rage and their rage against the dying 

of the light. 

 

And the stand of the loyal opposition against this motion is 

only a very thin and almost insignificant part of that rage, Mr. 

Speaker. We know that we take the stand on the side of right 

and that we'll stand with the people of Saskatchewan and we 

shall stand as long as we can turn aside this tyrant's sword. 

 

This motion, Mr. Speaker, is in fact the tyrant's sword. It is the 

sword of tyranny hefted to cut off debate, swung, Mr. Speaker, 

to take the life out of genuine 

dissent. We shall stand and we will not go quietly to the 

slaughter. I say how deeply ashamed the Premier must be of his 

behaviour and is a record in this Assembly, how deeply 

ashamed he must be of his record of bringing forward this type 

of motion. 

 

But his shame, Mr. Speaker, is no consolation to the people of 

Saskatchewan. For what is this motion all about? This motion 

is meant to force Bill 3 and the health care agenda of the 

government through the legislature before the people have time 

to catch their breath and lodge protest that is gathering steam as 

we speak. 

 

Even as the government rolls in the guillotine the storm clouds 

gather across the province and the summer of our 

discontentment begins to broil out of the very soil itself. And 

this motion is designed to build the Premier a shelter from that 

storm, a shelter that covers all of Saskatchewan and excludes 

the people who live in her. 

 

(1630) 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, this motion puts in mind one of the 

Premier's pet phrases and I'd just like to take you through it. He 

starts off and he says, we're all in this same boat together. 

We're all in the same boat together, except for you government 

employees. You get out of this boat. And then he says once 

again, we're all in this boat together, except for you farmers. 

You belong in Ottawa's boat so get out of mine. That's what he 

says, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, folks, he goes on. We're all in the same boat together 

except, except again, for rural hospitals. I have surveys that say 

the rest of us don't want you so get out of this boat. But we're in 

this boat together, he goes on to say, except for you 

municipalities. You don't want to share your property tax base 

so get out of my boat. 

 

Now are we all in the same boat together? Do you understand 

that, Mr. Speaker? The Premier is left saying, I'm the only one 

in this boat and I'll dictate what's going to happen in this 

province. I'll tell the people of Saskatchewan what's going to 

happen. I'll tell the people of this province what kind of things 

we're going to do in this legislature. I'll tell the people of this 

province what they can and cannot do. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province are beginning to 

rally to the cry. They're beginning to stand up and say, this has 

got to stop. This has got to stop, these kinds of destructive 

changes, these kind of destructive things that this Premier talks 

about. 

 

The funeral train is leaving, and it's headed for rural 

Saskatchewan. That's what's happening, Mr. Speaker. The 

people of rural Saskatchewan are understanding clearly what is 

happening now. Their hospitals are going to close. Make no 

mistake about it, Mr. Speaker. Make no mistake about it. There 

are 41 hospitals, 41 small rural hospitals in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, with an average daily census of under 10 — 41 of 

them. And they consume a whopping 1.7 per cent of 



916 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1993 

the health care dollars that are spent in this province. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I say that the rural residents of this province 

are worth 1.7 per cent of the health care budget of this 

province. They are worth 1.7 per cent of that budget. And the 

member from Biggar, he knows very well that that's true. And 

other members of the back benches of this government, they 

know it's true. They know that the province of Saskatchewan, 

the rural residents that are located surrounding those small, 

little communities, those small rural hospitals, are worth 1.7 

per cent of the health care budget. They know that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The only ones that don't seem to know that any more, Mr. 

Speaker, are the front-benchers of this government, primarily 

the Premier, the member from Riversdale, and the Health 

minister of this province. They're the only ones, along with the 

Associate Minister of Finance and the Finance minister herself. 

Those are the only four people in Saskatchewan that want to 

see this action driven forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the other members of the government, the back bench 

members and other members of cabinet, I can't imagine why 

you folks will go along with this. 

 

Are rural residents, I ask the Minister of Justice, Mr. Speaker, 

are our rural residents not worth 1.7 per cent of the health care 

budget of this province? We think they are. You better believe 

it, Mr. Speaker, we think they're worth that. We think the 

people of rural Saskatchewan are worth that kind of 

expenditure. 

 

We think that the people of this province are important, Mr. 

Speaker. We think that the people of this province deserve 

health care services. We think the people of this province 

deserve the kind of service that they've had up till now, Mr. 

Speaker. We think the people of this province will continue to 

oppose these actions. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Speaker, I'd ask leave to introduce a 

guest. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In your gallery 

today, watching the debate, is an old acquaintance of mine. It's 

Mr. Michael Hegan who was the executive director of the 

EMO, the Emergency Measures Organization in the province 

of Saskatchewan for a number of years. 

 

Mr. Hegan has been a long-time member of the militia, and I 

believe has an officer rank in that organization that he has been 

a part of, and has certainly brought much of that military 

training and due diligence, if you will, to the Emergency 

Measures Organization. 

 

And I think it's an area that all of us in the province, 

particularly those of us that live in rural areas, can appreciate, 

that there are people out there that are prepared to respond to 

some type of an emergency when we most need it. And I can 

only remember the flood in Moose Jaw in 1974 when they 

certainly came in handy. 

 

So I would ask all members of this legislature to welcome Mr. 

Hegan here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to introduce a guest. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the east gallery, I 

have a neighbour of mine that I want to introduce. His name is 

Mr. Tom Rooke. He's the ACT (Associated Canadian 

Travellers) chairman and president in Swift Current. He is the 

president of a Swift Current pistol club. He is a member of the 

Swift Current Wheatland Mall Merchants' Association. And I 

want to ask the members of the Assembly to welcome him to 

the Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Time Allocation 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This motion that's been 

brought forward by the government, Mr. Speaker, is like what 

we said earlier — a funeral train running roughshod over the 

people of Saskatchewan. Rarely has a more shameful set of 

actions been presented to the Assembly and to the people of 

Saskatchewan in such a short time. 

 

This government has been in power for less than two years, Mr. 

Speaker. This government is in power for less than two years, 

Mr. Speaker. It seems like an eternity to the people of 

Saskatchewan, I'm sure. But it is less than two years, Mr. 

Speaker. But they've already brought forward more closure 

motions than has ever been brought forward in the history of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And the Government House Leader nods his head because he 

knows very well that that's true. He knows it doesn't bother him 

for a moment. It doesn't bother him for a moment, Mr. Speaker, 

to bring forward these kinds of things because that's the kind of 

person he is. If you can't get it through legitimately, you push it 

through with whatever it takes. That's the kind of person he is. 

That's the way he has conducted his affairs, Mr. Speaker, right 

since the days he was a farmer in the Shaunavon area, to the 

day that he sits there now. 

 

And the witness and testimony to that, Mr. Speaker, I don't 

think is that hard to find. When it came the opportunity for that 

member, Mr. Speaker, and you'll 



April 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 917 

recall this as all of Saskatchewan does, I'm sure — when it 

came time for that member to move from rural Saskatchewan 

into urban Saskatchewan, and get a seat, an important thing 

that he absolutely required if he was ever going to sit on the 

government benches, when it came time for that, Mr. Speaker, 

he had to use whatever kind of actions that were necessary to 

get that seat. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all recall what happened. He did the same 

kinds of things that he accuses other people of doing, but what 

did he do? He bought his nomination. He bought people with, 

Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I want to caution the member in the 

words that he is using in this legislature and the imputations 

that he is leaving. I ask the member that we are on a specific 

motion and he should get back to the motion. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Rarely before has a 

government brought forward these kind of actions. Rarely 

before have we seen a government that's had to resort to these 

kinds of tactics, Mr. Speaker. I just illustrate that the type of 

action that this member, the Government House Leader brings 

forward, it doesn't bother him for a moment to bring forward 

these kinds of things, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It doesn't bother him to cut off debate. It doesn't bother him to 

stifle debate in public meetings. It doesn't matter what it takes. 

Just push her through because we are the government; we're 

going to do whatever we please. Now you don't have to take 

my word for it, Mr. Speaker. Just ask the people of 

Saskatchewan. I can provide you with the words of others who 

believe this kind of motion is just despicable. 

 

Let me provide some references for you, Mr. Speaker. A 

member of this Assembly turned his back on his own 

constituents and walked away from them, and I will shortly use 

him as a direct reference why this motion should not pass. But 

before I use that member as a direct reference, Mr. Speaker, let 

me use him as an indirect reference. Well, Mr. Speaker, an 

indirect reference why this motion should be defeated. 

 

What I mean to do is the fact that the members of the 

Legislative Assembly are elected to represent their 

constituents, Mr. Speaker. We all are. We're elected to 

represent our constituents. It is their sworn duty; we all recall 

taking the oath. We all recall being called into this Assembly 

and standing up and placing our hand on the Bible and taking 

the oath that we were going to be sworn into duty in this 

province — the solemn obligation to represent the people who 

delegate them to this House. 

 

So the member from Prince Albert is here on behalf of his 

constituents, whether he realizes it or not. Whether he's 

prepared to live up to that or not, that's why he is here. The 

good people of his constituency elected him to represent their 

views. 

 

So as an indirect reference, what I mean to say is that I 

use the constituents of that member as a reference, as a 

powerful argument why this motion must not pass. And what 

do those constituents want, Mr. Speaker? They want the 

assurance that the basic decisions in this case, the decision to 

spend 23 million scare health care dollars, that the decision will 

be reserved to elected members of the proposed Prince Albert 

health care board. 

 

And you know what their MLA told them, Mr. Speaker? He 

told them that it was possible but not desirable. And that's an 

exact quote — not desirable, is what he said. When asked, Mr. 

Speaker, should they be spending 23 million scarce health care 

dollars, and the decision be reserved to the elected members of 

the Prince Albert health care board, he said, it's possible but not 

desirable. 

 

He hasn't yet realized, I don't think, the implications of what he 

said, Mr. Speaker. And it is an exact quote. He told his own 

people that it is not desirable for them to have elected 

representatives making decisions, but they will be made for 

them by the Minister of Health and her officials. That's what he 

said. The people of Prince Albert don't need to have a say in 

this. The Minister of Health and her officials can determine the 

course of action that needs to take place with respect to 

building a hospital in Prince Albert. 

 

Now that says loudly to me, and I should say loudly to this 

House that the motion before us is not worthy of support. Why 

would we close down debate when the people have been told 

by their own elected member, an NDP member, that the Bill 

this motion wants to force is essentially useless to them — 

useless to the people of Prince Albert. 

 

And now of course those people want more time to assess 

exactly what in heaven's name is going on. They do not want 

this motion to pass because their own member turned his back 

on them and walked away from them. He left them not 

knowing what the future holds, and they want time to measure 

what exactly is going on and they want time to react and to 

have some say in the process. In those circumstances, how can 

that member in good conscience support this motion? 

 

I also said, Mr. Speaker, that that would be . . . would use that 

member in direct reference in opposition to the motion, and I'll 

do that now. 

 

(1645) 

 

Here are the words of that member from Prince Albert Carlton 

dutifully recorded in Hansard, and I quote: 

 

 What can we say about closure, Mr. Speaker, and closure, or 

in this case it's a matter of closure on closure. Sitting back 

and listening to a lot of the arguments that have been 

presented, and listening carefully and knowing very well 

that this is the first time that closure has ever been proposed 

in this legislature and ever used in this legislature, I can say 

that to me it smacks somewhat of totalitarianism. 



918 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1993 

And that, Mr. Speaker, was spoken by the member on August 

7, 1989 in this very Assembly. That member's assessment of 

the motion now before this House, Mr. Speaker, is that that 

smacks of totalitarianism — strong words. Of course the 

difference was that in 1989 when he uttered this concern, the 

debate had gone over for a very prolonged period of time. That 

is why he said it smacks somewhat, and not totally. 

 

But the motion here today, it is before us only after five hours 

of debate. Only three members of the official opposition have 

had an opportunity to speak. Only three members have had an 

opportunity to speak to this Bill No. 3 and already the 

government realizes that they have to force closure on the 

people of Saskatchewan. That's all that spoke against Bill 3 so 

far. 

 

And I would ask people to check the record. The member from 

Souris-Cannington, the member from Rosthern, and myself, the 

member from Kindersley, are the only three people in the 

opposition that have had an opportunity to speak to this Bill. 

 

An Hon. Member: — The member from Moosomin. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Moosomin also 

reminds me that he spoke, but I'm not sure he did. 

 

Anyway very few of the opposition members have had an 

opportunity to speak. Very few members have had that 

opportunity to speak to this Bill, and now they bring in closure. 

And I fully expect the member from Prince Albert to stand in 

his place and oppose this motion with all the same strength and 

vigour that he showed in 1989. I would even be happy, Mr. 

Speaker, if that member said, in good conscience, his own NDP 

government should at least allow for more debate, as long a 

time as consideration of the measure to totally restructure 

health care as he and his party were allowed to discuss the sale 

of potash mines. Let him concede just that much decency to the 

debate and he'll earn our respect, at least for those kinds of 

words. 

 

But I don't think he'll do that, Mr. Speaker. No, I don't think so. 

He'll turn his back on the people of this province just as he 

turned his back on his constituents in Prince Albert just a few 

short days ago. 

 

Let me go back to the record, Mr. Speaker, and continue to 

remind this Assembly of the member's deeply held views as 

recorded in Hansard on August 7, 1989, because he continued, 

and I continue to quote: 

 

 I feel that closure is somewhat of an affront to democracy. I 

think and I believe that it is the antithesis of democracy — 

the exact opposite — because (that is) what it does is it 

stifles debate as opposed to what the democratic principle is 

of encouraging debate. 

 

So he said, Mr. Speaker, that this motion the government has 

introduced in this Assembly is the exact opposite to 

democracy, to democratic 

principles as we know them. He is speaking from the record, 

speaking from just a few years ago, and he is saying that the 

now Premier, his own leader, is opposed to the fundamental 

principles of democracy by stifling debate. 

 

And that is exactly what is happening, Mr. Speaker, in this 

Assembly. That is exactly what his leader now is bringing 

forward before this legislature. It is an attack on democracy and 

cannot be allowed to go unchallenged. 

 

Will he, Mr. Speaker, have the courage to speak up, not just 

from the record but in person in this debate and say those same 

kinds of things, Mr. Speaker? I don't think he will. But that 

member with those famous backs speaks powerfully from the 

record. Let me remind him of just how powerfully indeed he 

did speak. I quote: 

 

 If democracy, Mr. Speaker, if democracy implies making 

decisions that reflect the public good and the public mood, 

then this motion of closure is definitely an affront to it, 

because closure offends the democratic principle of free 

speech. I find it very distasteful; I find it a bitter pill to 

swallow, because it doesn't solve an issue, it smothers it. 

And that's not democratic. 

 

He says this motion of closure is an affront to democracy, is 

distasteful, a bitter pill that smothers the issue. That is the view 

of the member from Prince Albert Carlton. He was very clear 

about closure motions, very clear indeed. And we can only 

hope that he has the integrity and the intestinal fortitude, the 

courage, to stand in this Assembly and refresh the record with 

those powerful words. 

 

He will not because he didn't mean it then and I don't think he 

means it now. The debate on this motion proves again that this 

. . . for the NDP principles are simply convenient illusions to 

present to the people as justification, but purely conveniences 

that can be discarded as soon as they interfere with their 

whims. 

 

This member's integrity will be clearly and definely measured 

by the contribution to this debate and how that contribution 

measures up against his powerful words of a few years ago. It 

is indeed a question of integrity and this debate will be 

personally important for that member. I remind him of that. 

 

But what about his seat mates, Mr. Speaker? What about the 

pompous fellow from Humboldt who likes to stand and lecture 

anyone who will listen about what is dark and sinister? He too 

speaks from the record and he will be measured by his 

contribution to this debate. But, Mr. Speaker, almost as much 

as the Premier, that member from Humboldt sees speeches as 

occasions to utter conveniences and not opportunities for 

honest principles. 

 

Let us remind the Assembly of that member's words from 

August 7, 1989. The member from Humboldt says, and I quote: 



April 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 919 

Mr. Speaker, we are in this debate because this government, 

I believe, is drunk with power as well. They are so consumed 

with themselves, so consumed with their friends, so 

consumed by the power that they wield, that they . . . refuse 

to allow the democratic process to work. They simply just do 

not respond to democracy in a traditional way in this 

province because they are so drunk with power that they 

hold. 

 

He was opposing closure, Mr. Speaker, because he said it was a 

sign of a government drunk with power. 

 

Well I will not comment on the drunkenness of this 

government, but the people of Saskatchewan are clearly seeing 

a government consumed by its own power. This motion is the 

inevitable result when a man seeks power for the sake of power 

alone. This motion is expected and predictable consequence of 

a single-minded drive for power at any expense, any cost. 

 

All of the symptoms of this ailment have been there since well 

before the election actually occurred. We should have been not 

surprised that we are dealing with this motion today. The 

symptoms of this government — drunk, as the member from 

Humboldt discusses, drunk with power — those symptoms 

were there a long time ago. 

 

For example, we had the Leader of the NDP running around 

this province promising absurd spending increases to everyone 

he met, when he told them by the Minister of Finance . . . until 

he was told by the Minister of Finance that it couldn't be done. 

Just as this motion shows, the man did not care. 

 

There was an editorial at one point in the Swift Current Sun 

and it had the NDP collected around the member from 

Riversdale and he was leading them in a cheer, and it went like 

this: what do you want? You name it. When do you want it? 

Right now. 

 

And I remember that because it was such an apt description of 

what the NDP leader and his party were all about — power at 

any cost. And this motion is a motion of those who want power 

at any cost. The symptoms were there when he campaigned 

against harmonization of the sales tax. He was told the 

revenues were needed to balance the budget and fund farm 

support. He told the people: don't worry about it, we'll balance 

the budget, pay for all of our promises by doing away with 

waste and mismanagement. No problem, don't worry, said the 

NDP leader. 

 

And I remember another editorial in another paper and it 

observed that the NDP leader had spent the 5 million from 

GigaText and about 300 times over. He didn't care then and he 

doesn't care now. And this is the kind of motion we are dealing 

with — a motion from, again as the member from Humboldt 

says, a motion from those who are drunk, drunk with power. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, when you get that drunk, that 

drunk with power, you have no problem attacking the 

legislative process, attacking the basic 

democratic process because you are too drunk to care. And that 

is where this government is. And that is where the government 

began and it is how it continues to operate. The highest order of 

arrogance is represented by this motion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I'd again like to quote from the member of Humboldt on 

that score. And I quote: 

 

 It sets that arrogant attitude, and let me tell you, Mr. 

Speaker, I think the reason they're doing this is because 

every time they do it it becomes easier, it becomes more 

accepted by the people of . . . (this) province. Once . . . (it 

is) done, then the people . . . will say, well it's been done 

before, then they'll accept it a little easier next time and the 

next time and the next time. 

 

And they should know well about the next time and the next 

time, Mr. Speaker, because they have brought in closure 

motions more frequently, more frequently than the total sum of 

all other governments of this province. In less than two years 

they've been able to eclipse the record of all other governments 

that this province has ever had in less than two years. The NDP 

had it in their minds even in 1989. And simply by doing it over 

and over and over it again, it could make it acceptable to the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it was not the previous government that 

made a habit of using closure; it was this NDP government. It 

is the Premier that wears the mark, the mark of closure in this 

province in the history . . . the longest in the history of this 

province. 

 

And the member from Humboldt's own assessment of the logic 

of this continued use of closure is to undermine the institution 

of this Legislative Assembly. They're repeatedly using closure 

because they believe if they do it often enough then the people 

will no longer care. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province do care. We are 

hearing from all over the province now that they realize that the 

heavy hand of oppression is being brought down on this 

legislature; the heavy hand of closure is now being used by this 

government once again in Saskatchewan. Once again they're 

going to force their way through this legislature. Once again, 

Mr. Speaker, they're going to use closure. 

 

And that is his assessment, the member from Humboldt, Mr. 

Speaker. And having watched this government, watching this 

Premier, I can see why he has that kind of assessment. 

 

But where is that member today, Mr. Speaker? Where is he to 

oppose this kind of motion? I seriously question whether he 

even understood what he was saying in 1989, let alone whether 

or not he meant what he was saying. It'll be clear from his 

participation in this debate whether he meant what he was 

saying or will we quickly find out that he did not mean what he 

was saying at that time. 

 

One of the more eloquent spokesmen on this motion, 



920 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1993 

Mr. Speaker, is the member from Regina Churchill Downs. He 

has a contribution to make to this debate, and I'll just lend him 

a hand in making that contribution by bringing forward the 

record on his account. From Hansard, I quote: I sincerely hope 

it'll be the last time closure is ever invoked in this province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that is a relevant contribution, because I 

want you to note that this member for Churchill Downs was 

very specific in his view. I sincerely hope it'll be the last time 

closure is ever invoked in this province. That's what the 

member said, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What is so ironic is that after making that observation, after 

expressing that hope, he has allowed himself to be part of that 

government that has invoked closure more times than anyone 

in the history of this province. 

 

I wonder what that member must feel today, Mr. Speaker. 

They're using closure again. They're using closure in this 

province, Mr. Speaker, again. Once again in this province we 

see a government that absolutely feels it has ultimate control 

over this province and, Mr. Speaker, I think the people of this 

province want to hear more. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that we now adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Hours of Sitting 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move, with leave, 

seconded by the member for Saskatoon River Heights: 

 

 That notwithstanding rule 3 of the Rules and Procedures of 

the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, that this 

Assembly shall on Thursday, April 8, 1993 meet at 10 a.m. 

until 1 p.m., and that when this Assembly adjourns on 

Thursday, April 8, 1993 it do stand adjourned until Tuesday, 

April 13, 1993 at 2 p.m. 

 

I so move. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:02 p.m. 

 

 


