




















































Hansard: March 15, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 311 

 March 15, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The gist of the 

petition is . . . and titled: 

 

 To the Hon. Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in 

legislature assembled: 

 

 The petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 

 

 that back pain and other highly prevalent 

neuro-musculo-skeletal disorders are extremely costly to the 

Canadian economy: 

 

 that scientific evidence clearly illustrates that chiropractic 

treatment is the most effective and efficient therapy for such 

disorders; 

 

 that in the face of an ever-increasing pressure to adopt 

expensive new forms of high technology treatment, 

chiropractic care has proven to be a low technology, low cost, 

conservative, and safe form of treatment, consistent with the 

true "wellness" model of health care; 

 

 that the government publicly asserts it remains committed to 

the basic principles of medicare, namely universality, 

comprehensiveness, accessibility, portability, and public 

administration; 

 

 that the government is acting to destroy these principles as 

they apply to chiropractic patients; 

 

 and that the government's proposed restrictions on this 

therapy will clearly cost more both in dollars and in patient 

disability; 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too want to hand 

in a petition that deals with chiropractic care.  I have petitioners 

from Regina, Lumsden, Windthorst, Strasbourg, and I want to 

place this petition before the House today. 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too wish to rise in 

the Assembly today to present petitions on behalf of 

Saskatchewan people who take issue with the government and 

the way they have implemented changes to the health care 

system. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, I have people from the city of Regina and 

the community of Strasbourg who wish their names tabled in 

the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have, as well, a 

petition with regard to chiropractic care in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  I'd like to place it before the House today.  

These names come from all of Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have a couple 

of pages of signatures here on a petition that I'd like to table 

today.  Mr. Speaker, these are signed from people from Lake 

Lenore, Star City, Tisdale, Hudson Bay, Melfort, Carrot River, 

St. Brieux, Zenon Park, Saskatoon, Tisdale, Carragana -- all 

across the province, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure to lay this 

on the Table. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have petitions 

regarding the chiropractic problems that people are facing.  I'll 

just read the: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reserve its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withold consent from any government 

proposal to discriminate against chiropractic patients by 

charging them fees not assessed for any other medical 

treatments. 

 

Of course I guess there are some others since this document 

was signed that have also been included, but they come from 

the east side of the province, Mr. Speaker, the Yorkton area 

basically -- Stockholm, I see Esterhazy, and Saltcoats, and a 

few other towns and villages in that area. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a 

different petition to present to the legislature today: 

 

 To the Honourable Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in 

Legislature Assembled; 

 

 The Petition of the undersigned citizens of the Province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 

 

 That Saskatchewan producers are undergoing extremely 

trying financial times due to drought, grain prices and 

international trade wars and that they are being pressed 

further financially by the NDP government's decision to 

eliminate the Farm Fuel Rebate program and it's coloured 

fuel policy; and, that to implement the government's coloured 

fuel policy will cost Co-ops and small independent fuel 

service 



312 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1993 

stations thousands of dollars, leading to the loss of jobs and 

businesses in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that you Honourable 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the Government to 

reverse it's decision to eliminate the Farm Fuel Rebate 

Program and that they cancel the coloured fuel program. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions come Storthoaks, Redvers, Alida, Carlyle, 

Manor, areas of the south-east corner of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I just want to join with my 

colleagues in presenting some petitions with respect to the 

NDP (New Democratic Party) government's farm fuel rebate 

program.  I won't reiterate what my colleague said, except to 

say that the enclosed would like to see the administration 

reverse its decisions because it's costing them thousands and 

thousands of dollars. 

 

I will table these names, and they're from south-eastern 

Saskatchewan:  Storthoaks; Alida; Sedley; various other . . . 

Redvers; and south-eastern communities around the Carlyle 

area. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that 

I shall on Wednesday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

 Regarding the Department of Natural Resources:  (1) how 

many Crown range land leaseholders are there in the 

province of Saskatchewan;  (2) how much additional monies 

were raised from increasing the cost of these leases in the last 

year;  (3) what is the total amount of money raised from these 

leases;  (4) what was the rationale for those increases; and  

(5) for what purpose were those monies used? 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that I 

shall on Wednesday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

 Regarding SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) in the 

fiscal year 1992:  what percentage of SGI auto claims were 

related to damage involving wildlife; what is the total dollar 

cost of the auto fund of all wildlife-related claims; what 

percentage of SGI commercial claims are related to damage 

involving wildlife; what is the total cost of SGI's commercial 

of all wildlife-related claims; how many motor vehicle 

accidents involving wildlife and the proportion of total 

accidents does this constitute; and number six, how many of 

these accidents resulted in the loss of life or permanent injury 

to persons involved. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 

delighted to introduce to you and through you to members of 

this Assembly, seven Cubs from McLean.  They are 

accompanied by their leader, Cliff Marshall.  They have braved 

the lion-like weather of Saskatchewan today to come and join 

us.  I'm looking forward to meeting with them after question 

period, so I ask all members to join me and welcome them here 

this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

CP Customer Service Centre 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I direct my 

question to the Minister of Economic Development.  Last week 

I raised with you, sir, the issue of CP (Canadian Pacific) Rail 

and the possible location of its customer service centre to our 

province.  Would you tell us, please, if you've met personally 

with CP officials recently and of the chance we have for 

obtaining the 300 new jobs and the $10 million payroll that 

comes with this centre? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to 

the member that we have met on a number of occasions with 

CP officials.  My understanding is my deputy has been on the 

phone a great deal to Mr. Ed Dodge in Vancouver.  It's my 

understanding as well that our Premier of the province has met 

with the CP officials as well. 

 

And I think it's fair to say at the meetings they are encouraged 

with the proposals that are being put forward by Saskatchewan 

and that Saskatchewan is being looked at favourably at this 

point, although no decision has been made. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'm sure then 

that you and the Premier are aware that the service centre is 

simply the beginning.  Further centralizations are now being 

considered by CP Rail that would mean the creation of a 

calling bureau equalling some hundred jobs, as well as the 

centralizing of all of their accounting as well as their 

administration functions, which is going to mean another 250 

jobs.  The province that gets the service centre gets everything. 

 

I'm asking you, sir, if your department and the Department of 

Finance has calculated the difference in revenue generated by 

an additional 600-plus jobs, quality jobs, for our province, 

versus reducing the locomotive fuel tax by a few cents in order 

to make us competitive. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want the member to 

know that when she talks about the sales tax -- she will know 

that the sales tax on a litre of diesel fuel for the railways is 15 

cents per litre -- and most of that tax was put on over the last 10 

years.  I believe when we left office in 1982 it was 1.9 cents 

per litre.  It was increased from 1.9 cents per litre to 15 



March 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 313 

cents per litre under the previous administration.  I just want to 

make that point. 

 

Having said that, you will know that the tax adds up to a great 

deal of money for the provincial coffers.  And you talk about it 

in terms of a few cents per litre; you're talking about tens of 

millions of dollars.  And obviously when we're cutting taxes for 

the CP -- you're suggesting we cut tens of millions of dollars in 

taxes for the CPR -- we have to balance that off against other 

economic development in the province.  And we have put 

together a package that I think is very attractive. 

 

But you shouldn't mitigate by saying a few cents per litre when 

in fact you're talking about tens of millions of dollars in tax 

cuts for the CPR.  I'm not saying that we shouldn't do that or 

should do it, I'm just saying be accurate and honest with the 

public when you talk about what a few cents per litre means. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I understand, 

Mr. Minister, what you're saying then is that you and your 

department, as well as the Department of Finance, has done 

this comparison and that the $10 million payroll that would 

come with the 300 new jobs, plus the millions of dollars of 

payroll that would come with the in excess of 350 other new 

jobs, plus the benefits and the spinoffs that would come with 

this, that that in fact is less than what you would get if you left 

the 15 cents per litre fuel tax in place. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, we certainly have looked at the 

benefits that would accrue from having jobs coming to 

Saskatchewan and weighed that against the $2 million per year 

that each cent of reduction would mean to railway fuel and 

these are the kinds of calculations that go on all the time.  I'm 

sure Manitoba is doing the same thing right now. 

 

And you will know that if you were to remove the sales tax of 

15 cents per litre, you would be reducing the income of the 

government of Saskatchewan by $30 million a year.  And that's 

not for one year; that's ongoing over a term of office of four 

years.  You're talking about $120 million in reduced taxes. 

 

And so obviously you do weigh these things out.  And I just 

add again that you shouldn't simplify, taking a very simplistic 

approach to this, that it's a few cents a litre.  You're talking 

about $120 million over a term to remove the fuel tax on diesel 

fuel, that's for railways alone. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

I'm not talking about removing 15 cents per litre of fuel tax; I'm 

talking about a few cents.  The next province, the province with 

the highest fuel tax next to our own, is at 13 cents a litre.  The 

average in Canada of the provinces is 6.6 cents per litre.  So 

we're not talking about removing all 15 cents per litre, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Your job, sir, is to sell the merits of our province by convincing 

businesses -- be it CP Rail or others -- that our tax structure is 

fair and that it's competitive. 

 

And I'd like to know what you're doing to ensure that 

Saskatchewan people already employed with CP Rail, those 

who are at risk of losing their jobs, and there are 61 of those 

people with a $2 million payroll, as well as those people in our 

province who want high quality jobs -- I'm sure there are more 

than 650 people in Saskatchewan looking for high-paying jobs 

-- what are you doing, sir, to ensure that our tax system in this 

province is considered fair and considered competitive? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to to tell the 

member opposite that we are working very diligently on this 

project, and we have had a great number of meetings going 

back all the way, for the member's information, to last fall.  I 

believe our first contact was in October of 1992 or September 

of '92.  We have had numerous meetings at official levels as 

well as ministerial level.  And the Premier, as I mentioned, has 

met with CP to discuss this issue. 

 

The real competition for this project of course, as you probably 

know, comes from Manitoba.  There is a couple of cents 

difference per litre in the taxation, that's true, but Manitoba has 

a payroll tax, which makes it difficult for them to locate there 

as well. 

 

So I'm saying to you that in working this out, you have to 

realize that the tax structure, while a small amount higher in 

Saskatchewan than Manitoba, CP is also looking at the fact that 

Manitoba has a payroll tax that they will have to be involved in 

if they were to go to Manitoba. 

 

So the key here is, is to put together a package that is attractive, 

knowing that we have a $15 billion debt and a tax on railway 

fuel that was jacked up from 1.9 cents per litre to 15 cents a 

litre under the previous administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

when you're faced with either reducing the highest locomotive 

fuel tax in Canada or creating hundreds of quality jobs, why 

would you choose to keep the Tories' unfair tax system? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I say again to the 

member opposite that we're looking at all the options and I'm 

not ruling out any options at this point.  And obviously, the 

Minister of Finance is quoted accurately that we're looking at 

ways and means of modifying taxes, making them equitable in 

order to attract business to Saskatchewan -- as we did in last 

year's budget by reducing small business tax from 10 to 9 per 

cent. 

 

And so over time, as we can afford it with the load of $15 

billion hanging over our head, try to balance out 



314 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1993 

where we are at in trying to solve the debt problem with trying 

to put a tax system in place that makes its easier for business to 

do business in Saskatchewan. 

 

And I think you'll see that at every step that we're doing that.  

IPSCO is pleased with changes that were made.  Hitachi is 

pleased with changes that were made.  Sears is pleased.  We're 

now working specifically with CP, and if our other record on 

Hitachi and IPSCO and Sears, if it works -- and there's no 

guarantees in this -- we will get the jobs.  But to simply say all 

you have to do is remove the tax from CP and the jobs will 

come, I say is simplistic and isn't living in the real world. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I think I'm 

hearing what you're saying, Mr. Minister.  I think that you're 

agreeing that Saskatchewan needs to be able to compete and 

that the current tax system in our province really can be 

considered by some to not create a level playing-field. 

 

As many as 650 or more jobs and all their benefits and all their 

spin-offs are going to depend on whether or not this 

government recognizes that we don't have a level playing-field 

when it comes to taxation in our province.  It is affecting 

investment; it's affecting our ability to be competitive.  And 

many, many people other than myself are saying this.  They 

don't consider it a simplistic view at all, sir. 

 

Will you commit today -- and I think I heard a glimmer of this 

-- that you will level out the playing-field and in fact reduce the 

locomotive fuel tax in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well obviously here again in doing 

technical negotiations with a company that's thinking about 

moving to the province, it would be less than responsible for 

you and I to do the bargaining on the floor of the Assembly.  

The injection of politics at this level to try to improve your 

standing, which after recent events are, to say the least, 

slipping; also at the federal level recent pollings would indicate 

that . . . But what I'm saying is to try to negotiate a complicated 

deal like this in a simplistic fashion on the floor of the 

Assembly isn't the way it works. 

 

But what I can say is that in our tax policy, even with a $15 

billion debt, we were able to adjust the taxes to allow Hitachi to 

expand.  We were able to adjust them slightly to allow Sears to 

move 900 jobs, most of them from out of province, to 

Saskatchewan.  With the small changes, both IPSCO and 

Hitachi, as I mentioned, were able to come to Saskatchewan 

and to expand. 

 

And I might add, Mr. Speaker, before I take my place, that if 

you look at the agriculture machinery manufacturing in the 

province at this point in 1993 compared to 1992, whether you 

look at Flexi-Coil in Saskatoon, where the employment has 

gone from 400 to 800, if you would look at Schulte 

manufacturing, if you look at the manufacturing based in 

Yorkton or Brandt here in Regina, you'll find that almost all of 

the machinery manufacturing is up and up considerably under 

this administration.  So I would, if I were you, I would quit 

preaching . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, the gentleman to your left is 

the one who has preached the most gloom and doom 

throughout the entire province of Saskatchewan, and everyone 

knows it.  I think one of the things that we have to do is to offer 

some hope to the people of our province.  And on Thursday 

next many, many people in this province have been led to 

believe that there are going to be tax increases, Mr. Minister -- 

not some reasonable form of looking at taxation that can make 

people feel that they can be competitive and invest in this 

province and have jobs in this province. 

 

I don't think it's simplistic in the least, and I think it rather 

flippant to talk in such a way when there are people worried  -- 

61 individuals worried about losing their jobs and the $2 

million payroll that comes with that in this province.  What we 

need in Saskatchewan are more people who can pay more 

taxes, not the kinds of people who are here who simply have to 

pay more and more and more and you can't get anything more 

out of them. 

 

So we need 650 more jobs in this province.  All that I'm asking 

from you today is some kind of assurance that you're doing 

your very, very best to ensure that we can have a level 

playing-field in this province and continue to have some 

commitment to stopping the kind of tax attack that you have on 

the people of Saskatchewan.  Could you answer that please, 

sir? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Clearly the member opposite is 

dealing with an issue that is a top priority of our government, 

and that is attracting jobs to Saskatchewan and creating jobs 

within the province by small- and medium-sized business. 

 

But obviously I want to be clear that your idea . . . and you 

haven't been specific on how many cents you would suggest 

that it be reduced, or how many millions of dollars of 

taxpayers' money you would move from the CP (Canadian 

Pacific) onto the backs of other Saskatchewan residents.  And 

I'd be interested in knowing where you would raise and replace 

that tax from in the initial stages. 

 

But it's fair to say that in dealing with economic development, I 

think our record in attracting a number of successful businesses 

to the province and for allowing many businesses to expand, 

stands on its own. 

 

Whether or not CP move to Saskatchewan in the end and move 

their centre to the province will depend of course on the kind of 

attitude the people of the province have as well as the taxation 

system.  And I would just urge you to become more positive 

about Saskatchewan than the gloom and doom I've been 



March 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 315 

hearing from you over the last couple of months. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, it's becoming quite humorous 

actually for most of us hearing all of this so-called gloom and 

doom from myself. 

 

You're wondering from where I would move some of the taxes 

in Saskatchewan.  I would like very much to have available to 

me so many of your staff, sir, whose job it is to find out exactly 

those kinds of things. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, we know that you in fact have been at the 

employ of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan for some 13 years, 

the Premier some 26 years, the Deputy Premier for some 22 

years.  That adds up to 61 years of salaries and benefits paid for 

by the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 

 

I would suggest that perhaps you go back to your department 

and find out how much they are determining would be of 

benefit to the people of Saskatchewan.  That if in fact we 

removed some of the locomotive fuel tax, what did they 

determine to be the most appropriate amount that we could 

reduce by and actually make some money by people being 

employed in our province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I want to say to the member 

opposite that obviously putting together a package like this that 

will attract businesses to the province -- in this case, CPR and 

their call centre -- that putting together a package that 

maximizes the number of jobs but yet keeps as much of the 

revenue being generated as possible is key to economic 

development.  And we're looking at that, and we're dealing 

with it, and our staff are working on it diligently. 

 

As to the fact that I have been elected for a number of terms, I 

don't apologize for that any more than you would apologize for 

your salary coming through third-party government grants 

while you work at the university.  And obviously you've lived 

off the taxpayers for many, many years and other of your 

family members as well.  To get into that kind of a childish 

debate here, I don't think adds anything to the issue of CPR. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Highway Workers' Strike 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: --The Minister of Highways will know that 

much of our province has been subjected to a severe winter 

storm.  It started last night and has gone through the day.  This 

has provided for some very dangerous driving conditions, Mr. 

Speaker.  And it's odd, but the employees of the Department of 

Highways have decided that this is the right time to go on 

strike. 

Mr. Minister, we on this side of the House feel that this is 

exactly the wrong time for your employees to go on strike 

because they have literally put the lives of thousands of 

motorists and their safety at great risk. 

 

To the Premier, I'll ask the question, Mr. Speaker:  what action 

has the government taken to get these employees back on to the 

job so that safe conditions for the motoring public can be 

returned. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Saskatchewan 

is of course a democracy and as in the case of any democracy, 

working people have the right to withdraw their services.  And 

I know you support that idea and we on this side of the House 

support that idea as do all Canadians. 

 

Now for today with this storm there are highway workers on 

strike, but the Highways department has people -- out-of-scope 

people, management people, and others -- on the roads, on the 

roads ensuring that the main arteries are open.  And we expect 

that the situation is going to be manageable. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, thank you.  To the 

Minister of Justice:  it seems odd to me that the Minister of 

Justice would say that management can handle all the problems 

at the heaviest workload period that we would have for the 

Department of Highways.  And it rises the question in my 

mind, Mr. Minister: why do we have the other workers at all 

then?  Shouldn't maybe we just get rid of them all and we'll just 

let management carry on? 

 

I know that the front benches of the government, Mr. Speaker, 

now in cabinet, they don't have to drive through this mess; 

they'll simply either sit here in Regina or fly over it in their 

airplane.  They don't have to put up with what the ordinary 

people are putting up with, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Why don't you recognize the plight, Mr. Minister, of the 

ordinary people in this province instead of the powerful 

unions?  Or have you become so completely isolated to their 

needs that you can't see the needs of anyone else? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Good heavens, Mr. Speaker.  I don't 

know how to characterize that question that would fall within 

the rules of this House. 

 

I thought that the member had a clear understanding that in any 

democracy working people have a right to withdraw their 

services -- that's fundamental.  Collective bargaining is part of 

our way of life and part of collective bargaining is the right to 

strike.  And you don't panic at the first sign of any difficulty 

and suddenly take away that right to strike. 

 

We're watching the situation very carefully.  We have 



316 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1993 

arranged for as many people as possible to be on the equipment 

today, as the day goes on, to ensure that the arteries are open.  

Now if the member knows of any particular situation where the 

road isn't open and the situation becomes dangerous, I expect 

that I would hear from him during the course of the day.  But if 

the member is suggesting that working people in this province 

shouldn't have the right to withdraw their services, then I'd 

certainly be interested in knowing that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well the Minister 

of Justice can know it right now.  I'm saying exactly what 

you've just said:  in a crisis situation, people should not have 

the right to strike.  When the other people's lives are put on the 

line and they're going to die because of your arrogance and lack 

of understanding of the needs out in the country, then it's time 

somebody got up and told you that there's a time that strikes 

have got to come to an end, and this is it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I hope that you will recognize that priority 

today.  And, Mr. Minister, your Minister of Highways should 

know exactly what the conditions are out on those highways 

better than I do, although I had to drive on them this morning.  

And I can tell you there are no highway trucks to be seen.  And 

there are places where there are trucks upside down.  There are 

accidents on the highway.  How many accidents have there 

been, Mr. Minister, today?  And how many people have been 

injured? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well we're awfully glad, Mr. Minister, 

that the member from Maple Creek was able to make it in this 

morning, and we'll try and ensure that the road will be 

ploughed out in case he wants to go home tonight. 

 

And is he suggesting, Mr. Speaker, that yesterday when the the 

weather was fine, then highway workers could strike but today 

they can't strike?  And if tomorrow's a nice day, then they can 

strike?  I mean you can't run a system like that.  People either 

have the right to strike or they don't. 

 

We would have hoped that the SGEU (Saskatchewan 

Government Employees' Union) would have ensured that there 

was a basic level of service for all of the areas where 

emergencies might arise.  But we can't control that.  We can't 

control that.  We can't control that.  This is kind of an upside 

down strike in that sense. 

 

Usually a public sector strike, there's a strike across the service 

but some effort is made to provide emergency services.  In this 

case it seems to be the vulnerable situations where the pressure 

is being put upon us.  But we can take that.  We want to be a 

responsible employer, and responsible employers have to take 

strikes when they come along.  We're doing our best to settle it 

at the bargaining table, 

which is where it has to be settled.  And that's what we're trying 

to do even today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

think that the minister has failed to recognize that there is a 

more important right in every place in the democratic world.  

That's the right to live in safety and not to have your life 

jeopardized by people who go out on strike just at the time 

when they know that it will cost the most misery. 

 

Now there is a solution, Mr. Minister; there is a precedence.  

And for very speedy action we could have back-to-work 

legislation.  That's been done before and it could be done today.  

Would you consider bringing back back-to-work legislation 

and leave this . . . by leave this afternoon, with the opposition 

agreeing, to pass through all of the stages.  We can't afford, Mr. 

Minister, to take a chance on losing any more lives in this 

province or having anybody else injured because the roads 

aren't cleared at the proper time when people expect them to 

be. 

 

People out of our province don't know we've got a strike.  They 

come sailing through and hit a snow drift, and they're dead.  

That's not fair and it's not right, And I'm asking you to 

cooperate with us.  Will you act today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I want to say two things in response, 

Mr. Speaker.  The first is that as I told the member in the 

answer to the first question that he asked, we do have 

management personnel in charge of the equipment and we 

believe that they will be able to manage this situation. 

 

The second thing I'd like to say is that the forecast for this 

storm does not indicate that we've a storm of long . . . that's 

likely to endure for any significant period of time.  So we're not 

up against a situation that's going to be a problem tomorrow.  

We expect that tomorrow will not be a problem at all. 

 

Now I know the member is genuinely concerned.  When he 

raises these questions I know that he is genuinely concerned 

and I'm telling the member that we think we're able to manage 

the situation.  We think we have the resources and the people to 

do it.  But even with all of the highway workers back at work 

when the snow is falling like it has today, it's pretty hard for 

anybody to keep the road clear, but we'll do the very best we 

can. 

 

And as I say, this is not a storm that's likely to last long, so I 

don't think we have to resort to the drastic action that the 

member has suggested. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 32 -- An Act to amend The Family 



March 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 317 

Maintenance Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill to 

amend The Family Maintenance Act be now introduced and 

read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 33 -- An Act respecting Security Interests in 

Personal Property and making Consequential and Related 

Amendments to Certain Other Acts 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill 

respecting Security Interests in Personal Property and making 

Consequential and Related Amendments to Certain Other Acts 

be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 34 -- An Act to amend The SaskEnergy Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I move a Bill to amend The 

SaskEnergy Act now be introduced and read for the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 

question no. 4 put by the member from Saskatoon Greystone, I 

would request it be converted to a motion for return 

(debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Motions for returns (debatable), no. 84. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 25 -- An Act to repeal The Saskatchewan Mining 

Development Corporation Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to move second reading of An Act to repeal The 

Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation Act. 

 

The Saskatchewan Mining and Development Corporation, 

better known as SMDC, was created by an order in council on 

June 4, 1974 and continued under The Saskatchewan Mining 

Development Corporation Act, 1977.  The initial emphasis for 

this Crown corporation in 1974 was in exploration, particularly 

for uranium in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1988 the previous administration privatized 

SMDC's operation by merging both SMDC and the federal 

Crown corporation, Eldorado Nuclear 

Ltd., into the Cameco Corporation.  Substantially all of 

SMDC's assets, contracts, and net working capital were 

transferred to this newly created company in return for 

sixty-one and a half per cent of Cameco's common shares. 

 

Furthermore, with subsequent dispositions of shares, SMDC's 

holdings in Cameco have dropped to 38.9 per cent.  As a result, 

SMDC evolved into simply a holding company for these 

shares.  And now SMDC exists on paper for one reason only, 

and that is as a holding company for the province's interests in 

Cameco. 

 

The Crown Investments Corporation currently administers all 

the operations of SMDC.  Therefore our government believes 

our interests in Cameco should be transferred to the Crown 

Investments Corporation in order for it to directly handle this 

investment. 

 

The repeal of this Act will save the taxpayers of this province 

the added expense of separate administrative costs to maintain 

the Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 25, 

An Act to repeal The Saskatchewan Mining Development 

Corporation Act. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to take this 

opportunity to congratulate the NDP administration for the 

recognition of the fact that SMDC is only a holding company. 

 

I do hope that the . . . really the only reason that they're doing 

this is to save a little bit of money and not hide the transactions 

of this holding company in the Crown Investments 

Corporation. 

 

I will assume that the minister will be able to report to the 

Legislative Assembly about the Crown Investments 

Corporation and the holdings that would be in SMDC and that 

we could have access to the kinds of information we've had 

before, but in this new kind of arrangement. 

 

I would also point out that the general public has certainly 

benefited by the fact that Eldorado Nuclear and SMDC were 

able to come together to form a brand-new company. 

 

As the hon. member knows, Cameco is doing really well.  It is 

exporting and processing.  In fact it is the largest mining and 

processing . . . uranium processing company in the world.  We 

now have shareholders worldwide.  People who have been 

from Germany, France, United States, Japan, and others can 

come into the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Cameco was publicly traded and as a result it is allowed for 

people in various parts of the globe to invest and to watch the 

people of Saskatchewan.  It is quite open.  And indeed it has 

been profitable. 

 

Recently I can say, Mr. Speaker, that we now have seen 

firsthand the opportunity to export uranium into 



318 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1993 

the Pacific Rim and more particularly into Taiwan.  And that 

will mean in the neighbourhood from 50 to $100 million more 

sales into that country. 

 

And as a result Cameco, because it is publicly traded and 

because people have confidence that it will stay publicly traded 

and this move today will ensure and help people believe that 

the NDP will not nationalize or try to nationalize that company, 

it bodes very well for the international recognition of a 

Saskatchewan-based trading company that is now traded 

publicly in the Toronto exchanges and recognized in Tokyo, 

New York, Toronto, London, various places throughout the 

globe. 

 

I will also point out that the Cameco Corporation is building a 

reputation now of being a company that is looking at the 

newest technology.  It certainly is marketing well on the 

international markets.  And if we can have the support of the 

administration in encouraging more and more companies to do 

this, then in fact we will end up with some benefits that are a 

little bit difficult, perhaps, for the NDP administration to 

recognize but it can lead to things like AECL (Atomic Energy 

of Canada Ltd.) coming to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So we not only have Eldorado Nuclear here with SMDC, now 

combined into a very large company; we not only now have 

large sales coming through because of changes encouraged by 

Cameco and encouraged by the federal government to sell 

internationally in the Pacific Rim, countries like Taiwan, but as 

well as Korea and Japan and Singapore and other major 

jurisdictions, but in fact, we can encourage more and more of 

the processing and energy-related, high-tech jobs and activities 

like AECL, coming to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So indeed, Saskatchewan would not only be the largest mining, 

uranium mining jurisdiction in Canada and one of the largest in 

the world, it is now associated with a company that is the 

largest processing and marketing jurisdiction any place, and 

this company's headquartered here. 

 

It is now tied to sales all over the world and it is linked now to 

even more and more energy development.  Because in my 

recent trips for example, looking at the possibilities of sales in 

Taiwan, in China, in other jurisdictions, they asked about the 

attitude of Saskatchewan people towards nuclear development; 

uranium research; having AECL move to the province of 

Saskatchewan; CANDU 3's (Canadian deuterium uranium); the 

marketing arm; and I could say quite clearly that now the NDP 

administration support the mining of uranium.  They support 

publicly traded shares because indeed they have now repealed 

the old SMDC Act. 

 

(1445) 

 

They support AECL coming to the province of Saskatchewan.  

They support the marketing of CANDUs internationally, and 

I'd like to point out, before I take my place, Mr. Speaker, that in 

fact it looks 

like we could have CANDU sales and new CANDU sales in 

the Pacific Rim.  And I was just a little disappointed to find out 

that the Premier of the province says, no CANDUs because we 

have no money. 

 

Well I will point out to the hon. member, because we changed 

SMDC to put it into the real public sector, that is allow people 

to invest in it, there is money there.  And because we market 

internationally, billions of dollars are now being paid for 

CANDU reactors internationally that can come into the 

province of Saskatchewan.  In fact it is 1.5 billion per CANDU 

just in new investments.  Now Saskatchewan hasn't got a lot of 

that money to date but we can begin to get that money. 

 

So I would say that I'm very supportive of the arguments, Mr. 

Speaker, that the NDP will stand up now and say, well I guess 

we'll finish the privatization of SMDC.  Looks like Cameco is 

doing well; looks like uranium mining is doing well; uranium 

processing is doing well; AECL is moving to the province of 

Saskatchewan.  We like that very much. 

 

We have new uranium sales in various countries like Taiwan 

and new ways to do it.  And now we have the potential for 

CANDU sales even in the Pacific Rim that could generate 

billions and billions of investment, not from Saskatchewan 

people but from international sources, that would mean 

thousands and indeed tens of thousands of jobs for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

So I would recommend to the minister that he do and he does 

remind the Premier, who was very negative on CANDU here 

the other day because he said they had no money there, the 

CANDU money comes from offshore.  International uranium 

purchases come from offshore.  That money is not generated 

here. 

 

We sell uranium and sell CANDUs and sell this technology all 

over the world.  And as a result of this piece of legislation, now 

Saskatchewan people are into the 21st century with a new 

financial instrument, with an attitude and indeed frankly a 

reputation that even the NDP, even the socialist party in the 

province of Saskatchewan now, kicking and screaming, has 

had to endorse nuclear development, uranium, public share 

offerings, and the privatization of a once Crown corporation 

that the previous administration borrowed money to put 

together and they were going to nationalize this industry. 

 

So from my vantage point, as long as they keep giving us full 

public information and don't hide it in CIC (Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan), I think this is a good move.  I 

would certainly endorse people in Saskatchewan. 

 

An Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- And the hon. member says, hear, hear.  Well 

right.  To get the NDP to admit that nuclear development and 

uranium mining and publicly traded companies and the 

privatization of SMDC in 



March 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 319 

this legislature, for heaven's sake, Mr. Speaker, that's fairly 

historic.  And for them to say: hear, hear, is double historic. 

 

So I would just congratulate them for recognizing the facts of 

the contemporary world and I'd hope that they continue to look 

at opportunities like this, whether it's in SGI, whether it's in 

energy, whether it's in other corporations, because in fact you 

can start to have a reputation that you indeed are open for 

business, open for investment.  And in fact money can come 

from across the world, not just from the taxpayers in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Johnson: -- Mr. Speaker, in supporting this Bill I'd like to 

say just a few words on it that, I believe, should be said in the 

Assembly; that in removing from the legislation SMDC we are 

in fact really cleaning up a mess that was left by the opposition 

when they left government.  It's really a Bill of condemnation 

to the previous administration's ability to maintain a structure 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

If you take a look at some of the economic figures over a 

period of say the last 40 years, you'll see that in the '80s we 

started to slip from a province that had actually a net 

investment -- government investment where you had reserves 

over and above the borrowing -- into a situation where the 

opposite is the case.  And this is just simply one of those pieces 

of legislation that indicate that. 

 

In the vernacular in rural Saskatchewan there's a little saying 

that goes something like this:  that the job isn't done until the 

paperwork is completed.  And in that particular case, we're 

completing the paperwork for an administration that couldn't 

even finish a job that it started out to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too would like to 

take a moment and make a few comments on this Bill which 

repeals the Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I agree with the member that this Bill effectively 

closes down the Saskatchewan Mining Development 

Corporation.  In actuality, Mr. Speaker, SMDC was redundant; 

it was defunct since 1988.  So this Bill, as the member said, is 

more or less doing the paperwork. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in October of 1988 Saskatchewan Mining 

Development Corporation and Eldorado Nuclear merged, and 

they formed a company called Cameco.  The provincial Crown 

corporation and federal Crown corporation formed Cameco 

that some people now refer to as the uranium giant. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when it was formed it inherited a debt of 

$650 million.  That debt was cut in half by 

1991.  That was only three short years later, Mr. Speaker.  And 

I would say, just imagine cutting a debt of $650 million in half 

in three short years.  I think, Mr. Speaker, says a lot for the 

forming of that company. 

 

I would like to provide a few details to this Assembly on 

Cameco in its copy form by SMDC, which the Bill repeals.  

And I quote this, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 Cameco . . . is (now) one of the world's largest, low-cost 

integrated uranium producers.  It operates and owns 

two-thirds of two of the world's largest, high-grade uranium 

mines in northern Saskatchewan and obtains a share of 

production from a third Saskatchewan mine.  With its 

processing facilities in Ontario, Cameco is Canada's only 

supplier of nuclear fuel conversion services.  Cameco 

reported net earnings in 1991 of $47.9 million compared to 

$91.6 million in 1990. 

 

That's the end of the quote, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, that 

would seem to be a lot of bragging about Cameco -- a whole lot 

of boasting and bragging, Mr. Speaker.  And I would imagine 

that most of the NDP members would assume that I'm quoting 

from some Progressive Conservative document that brags up 

the fact that we were in power when Cameco was formed 

through the 1988 merger of SMDC and Eldorado. 

 

But the truth of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, I am actually 

quoting excerpts from a Crown Investments Corporation 1991 

annual report.  The annual report of which the member from 

Regina Churchill Downs was responsible, or was at that time of 

the printing of the annual report. 

 

How ironic that the NDP, the same party that condemned 

uranium mining, now brags up a uranium mining giant like 

Cameco.  And this is relevant to this Bill, a Bill which repeals 

SMDC, a Crown corporation that formed Cameco back in 

1988. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to now quote an STV (SaskWest 

Television) news report, dated March 8, 1990, and I quote:  

uranium mining is something that the New Democratic Party 

does not approve of.  Its policy is to slowly phase out all three 

Saskatchewan mines and prevent new ones from getting 

started.  It has also promised to provide alternate employment 

for mine workers. 

 

That was the NDP policy on uranium mining back in 1990.  

Mr. Speaker, that's a far cry from the praise that CIC's annual 

report is heaping on Cameco right now.  A company that would 

be shut down, just like SMDC, if the NDP shut down uranium 

mining in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Well thank goodness, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP have no 

problem in breaking their promises.  A broken promise in this 

regard is a good one. 

 

And I want to quote a few quotes, Mr. Speaker, on uranium 

mining and how things seem to change.  I quote:  The key 

question in environment control 



320 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1993 

concerns uranium mining.  Unlike my colleague from 

Saskatoon, I have concluded the use of uranium as a source of 

energy is inevitable.  I do not deny the problems associated 

with its use; I simply see no other alternative in the short term. 

 

Ned Shillington, the budget of '81-82, and I'm quoting, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I go on.  Another quote:  when he was told that the NDP 

phase-out policy on uranium mining had workers concerned 

about their jobs, Allan Blakeney replied: I suppose at some 

future time they may have a worry. 

 

That was by Allan Blakeney, CFQC open line in Saskatoon, 

November 7, 1985. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's interesting to see how people's minds change 

when something turns out good. 

 

Another quote:  phasing out uranium mining would do more 

harm for Saskatchewan than good. Bob Mitchell, NDP 

candidate, Star-Phoenix, November 28, 1983. 

 

Another quote:  I do not believe that Saskatchewan can 

necessarily cease the production of uranium in Saskatchewan.  

Allan Blakeney, Hansard, March 17, 1980. 

 

Another quote, Mr. Speaker:  the Saskatchewan sale of the 

uranium overseas is an immoral act -- an act over which the 

people of Saskatchewan may weep 20 years from now.  Peter 

Prebble, Hansard, 1979. 

 

Kind of all over the map.  I don't know . . . Everyone has a 

different idea what's good for Saskatchewan, what's good for 

Canada, and what's good for people in the uranium industry.  I 

go on to quote.  This was in the Briarpatch:  the NDP passed a 

very tough resolution on stopping uranium mining.  It is 

conceivable at the time of the next election, and if you win, that 

mines at Cigar Lake and at the 5th, 6th, and 7th mines at 

Collins Bay will be in operation.  Will you shut them down?  

This is a question. 

 

Romanow: My position is simply that the party . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order.  Just a 

clarification.  Using member's names . . . If the member's name 

is contained in the quote, you can use the member's name; 

otherwise you must refer to their constituency.  You can't say 

that so-and-so said this.  Then you have to refer to the Premier 

said this or the member from Riversdale said this; otherwise 

you would be out of order.  Just a clarification. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Well thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I was under the 

impression I could quote, and I thank you for the ruling. 

 

I will go on:  my position is simply that the party leader's job 

and the caucus job is to implement party policy.  That is party 

policy.  And so far as it can be implemented, when we are in 

office, it, like other 

party policies, will be implemented.  Interview with the now 

Leader of the NDP Party, the Premier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will dispense from any more quotations . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . The member from Churchill Downs 

don't like it because we catch him with egg on his face so many 

times.  And that's fair ball.  I suggest maybe he should go and 

play with his toys, the toy minister . . . (inaudible interjection) . 

. . That was your own definition, sir. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think I'll carry on a little bit here.  Mr. Speaker, I 

would suggest a broken promise in this regard.  We on this side 

of the House find that's a good promise to break because it was 

a bad promise to make.  As the quotes I quoted to you indicate, 

Mr. Speaker, there's been a 180 degree turn-around.  And we 

on this side of the House applaud them for making that. 

 

(1500) 

 

I would say rather than shut down the uranium mines up North 

which would devastate the economy of our northern 

communities by increasing unemployment, the NDP 

government should be, and I think they are, approving new 

mines.  And I congratulate them for this flip-flop, Mr. Speaker.  

As I said, generally speaking, a flip-flop is not something that 

we would congratulate the government for, but in this case this 

is one of the promises that the NDP made that I don't mind 

being broken. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would say to the Premier, this is a good time to 

break a promise.  And I think that it should be quite easy 

because you're getting quite good at it and you have a lot of 

practice. 

 

And I say it is also good because SMDC is no longer a Crown 

corporation -- hasn't been for a long time.  But this repeal will 

make it official. 

 

The NDP government that was so against uranium mining has 

approved an underground exploration project at Cameco's 

McArthur River site.  I understand that's been approved, Mr. 

Speaker.  And again I say that is the right direction to go. 

 

If there is an unexplored frontier in Canada, I suggest to you it 

is in the North.  I also suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, if I was a 

young man looking for a future, I think I'd be looking into the 

North.  I believe that's where the action is going to be.  So we 

commend the government for at least having the foresight to 

change their mind and get on with the business of developing 

the North. 

 

The news release that was put out by the NDP government 

states that there are several proposed sites.  And once they are 

approved, there may be more uranium mines in northern 

Saskatchewan.  This again is good news.  This is good. 

 

This is the kind of news, Mr. Speaker, that should be going out 

to the people of Saskatchewan, not the gloom and doom that 

we hear from the minister out in 



March 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 321 

Melville telling people that we're a basket case.  This is the 

kind of news that I think should have been in the throne speech.  

This is the kind of news that brings people . . . brings their 

hopes up.  So I say again, it's marvellous news because it's 

showing that the NDP do not now oppose uranium mining.  

That does two things.  It brings up the hopes of the people 

looking for work, Mr. Speaker, and it gives the mining industry 

a feeling of security.  No business can feel secure when they 

feel that they're bucking up against their own government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it gives the people of Saskatchewan some hope 

and it gives the people the hope that they will not do another 

flip-flop on the same development; that they will continue on 

developing the nuclear technology in this province.  And I 

wanted to say that, Mr. Speaker, because I do believe this is the 

right move. 

 

We saw, Mr. Speaker, an effective flip on uranium mining.  

There was a flip-flop on the AECL agreement.  Well maybe 

we'll soon see the member from Regina Elphinstone announce 

the CANDU reactor is pending in the province.  Maybe we'll 

see that.  This would be a major development. 

 

Imagine the boost to our economy, Mr. Speaker, the jobs that 

would be created.  And without jobs, without people earning 

money, paying taxes, this province will not pull itself out of the 

crisis we're in.  There is no way, there is no way the debt will 

be reduced by unemployed people.  We know that.  We have to 

employ them. 

 

The previous government, Mr. Speaker, knew that too.  We did 

spend some money trying to develop business for people, jobs 

for people.  I would point out in one case, up at the 

Weyerhaeuser pulp mill that went from 600 people to 1,100 

after they put the paper . . . 1,100 all good, unionized jobs, 

good paying jobs.  That's the kind of thing that'll pay off the 

debt -- not taxing people out of the province, not shutting down 

business -- creating business.  And I hope that they have finally 

opened their eyes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Speaking of open their eyes, it reminds me of the story of a 

little boy.  He had five kittens and he was standing on the street 

corner and he was selling these kittens.  His sales pitch was, 

NDP kittens for sale, $5.  He was saying this and the parish 

priest came along and he said, you know young fellow, he said, 

I appreciate your entrepreneurialship, but I'm wondering if you 

should be using that kind of an approach. 

 

And he went on his way and about 10 days later the same 

parish priest came back past the same corner and the same 

young fellow was trying to sell these 10 kittens . . . 5 kittens.  

He said:  Progressive Conservative kittens for sale - 

_ $10 apiece.  The same priest said to him, he said: you know, 

young fellow, I appreciate your entrepreneurialship but I still 

wonder if you should be using that approach.  And why, 10 

days ago you were $5, today they're 10?  He said: well, Father, 

these kittens have their eyes open. 

That's what I'm saying to those opposite.  I hope you have your 

eyes open now to what makes an industry run; what makes a 

province run.  It is not driving people out; it is not shutting 

down business; it is creating business, creating jobs for people 

to work and to pay their taxes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this would be a major development.  It would be 

welcome news to the people of Saskatchewan.  But I digress 

again. 

 

This Bill repeals the Saskatchewan Mining Development 

Corporation.  Cameco has had its share of problems over the 

years -- problems in court over environmental matters and 

problems with contract talks.  One of the most recent problems 

deals with the end uses of uranium. 

 

These are just growing pains, Mr. Speaker, that I'm pleased to 

think most businesses have to expect in a growing business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don't want to get into a debate on the end uses of 

uranium so maybe I should wrap up my remarks by moving . . . 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to move: 

 

 That this Assembly now move to consideration of Bill 10. 

 

Seconded by the member from Souris-Cannington. 

 

The Speaker: -- Call in the members. 

 

Order.  Will the members please come to order? 

 

Just for the information of the members, my understanding is 

that some of the bells are working, others are not working.  

However, I think those that are working, members will be able 

to hear those.  And what I intend to do now is to put into effect 

a 10-minute recess and in 10 minutes time we will have the 

vote on the division.  As of now. 

 

The Assembly recessed for a period of time. 

 

The division bells rang from 3:18 p.m. until 3:28 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

 

Swenson Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

Boyd Haverstock 

-- 8 

Nays 

 

Van Mulligen Johnson 

Shillington Trew 

Anguish Draper 

Goulet Sonntag 

Kowalsky Flavel 

Carson Roy 

Mitchell Cline 

MacKinnon Scott 

 



322 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1993 

 

Penner McPherson 

Upshall Kujawa 

Koenker Crofford 

Lyons Stanger 

Lautermilch Kluz 

Calvert Renaud 

Murray Langford 

Hamilton Jess 

-- 32 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's certainly a pleasure to be able to speak on this 

Bill.  This Bill marks the end of the process of privatizing the 

uranium industry in Saskatchewan.  It also marks the first time 

the NDP Party has had to admit that uranium mining and 

development is good for the people of Saskatchewan, good for 

Saskatchewan taxpayers, and indeed good for the entire world, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Congratulations -- congratulations to the previous 

administration for their foresight in uranium development, Mr. 

Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, as you know, this process has not been 

an easy one -- not easy at all.  The NDP Party has fought 

nuclear development and uranium development, uranium 

mining, at every turn, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This Bill, Mr. Speaker, marks the admission -- the admission 

by the NDP government -- that privatization of Saskatchewan's 

uranium resource industry must be acknowledged as a reality, a 

fact of life, a good thing, Mr. Speaker.  Unfortunately, Mr. 

Speaker, for the NDP Party it must be an unpleasant task to 

have to admit that reality, Mr. Speaker.  Regardless of what 

they say now, there are a number of occasions when members 

opposite have stated that if they had the financial room, they 

would re-nationalize uranium mines, Mr. Speaker. 

 

NDP Party resolutions have always -- always -- until lately, 

been opposed to uranium development.  The NDP desire was to 

shut down uranium development as soon as alternative jobs 

were found, were available.  Imagine, Mr. Speaker, after all 

that has transpired, this government still dreams of one day 

buying up all the mines again. 

 

Yet if we'd only look at the results of privatization, Mr. 

Speaker, they could see that great benefits are deriving from 

this privatization.  Cameco is the company that succeeded the 

Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation.  And 

Cameco, Mr. Speaker, has been an impressive success story for 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Indeed there are three new uranium mines on the table for 

Saskatchewan; the possibility of an entire new and prosperous 

nuclear industry.  These are the fruits of private sector 

investment, private sector involvement, Mr. Speaker.  Although 

I must say, Mr. Speaker, that the privatization is not entirely 

complete and that is a matter that the people of Saskatchewan 

should be concerned about. 

I note, Mr. Speaker, looking at the "Monthly Statistical 

Review" from February on page 12, that the production of 

uranium in the province was up almost 100 per cent from the 

third quarter of 1991 to the third quarter of 1992.  And that is a 

very positive signal to the families who depend on the uranium 

mines for employment, either directly or indirectly, as a result 

of the spin-off benefits of that very new industry and important 

industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the numbers are 1.5 million kilograms in the third 

quarter of 1991 to 2.9 million kilograms in 1992.  Now that's 

not quite doubling, but is very substantial.  Very, very positive 

increase, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the increase happened, Mr. Speaker, after the creation of 

Cameco, which is a direct cause of the Bill before us now.  

Cameco is the largest uranium mining concern in the world, 

Mr. Speaker.  It is the single largest player in the industry, and 

because of that it brings to this province an enormous amount 

of influence in the industry.  Certainly an influence far greater 

than our population or size or economy alone would justify. 

 

And along with that influence, Mr. Speaker, comes a great deal 

of responsibility.  And I would be interested to hear from the 

member from Regina Rosemont as to what his thoughts are 

relative to this Bill on the end of the process of creating 

Cameco. 

 

I would also be interested, Mr. Speaker, to hear from the 

Minister of Social Services in her capacity as a private member 

representing the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

It would really encourage everyone in this legislature, Mr. 

Speaker, if they would get up and give their thoughts on the 

uranium industry to the people of Saskatchewan -- and nuclear 

development.  I think all of Saskatchewan taxpayers and all 

Saskatchewan people would be interested in their comments, 

those two members now, particularly as this Bill signals that 

the development will occur in the private sector. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, regardless of how misguided Peter 

Prebble was, and is, the fact of the matter is he did not let this 

Assembly and the people . . . he did let the people of 

Saskatchewan know where he stood -- in direct opposition to 

uranium development, in direct opposition to the government 

of today.  He did not allow himself to be silenced by the 

member from Riversdale.  And in fact on this issue of uranium 

mining, Peter Prebble stood and spoke at every opportunity 

presented to him in this House.  If he were here today, Mr. 

Speaker, I would predict that Peter Prebble would again stand 

in his place and speak out against uranium development. 

 

One would have to wonder, Mr. Speaker, where the member 

from Regina Rosemont is on this important question, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But the NDP benches have fallen silent, Mr. Speaker, on this 

issue of uranium mining since Peter Prebble was defeated.  Not 

a single member, Mr. Speaker, not 



March 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 323 

a single member, like the member from Regina Rosemont, has 

stood in his place and commented on uranium development in 

this House since it's reconvened or since the election, Mr. 

Speaker.  Every single opportunity that has been presented to 

him to speak on this important issue, he has declined, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I think it's important that the people of Saskatchewan 

know where that member stands on this important question.  

Where will that member vote on this important question of the 

finalization of the privatization of Cameco? 

 

The NDP members, Mr. Speaker, do not wish to avail 

themselves of this opportunity to be forthright with this 

Assembly and with the people of Saskatchewan with respect to 

uranium mining.  And as misguided as Peter Prebble is on this 

issue, you have to render him respect for not hiding behind the 

government's majority, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the position of the opposition is well-known in 

this Assembly and in the province, and I'm proud to stand 

behind that policy -- a policy, Mr. Speaker, which is well 

underlined by this Bill now before the Assembly.  So, Mr. 

Speaker, on one hand I do commend the government for 

presenting this Bill as it does illustrate a belief on their part that 

the uses for a Crown corporation in the uranium mining 

industry are long dead, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I do have one specific concern about this Bill, Mr. Speaker, in 

that the government still does own a significant interest in 

Cameco, and the passage of this Bill may have some 

accountability implications for the management of those 

shares. 

 

I was a little concerned, Mr. Speaker, when I read one of the 

reasons given by the minister for the repeal of The 

Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation Act was that 

it would eliminate the need for a separate accounting of the 

government's shares in Cameco.  There's something to be said 

for a separate annual report in that it provides a direct 

opportunity for the members of the Assembly to focus on the 

uranium mining industry -- shares, and government 

accountability for the management of those shares, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So this Bill is not a complete rose garden, Mr. Speaker, but it is 

certainly a big step forward, a big step forward for 

Saskatchewan and a giant leap forward for the NDP Party, Mr. 

Speaker.  This Bill represents however, the principle that we 

have completed a major chapter in our history in shifting 

responsibility for our economy to the private sector from the 

government sector, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this Bill sets the stage for a tremendous 

economic growth in the uranium and nuclear industries.  After 

passage of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, the only thing standing in our 

way will be the government wishing to pursue future 

opportunities for our people. 

Mr. Speaker, let's just touch for a moment on the opportunities 

that come with this moment of transition.  It was amusing, Mr. 

Speaker, to see the Premier of Saskatchewan saying in a paper 

that his province cannot avail itself to the nuclear opportunity 

because the economy is in poor condition.  He did not say, Mr. 

Speaker, that he is opposed to a nuclear power plant.  He said 

he couldn't proceed with a CANDU because the economy was 

in rough shape. 

 

Now let's just think that through for a minute, Mr. Speaker.  

We have no jobs in the province, so we must not try to create 

any jobs.  Is that what the Premier is saying?  Our economic 

condition is poor so we must not try to improve the economy.  

It's truly a strange position for a government, Mr. Speaker, and 

especially strange for a Premier from the city of Saskatoon, a 

city which stands to benefit so greatly from nuclear 

development, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Consider, Mr. Speaker, the absurdity of a premier saying his 

province is in desperate need of jobs but our one economic 

basis for job creation that no one disputes, the greatest hope, 

cannot be assessed because we have not enough jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's not a matter of having insufficient funds.  The 

fact is that the private sector in Saskatchewan has already 

expressed a clear enthusiasm to proceed with nuclear 

development without the financial participation of the 

Government of Saskatchewan.  What's more, Mr. Speaker, is 

the huge volumes of dollars available from the federal 

government if the province were to pursue this exciting new 

development and opportunity. 

 

I'm not certain what the numbers are now, Mr. Speaker, but at 

one point I was told that there was a billion dollars worth of 

federal money on the table if the province were to agree to a 

CANDU 3 nuclear reactor -- a billion dollars of federal 

investment married to private investors in the province and 

possibly even to the participation of the power utility of the city 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

With those kinds of dollars coming into the province, the 

Premier might expect to see some kind of job creation -- job 

creation that we desperately need in this province; some kind 

of wealth generation; some kind of wealth creation the 

province of Saskatchewan desperately needs.  But instead, 

instead of pursuing that tremendous opportunity, Mr. Speaker, 

we have a Premier unable to cope with the opposition within 

his own party.  So he says we cannot proceed due to the very 

poor economic development problems we have, something he 

is unable to cure. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we do commend the Premier for disowning 

his party when he decided to re-sign the AECL agreement.  

And we applaud him and his colleagues for setting aside, Mr. 

Speaker, setting aside their unfounded opposition to uranium 

development and setting aside their opposition to AECL 

coming into this province, something we heard a great deal 

about during the election campaign, Mr. Speaker. 



324 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1993 

At every opportunity that was available, the members of the 

NDP government spoke out against uranium development, and 

yet within months of taking office we commend them on 

changing their mind and looking forward and looking to the 

future of Saskatchewan.  A giant flip-flop, but nevertheless a 

correct one, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier should use this opportunity presented 

by this Bill to go the next step and allow the development and 

construction of a CANDU nuclear three-generation plant in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP opponents to nuclear technology is 

based on the waste product that remains radioactive.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, the extremists in their party have long held the 

contention that nuclear development would pose a great threat 

to all of humanity.  And yet we see nuclear development all 

over the world, Mr. Speaker.  And yet we see nuclear 

development all over the world and it hasn't been the downfall 

of humanity; it has indeed been the opportunity that humanity 

has been looking for in the 20th century. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Speaker, the extremists in the NDP Party like to use the 

word radioactive.  They use it to scare.  They use it to scare, 

Mr. Speaker, the uneducated or the unsure about nuclear 

development.  It is fairly easy to make the word scary since you 

are talking, Mr. Speaker, about something that cannot be seen, 

cannot be touched, or cannot be heard. 

 

So by its nature the whole concept of radioactivity is easy to 

manipulate and easy to use in fear tactics.  And that's 

something that the NDP Party has made a career of, an absolute 

career of scaring people, putting the fear of the problem into 

people -- something they've been able to do through successive 

administrations ever since the province began, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, if you look at the actual facts, it is not so 

scary and as frightening as the NDP would have you believe.  

Mr. Speaker, you may not realize, and members of the 

Assembly may not realize that you receive more radiation by 

wearing a see-in-the-dark watch than you do by standing in 

front of the door at a nuclear reactor. 

 

What is more, Mr. Speaker, is that every human being 

generates radiations themselves internally, Mr. Speaker.  It is 

not possible for a human being to be free of radiation.  Even 

after death the human body continues to emit radiation.  

Because it is the most basic, Mr. Speaker. Radiation is in fact 

what all things are, all things in this universe.  To be without 

radiation would be the same as being without any substance at 

all.  And that, of course, is not possible in the physical world. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that is not to say radiation is not dangerous.  

No one makes that admission, Mr. Speaker.  At certain levels 

radiation is in fact dangerous, and exceedingly dangerous if 

handled 

improperly or without due care.  But, Mr. Speaker, almost all 

things are dangerous if not given the respect they deserve in 

their handling. 

 

I invite the NDP members to examine the accident record of 

nuclear facilities, Mr. Speaker.  Then compare that record to 

the accident record of almost any other human endeavour, Mr. 

Speaker.  And even when such foolish and unnecessary 

tragedies as Chernobyl are included, Mr. Speaker, you find that 

the track record of uranium and nuclear industry are far better 

than the track record, for example, of accidents on our 

highways, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The death toll on the highways of the world is truly enormous 

-- staggering in fact when you compare it to the nuclear 

industry, Mr. Speaker.  Yet I have not heard the NDP members 

calling for the elimination of automobiles and highways. 

 

They say that . . . In spite of the fact, I'm reminded, Mr. 

Speaker, of the fact that they wanted to tear up highways in 

their last budget. They haven't called for the total elimination of 

them yet, just the ripping up of the pavement on the surface of 

them. 

 

They say that accidents involved in automobiles are acceptable, 

given what society obtains from the existence of these 

machines and the infrastructure required to serve those 

machines. 

 

Yet, Mr. Speaker, if the same NDP members choose to 

examine in detail the accident record of CANDU technology, 

they will find it has a better record than coalmining, a better 

record than the oil industry, a better record than the aircraft 

industry. 

 

And there is a good comparison for this government, Mr. 

Speaker -- the aircraft industry.  This government went into 

enormous lengths to announce it had landed the Piper Aircraft 

deal.  And of course, Mr. Speaker, that deal never landed but 

instead flew the coup.  But the government did make that 

announcement. 

 

All of us recall the glowing announcement that they made that 

the Piper deal was coming to Saskatchewan.  And it didn't 

come and it never will come, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, did the government announce how many 

people are injured or killed in test piloting new aircraft?  Did 

they announce the incidence of accidents in aircraft 

manufacturing plants?  Do they do an industry analysis of 

workplace accidents and accidents involving the users of 

aircraft?  No, Mr. Speaker, they did not do these things.  And 

why not?  Because they had no political forces pressuring them 

the way they do on uranium mining and nuclear development. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1988 Cameco was formed through the merger 

between the provincial Crown, Saskatchewan Mining 

Development Corporation, and the federal Crown, Eldorado 

Nuclear.  In three years debt was greatly reduced by half, Mr. 

Speaker.  Original debt 



March 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 325 

was around 600 million.  In 1991 debt was about half that 

amount. 

 

Cameco is one of the world's largest low-cost integrated 

uranium producers in the world.  It operates and owns 

two-thirds of two of the world's largest high grade uranium 

mines in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

In opposition and during election campaigning, NDP were 

bitterly opposed to those uranium mining developments, Mr. 

Speaker.  Now that they are in power they are approving more, 

Mr. Speaker -- they are approving more.  Another NDP 

flip-flop, but this time a positive flip, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It would seem logical that Cameco would prosper with the best 

uranium reserves in the world being in Saskatchewan.  Also it 

seemed logical that AECL would develop technology here as 

well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's interesting to note that the government now, 

when in opposition and during the election campaign they were 

so bitterly opposed to uranium development, and yet we see on 

February 5, 1993, Mr. Speaker, a news release coming out of 

the Department of the Environment.  And I'd like to quote 

some passages from that: 

 

 Environment minister approves exploration project at 

McArthur River. 

 

 Environment and Public Safety Minister Berny Wiens has 

approved an underground exploration project at Cameco's 

McArthur River site. 

 

They've given approval to it, Mr. Speaker.  And we 

wholeheartedly agree with their approval, Mr. Speaker. 

 

 The approval of the exploration work was recommended Jan. 

15 by the joint federal-provincial panel which is studying the 

future of several proposed uranium mines. 

 

Not only one mine, Mr. Speaker, they're going to give approval 

to, but they're going to give approval, I predict, to a whole host 

of them in northern Saskatchewan before long. 

 

 "Based on this recommendation the project is being given the 

green light," Wiens said.  "After studying the issue and 

holding public consultations the joint panel told us the 

project's environmental safeguards are fundamentally sound." 

 

Those are the words of the Environment minister in this 

province today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Environment minister and the Community Services 

Minister: 

 

 . . . will soon initiate consultation with northern residents and 

communities regarding: 

 a timetable and process for discussing northern policy issues 

related to uranium mining including revenue sharing and the 

standard provisions in surface leases; and 

 

 ways of dealing with panel recommendations on the specific 

surface lease for the McArthur . . . underground exploration 

program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and it goes on to say . . . the minister goes on to 

say: 

 

  . . . comprehensive discussions would address human 

resource development, environmental and worker protection, 

compensation for (those) directly affected resource users, as 

well as revenue sharing. 

 

 "The joint panel gave us more than just environmental 

guidance on (this) mine site," (the minister) said.  "The report 

recognizes the role of local communities in dealing with the 

impact of mining." 

 

What a direct turn-around, Mr. Speaker, from the words of 

members opposite when they were in opposition and 

campaigning in the election.  At every opportunity they used 

words to scare the living daylights out of people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And now when you look at their press releases, they're trying to 

make everybody feel as comfortable as possible with uranium 

development in this province -- something they should have 

been doing in opposition, something they should have been 

doing during the election campaign.  But oh no, Mr. Speaker.  

They couldn't do it because they thought there might be some 

political mileage in it for them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

 The McArthur River exploration project will provide 

technical information on the ore body at the site but does not 

involve mining of the ore.  Future mining at McArthur River, 

and at a number of other proposed locations in the north, is 

currently under separate study by the joint panel. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think we can all conclude from that that the 

mine indeed will be going ahead, and others as well.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, while we're speaking about mining in northern 

Saskatchewan, I'd like to just give you a few short facts on the 

developments that are being currently proposed in the North. 

 

The McArthur River project, the employment . . . When we 

look at employment, Mr. Speaker, if approval is granted to 

mine the McArthur River ore at the Key Lake mine, the current 

level of employment at Key Lake, 340 employees, will be 

maintained.  The level of northern participation is targeted to 

be 50 per cent. 

 

Investment.  The investment that's going to be put into that is 

currently unknown.  Cameco has not established an estimate 

for the cost of developing the McArthur River deposit.  When 

such an estimate is 



326 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1993 

established, Cameco as a public company needs to provide the 

exchanges and shareholders with this information on a 

first-priority basis. 

 

The royalty structure, Mr. Speaker, if the mine is able to 

sustain the Key Lake mill at full capacity for 15 years, 

minimum development of the royalties would be $90 million -- 

royalties to the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  The 

start-up date is planned for 1998. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we look at another project in northern 

Saskatchewan, the mid-west project as it has been called, will 

employ 242 employees, Mr. Speaker.  A construction crew of 

300 will be required for the predevelopment and building of the 

mill.  Investment in that project, private investment in that 

project will be somewhere between 150 and $200 million.  

Royalties to the province of Saskatchewan will be at a 

minimum of $18 million. 

 

Other economic spin-offs:  annual payroll, estimated to be in 

the order $10.5 million, Mr. Speaker; impact area for 

employment is identified as including Wollaston, Uranium 

City, Stony Rapids, Black Lake, Fond-du-Lac, and Prince 

Albert, Mr. Speaker -- all areas that desperately need 

employment and investment dollars. 

 

The start-up date for that project, Mr. Speaker, is planned for 

1994.  A truly important development for northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Another development that's being proposed in the North, Mr. 

Speaker, is the McClean Lake development.  Employment 

on-site will be 250 people, Mr. Speaker; office staff of 24. 

Total employment will be 274.  Construction will begin in 

1993 through to 1995, and 120 to 133 people will be directly 

employed in the construction.  Future construction plans 

through 1998 to year 2000 will be an additional 33 to 88 

people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Investment, at a minimum, will be 250 million.  Again a 

substantial royalty of $18 million as a minimum will be 

generated for the province of Saskatchewan.  More spin-off 

benefits result from that development, Mr. Speaker.  Payroll 

and employee benefits are estimated to total 200 million for the 

duration of this project, which will be about 14 or 15 years. 

 

Minatco has engaged the services of NorSask Native Outreach, 

a native and Metis hiring service to assist in recruiting 

employees.  Minatco is willing to hire 100 per cent native 

employees for both construction and production, if such were 

available, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Bands and communities most likely to be affected by the 

McClean Lake development are: the Black Lake Band; Fond 

du Lac Band; Hatchet Lake Band; Stony Rapids; Wollaston; La 

Ronge.  Mr. Speaker, important developments for the people of 

northern Saskatchewan; important job opportunities; important 

investment opportunities for the people of northern 

Saskatchewan.  All of that project is planned to be started up in 

1993, Mr. Speaker. 

An Hon. Member: -- Are you supporting this Bill or . . . 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- . . . absolutely supporting this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

We will be supporting this Bill. And it's a pleasure to be able to 

stand in the Assembly today and say that, Mr. Speaker.  I think 

it's important that the members opposite take the time -- take 

the time to look over this Bill and comment on it. 

 

It would be interesting, Mr. Speaker, it would be interesting 

and refreshing if all of the people of Saskatchewan could hear 

comments from each and every one of the NDP members in 

this House on these important developments.  And we 

wholeheartedly endorse uranium development, Mr. Speaker.  

And we're glad to see, absolutely pleased to see the government 

bringing forward a Bill like this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's just not government and opposition members 

of the House, of this Assembly, that are looking forward to 

development in the uranium industry.  Mr. Speaker, it's people 

throughout Saskatchewan that are looking forward to this 

development. 

 

And I want to quote a few things, Mr. Speaker, from an address 

entitled, "Three Major Challenges for the New Government: 

Deficit, Agriculture and Uranium."  And this was put together 

by Mr. Roger Phillips, president of IPSCO Inc., and it was 

presented to the Melfort Junior Chamber of Commerce, and it 

was presented on January, 1992 in Melfort, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1600) 

 

And I think it's important that we go through some of this, Mr. 

Speaker.  And I won't quote it all through its entirety, but we 

want to point out some of the most important parts of this, Mr. 

Speaker.  Mr. Phillips says: 

 

 We need systems which will encourage real cost increases in 

our grain collection and delivery systems.  Every mistaken 

resistance to change merely saps our ability to be efficient 

(Mr. Speaker). 

 

And I think this speaks to all kinds of industries. 

 

 The third major challenge will be one to take advantage of . . 

. the new distinctive natural advantage that Saskatchewan has 

over the rest of the world.  We can't afford to pass this . . . 

(over).  This is our uranium resource (Mr. Deputy Speaker). 

 

Mr. Phillips goes on.  He says: 

 

 I urge the government to ignore their recent party convention. 

 

1.  (And) Ratify a program of Saskatchewan-based nuclear 

research with Atomic Energy of . . . (Saskatchewan). 



March 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 327 

And, Mr. Speaker, the government has concluded that 

agreement and we wholeheartedly endorse that agreement.  It 

was this party that set that agreement out in place to begin with, 

Mr. Speaker.  It was this party that signed that agreement, it 

was this party campaigned for that during the election 

campaign, and it was those folks opposite, Mr. Speaker, that 

campaigned against it. 

 

And yet now we see a major, absolutely major turn-around in 

this government and we wholeheartedly endorse it, and we 

hope the people of Saskatchewan do. And I'm sure they do, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Phillips goes on to say the province should: 

 

 2. Seek to develop spent fuel resource facilities in the north to 

encourage uranium sales -- please note that returning material 

of lower radioactivity than was originally mined shouldn't be 

a problem. 

 

 3. Seek to construct an initial Saskatchewan-based reactor as 

soon as possible -- remember there's never been a major 

radioactive leak in any North American reactor.  I note in 

parenthesis that the former NDP MLA told the CBC that a 

major reason for the party to reject the reactor was that the 

government couldn't afford it -- obviously an argument for 

permitting a privately-owned nuclear reactor to sell 

electricity to SaskPower under long-term contract! 

 

If you don't want the Government of Saskatchewan to invest in 

this development, Mr. Speaker, let private industry take over 

and invest for you.  Let the private industry that want to 

proceed with this development, let them bring forward the 

investment dollars necessary to complete the construction of a 

CANDU 3 nuclear reactor. 

 

Mr. Phillips goes on to say: 

 

 One of the largest countries under social democratic rule 

today is France, a strong proponent of nuclear power, with 

some three quarters of its electricity generated that way.  

And, environmentalists take note, tourists in Europe observe 

a marked difference between the blue skies of France and the 

grey ones of fossil fuel (generation) . . . in nearby Germany. 

 

 I cite France to suggest anti-nuclear is not a social democratic 

fundamental principle (Mr. Deputy Speaker). 

 

The rest of the world is embracing nuclear development, Mr. 

Speaker, and it certainly is high time that the government 

moves forward with this kind of development in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Phillips goes on to say: 

In a world where the green house effect and air pollution 

generally are severe problems, nuclear power, especially 

from smaller, less costly reactors, is an absolute necessity 

(Mr. Speaker). 

 

 It is always difficult politically for governments to cut back.  

In our black/white for/against adversarial system the 

opposition will always be against such initiatives (Mr. 

Speaker).  When a centre to right government is in power the 

opposition can pillory . . . (against) being insensitive to social 

and human values. As a social democratic government with 

52 percent of the popular vote the Romanow regime has the 

best chance of taking some . . . tough initiatives that must be 

taken if Saskatchewan is to remain a viable province. 

 

 I wish the government success in these endeavours. 

 

Those are the words of Mr. Roger Phillips, president of IPSCO, 

with regard to nuclear development in this province, Mr. 

Speaker.  I think those words are very, very important.  I think 

the government should take and wholeheartedly endorse those 

words, Mr. Speaker.  And it would be important if the members 

opposite, each and every one of them, would take the time to 

read his comments on nuclear development, take the time to get 

up in this legislature and tell the people of Saskatchewan 

exactly their thoughts on nuclear development. 

 

I see the Minister of Energy and Mines giving the thumbs-up 

signal, Mr. Speaker, and I wholeheartedly agree with him.  

Thumbs up to the nuclear industry and uranium mining in this 

province. 

 

We expect, Mr. Speaker, that the minister will be on his feet 

speaking to this very important question, and I'm sure the 

people of the NDP Party and his constituency would be 

interested in hearing his comments on this important resource 

development. 

 

Mr. Speaker, uranium in Saskatchewan in 1990 . . . 20 per cent 

of the uranium produced in the world came from 

Saskatchewan.  This province is a world leader in uranium 

development.  The world needs Saskatchewan's uranium, and 

for Saskatchewan it means new jobs, new income, more 

diversification, new wealth, and a prosperous future, Mr. 

Speaker.  Since the early '80s, capital expenditures alone have 

totalled more than $1.2 billion with almost 500 million 

invested in exploration and pre-development in Saskatchewan's 

North. 

 

Last year the uranium industry generated $66 million in 

salaries, wages, and benefits for its 1,100 employees; invested 

44 million in capital expenditures; paid close to $30 million in 

taxes and royalty expenses and 2.7 million in industry fees; and 

donated $350,000 to community and charitable organizations, 

plus another 38,000 to the education of the province's youth in 

the form of scholarships, Mr. Speaker. 



328 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1993 

Saskatoon receives the greatest benefit from all of this, Mr. 

Speaker.  And it's important to note that the Premier's 

constituency of Saskatoon Riversdale has a number of people 

directly employed in the uranium mining industry in this 

province, and a lot of investment dollars come from that 

constituency into that important area of our economy. 

 

All the head offices of the operating uranium companies are in 

Saskatoon in this province, Mr. Speaker.  It is estimated that 

for every one person employed in the industry, there are two or 

three employed outside the industry that support Saskatoon in 

some way.  From transportation of employees who must be 

flown in to the northern mines to equipment provision, 

engineering services, and catering services, there are a wide 

range of support employment generated in Saskatoon by the 

uranium industry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It is an industry that should be fully developed for the benefit 

of our urban and rural areas.  The Saskatchewan government 

must encourage and facilitate the growth of the uranium 

industry, not shut it down. 

 

And I think this marks, Mr. Speaker, this Bill marks an 

important step forward that the NDP Party have taken in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Premier Devine's government has already announced a 

comprehensive agreement, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  When he was 

in office, he announced a comprehensive agreement with 

Ottawa, the AECL agreement to assess economic 

diversification opportunities for the energy sector in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

SaskPower signed a memorandum of understanding with 

AECL under the previous administration that allowed for 

thousands of jobs to be located in Saskatchewan.  The 

agreement will allow the two companies to assess the 

opportunities for a nuclear industry in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker.  And we are very pleased to be able to support 

this kind of development in Saskatchewan. 

 

Such an industry would, among other things, add value to the 

province's abundant uranium resources.  These value added 

opportunities include the potential for a CANDU 3 power plant 

for generating electricity.  And we believe, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that this government should move ahead as quickly as 

possible in that area. 

 

Additional manufacturing centred on uranium resources rather 

than just exporting it, Mr. Speaker, the production of isotopes 

for medical and industrial purposes -- Saskatchewan is a leader, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in uranium development in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Related industries that Saskatchewan is currently pursuing 

include an accelerator manufacturing marketing capability for 

food irradiation and industrial applications, a nuclear simulator 

training facility, expanded scientific studies and research at 

our universities, and recycling and waste disposal. 

 

That seems to be one of the areas that is of great concern, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, to opponents of nuclear development.  It's that 

waste that is created from nuclear generating sites. 

 

But yet, Mr. Speaker, the technology I believe is there, the 

technology the scientific community believes is there to deal 

with that problem, and they, I believe, could adequately deal 

with any problem that we might see in that area. 

 

As well there is an opportunity to complete the CANDU 3 

engineering in Saskatchewan.  They would create numerous 

high-tech jobs in this province as well as spin-off opportunities 

for Saskatchewan manufacturing firms.  By the turn of the 

century, thousands of new jobs could be created in 

Saskatchewan as a result of the Progressive Conservative plan 

to develop Saskatchewan's resources, particularly uranium.  

And that means new, high-income opportunities in Saskatoon, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And now, Mr. Speaker, we are pleased to 

see that the government is moving forward in this important 

industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think we should look back on some of the things 

. . . the NDP's position on uranium industry in Saskatchewan of 

the past.  They were opposed, totally opposed, to uranium 

development, Mr. Speaker.  The member for Riversdale said in 

the Briarpatch newspaper: 

 

 The NDP passed a very tough resolution on stopping uranium 

mining.  It is conceivable at the time of the next election, and 

if you win, that mines in Cigar Lake and the fifth, sixth and 

seventh mines at Collins Bay will be in operation.  Will you 

shut those down? 

 

And the member from Riversdale said in answer to that 

question: 

 

 My position is simply that the party leader's job and the 

caucus's job is to implement party policy.  That is party 

policy, . . .(as) far as it can be implemented when we're in 

office, it (is) likely party policies will be implemented. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that interview took place with Briarpatch in 

December, 1987. 

 

And we're glad, Mr. Speaker, to be able to read those 

comments back to the member from Riversdale because now 

he has totally changed his mind on uranium development. 

 

 Responding to questioners who expressed fears for the future 

of the uranium industry in Saskatchewan under the NDP 

government, . . . (the member from Riversdale) offered the 

official party position. 

 

 "Phasing out of existing uranium development in the north 

would only take place as 



March 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 329 

alternative jobs become available" . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, Star-Phoenix, March of 1990. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we see that employment opportunities in 

northern Saskatchewan are extremely difficult to initiate, Mr. 

Speaker, and it's important now that the government takes it 

upon themselves to realize that, and they have done that and we 

commend them for that. 

 

Prebble, a former NDP MLA, said: 

 

 The "Saskatchewan sale of uranium overseas is an immoral 

act, an act over which the people of Saskatchewan may weep 

20 years from now." 

 

Hansard of 1979, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We're very pleased to see that the good folks of Saskatchewan 

did not endorse that kind of attitude, Mr. Speaker.  And we're 

very pleased to see that the people of Saskatchewan corrected 

the mistake of allowing Mr. Prebble to take his seat in this 

legislature. 

 

He went on to say: 

 

 I mean I frankly don't think that we should be allowing 

mining of any kind offshore in a large commercial fishing 

resource like Wolliston Lake. 

 

"STV News", March 8, 1990. 

 

One of the Regina MLAs (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly), the associate minister . . . or pardon me, the former 

minister of Finance, says the NDP is opposed to an expansion 

of the uranium industry.  That is the position today. 

 

Well we're very pleased to see, Mr. Speaker, that was the 

position of that day.  And now, Mr. Speaker, the position of 

this government, the NDP government, is now that uranium 

mining should take place in Saskatchewan.  Uranium mining is 

good for Saskatchewan, good for the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan, good for Saskatchewan people, and indeed 

world development, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Other members that have commented on uranium development 

in the past -- the member from Regina Rosemont, Saskatoon 

Broadway, Regina Elphinstone, Regina North West.  And here 

are their comments: 

 

 Although I have not been able to locate documentation for 

these, the office of the Minister of Energy and Mines is 

confident these folks are on the "opposed" side. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these members were opposed to uranium 

development and we're very pleased to see that the members of 

the front bench of the NDP government were able to change 

their mind at the recent NDP convention, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1615) 

Other members that spoke out about uranium development -- 

the member from Churchill Downs.  And here is what he said: 

 

 The key question is environmental control concerns uranium 

mining.  Unlike my colleague from Saskatoon, I have 

concluded the use of uranium, as a source of energy, is 

inevitable.  I do not deny the problems associated with its 

use.  I simply see no other alternative in the short run. 

 

That was the budget of 1981-82, page 703, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I'm very pleased to see that the member 

from Churchill Downs was able to use his persuasive powers in 

being able to change the minds of the people in his party.  The 

persuasiveness of that man, Mr. Speaker, in his party must be 

immeasurable because he was able to change a party so 

opposed, so opposed to nuclear development, into a party now 

that is pro-development in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Possibly the next leader of the NDP, a colleague of mine says.  

I wouldn't go so far as saying that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, or Mr. Speaker, pardon me, other 

members have commented on uranium development in the 

past.  The member from Saskatoon Fairview said, Mr. Speaker: 

"Phasing out uranium mining would do more harm for 

Saskatchewan than good."  Star-Phoenix, November 28, 1983.  

And, Mr. Speaker, we're very pleased to see that that member 

as well used his persuasive powers with his colleagues to be 

able to get them to change their mind on uranium development. 

 

Other members, the member from Athabasca, Mr. Speaker, he 

also spoke on uranium development:  "The fact that there has 

been an accident at a nuclear plant doesn't mean that nuclear 

plants should be banned . . . "  He went on to say that he 

personally supports uranium mining and the operation of 

nuclear power plants.  Leader-Post, April 30, 1986, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, now we hear the member from Shaunavon 

speaking up and we hope that he would take the time in this 

legislature to give a little speech -- and coming from him it 

would indeed be little -- on uranium development and what his 

thoughts are on uranium development to the people of 

Saskatchewan.  I'm sure the people of Shaunavon would be 

most interested in hearing what his comments are on uranium 

development, what he feels . . . if he feels how important this 

industry is in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, other members that have commented on uranium 

development are the member from Cumberland.  And he said: 

 

 Although I do not have documentation . . . the  



330 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1993 

 office of the Minister of Energy and Mines suggests he would 

be in favour of the industry given the related jobs and activity 

in his constituency. 

 

And I think it's important, Mr. Speaker, that those members 

take the opportunity to stand in this legislature and reconfirm, 

reconfirm their commitment to uranium development in this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of other members that have 

spoke on the uranium industry in this province, NDP members, 

Mr. Speaker, and we would like to give them, give them the 

opportunity to speak on uranium development, Mr. Speaker.  

Any one of them that would like to take the opportunity now to 

stand on their feet and speak on uranium development, I'd be 

happy to turn the floor over to them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of other comments about 

uranium development that I think are important.  I think 

members on the opposite side as well as opposition members 

would like to take the opportunity to speak on this important 

development and important Bill and I will take my place now 

and let them have that opportunity.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I think that I would 

be remiss if I didn't take the opportunity as the former minister 

responsible for SMDC to rise and congratulate the member 

from Swift Current in his second reading speech here. 

 

I notice that he has so much enthusiasm for the uranium 

industry that he wishes to re-enter the debate and talk about all 

the good things that this province has had in the past from 

uranium development and about the things that are possible in 

the future, as long as this government doesn't backslide on 

some of the new-found strength that appears to be there for the 

uranium industry. 

 

It's also very pleasing, as the former minister responsible for 

SMDC and certainly working with Cameco Corporation on a 

daily basis through some of their endeavours, that this 

particular party and these people are realizing the benefits of 

the privatization of SMDC and Cameco.  Because I remember 

distinctly, Mr. Speaker, being in this House and hearing a 

number of speeches from people as they talked about this 

particular move, and took great issue with the jobs and the 

employment and the dollars that would benefit the province of 

Saskatchewan -- the royalties, the taxation, the aboriginal 

hiring practices.  And they took issue with almost all of it. 

 

And it was pleasing for me to listen to the member from 

Kindersley as he sort of did the roll-call and he went across this 

bunch and their comments.  Because it's like every one of them 

almost goes out and takes a walk on the road to Damascus at 

various times in their political career.  And depending on what 

they think is 

popular at the time, that's when the sun shines down and we get 

these revelations. 

 

And I would hope that the new Minister of Energy and Mines 

would tell us about some of the plans that he personally sees 

for this industry because he works with these people on a daily 

basis; he is involved in the regulatory mechanisms that govern 

the uranium industry; he's involved in the royalty structures 

that will affect this industry into the future.  And I would think 

this Bill which clearly sets a new direction for the New 

Democratic Party government, would give that minister the 

opportunity. 

 

And I think the minister who represents the Cumberland 

constituency also would take this opportunity to talk about 

some of the proposals being brought forward by the uranium 

industry as far as aboriginal employment.  The potential on the 

eastern side of the province to expand things like the hydro 

grid, which hasn't been mentioned all that much, but the very 

fact that uranium has been an ongoing industry and 

development in northern Saskatchewan means that a lot of 

communities now have electrical power that isn't generated by 

fossil fuel. 

 

The fact we've been able to tie together the hydro grid from 

southern Saskatchewan through all the way to Uranium City 

means that a lot of these mines have become more efficient, 

that the production of uranium, the production of gold, the 

production of potentially base metals in many of these 

communities now becomes more viable. 

 

And it means that many of those northern communities that 

didn't have access before, now and in the future have the 

potential to increase the quality of life because they have 

access to the hydro grid.  And I think it's a very important 

development for northern Saskatchewan in the years to come. 

 

It's that old story about roads to resources.  Well the roads are 

being developed, but you've got to have somebody there that 

can turn on the lights after you build the road.  And an 

outgrowth of uranium development in this province has been 

the need to develop that, and it has been done. 

 

Another very important aspect, Mr. Speaker, that's been 

touched on, but I think it's important that all members of the 

House realize that this industry has brought about, that for the 

very first time we have seen joint provincial-federal 

agreements and workings on major environmental impact 

studies. 

 

Now we all know, Mr. Speaker, in this province that when the 

New Democratic Party were in opposition, that they constantly 

harped on the environmental issues, that they said that there 

wasn't enough coordination, that there wasn't the ability of 

provincial legislatures and federal legislatures to come to some 

reasonable agreement on environmental issues. 

 

Well the process that has been put in place in northern 

Saskatchewan to do environmental impact studies on 



March 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 331 

five uranium mines, I think, Mr. Speaker, is a landmark 

process.  It's one that will be used Canada-wide in determining 

issues of this magnitude where there is significant, potentially 

significant impact on peoples living in those areas. 

 

We all, Mr. Speaker, as this province went through the 

Rafferty-Alameda process and the disagreements that arose 

between our own environmental impact studies and the EARP 

(environmental assessment and review process) process that the 

federal government put in place in 1989-90 means that there 

has been a tremendous cost attached to environmental impact 

to various industry groups and indeed to Saskatchewan 

taxpayers that might not necessarily have occurred had this 

process that we have developed in uranium been in place 

sooner. 

 

And I think, clearly what it will point out to people in this 

province and people in communities most affected by uranium 

development, is that it is a sound principle, that a lot of the 

scare tactics which people like to come into our province and 

use -- and indeed unfortunately some people within our own 

province, even people that were former members of this 

legislature who like to scaremonger on this issue -- what this 

process will point out is that any Saskatchewan citizen, 

taxpayer, voter, has the ample opportunity to enter into the 

process, know that they got a fair hearing, and at the end of the 

day we aren't going to get whip-sawed.  We aren't going to get 

whip-sawed by people primarily from outside of our own 

jurisdiction who have other motives involved in whether we, as 

Saskatchewan citizens, mine, refine, export, process uranium 

and its by-products. 

 

Because there's all sorts of people around the piece, Mr. 

Speaker, unfortunately that have other agendas on this.  And 

they want to always talk about nuclear bombs.  And they want 

to talk about things that frankly no one in this province, I don't 

believe, when they look real deep has ever thought we were 

going to do here. 

 

And I remember back some 10, 12 years ago to the debate that 

went around the potential uranium refinery at Warman, 

Saskatchewan.  And I'm sure the member from Rosthern knows 

more about that than I.  But I know, as the minister responsible 

to work with Cameco Corporation, that there is a significant 

number of jobs in this country that are tied to the processing of 

uranium.  And unfortunately for us almost all of those jobs 

have resided in eastern Canada, that Ontario has been the prime 

benefactor of that development, and that attempts to bring that 

secondary processing, that value added processing, to this 

province over the years have been thwarted by people who are 

on these other agendas. 

 

And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, in the past, a lot of those 

people have hitched their wagon to the NDP Party for whatever 

reason.  But that's where they hitched their wagon. 

 

And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, it's very unfortunate that that 

happened.  Because that meant that it got 

involved in the political process with these people.  And they 

were always looking for ways to politicize most everything that 

the former government did -- and certainly the privatization of 

SMDC and Eldorado Nuclear and the resulting formation of 

Cameco Corporation wasn't lost in that process because that 

particular issue then got expanded by all these people who had 

hitched their wagon to the New Democratic Party. 

 

And I think that's why we saw that nonsense arising out of their 

conventions about how we should shut all the mines down, and 

we should do away with all of the jobs, and we should sort of 

let northern Saskatchewan wilt on the vine.  And I don't know 

where that silly thing came from but I suspect it was from these 

people attaching themselves to this political party and trying to 

make short-term political gains in some way. 

 

And as we all know, Mr. Speaker, the result of a lot of that 

short-term thinking has now come home to roost on this 

political party because they're now charged with governing this 

province.  And every taxpayer that is in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, is reaping the whirlwind of that result because we've 

just had no end of tax increases and everything attached to 

them, making those silly kinds of promises. 

 

And we can only hope that some members of that party who 

are now in government and have the responsibility to make 

sure that uranium industry moves forward, will take this 

opportunity to digress a little bit from some of the rhetoric that 

we've heard in the past. 

 

And along with this Bill, Bill 25, which finally finishes off the 

privatization process begun by the former Devine 

administration . . . by the former PC (Progressive 

Conservative) administration -- I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker, it just 

slipped out -- that the former PC administration, that process 

that was begun I think set a very responsible and logically 

progressive mode in place to make sure that uranium mining 

continued on an even keel well into the future.  That I think 

that it's important for some of these members to now stand up 

and tell us their thoughts about how this is going to occur over 

the next two years that remains to their mandate in this 

province. 

 

(1630) 

 

And I'd like to hear comments about how the board of directors 

for instance . . . and this government has the opportunity to 

appoint people to the board of directors of Cameco 

Corporation.  I would like to hear from members of this 

government, from the treasury benches, what type of people, 

what type of people that they are appointing to that board so 

that the rest of us, the taxpayers of this province will have some 

feeling that there are reasonable folks being appointed there; 

that there are people that are in favour of expanding this 

industry to some of its logical conclusions. 

 

That the agreement that finally was dragged out of this 



332 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1993 

government by the people of Saskatoon and the opposition and 

other people, that they will cooperate with AECL in developing 

some components of the uranium industry. That this agreement 

that was finally dragged out of them, kicking and screaming, 

by a significant portion of the taxpayers of this province, that 

that agreement will be adhered to, that it will be promoted, and 

that it will progress, that the government will back it. 

 

And that means that the type of individual that this government 

appoints to the board of directors of Cameco is absolutely 

fundamental.  That the policy of the former government to 

bring people in from outside of Saskatchewan, to indeed make 

it international in character, given that many of the people that 

buy uranium oxide from Cameco are people in the Pacific Rim, 

are people in Europe, are people in the United States of 

America, that that policy of being inclusive, of being worldly 

in outlook will be enhanced by people that this government 

appoints to the board of directors. 

 

Because that was one of the things that the former 

administration, Mr. Speaker, felt very strongly about when this 

privatization took place, is that we as a Saskatchewan 

company, which Cameco is, headquartered in Saskatchewan, 

would derive its strength from expanding its horizons into all 

the areas of the world where we do business.  And certainly by 

having people from Switzerland, having people from Asia, on 

that board of directors, I think gives us a view into other parts 

of the world that are beneficial to us, Mr. Speaker, in not only 

uranium but other areas of endeavour. 

 

Because these are people that have their pulse on world affairs; 

that understand when the Soviet Union broke up, for instance, 

that there would be a lot of nuclear material come onto the 

market; that there would be weapons grade material that would 

have to be utilized in some way, would have to be reprocessed, 

would have to be moved into the market-place.  And that they 

would be prepared to position Cameco in such a way as it 

doesn't have to go through a down time; that it can keep 

generating profits and royalties for Saskatchewan people that 

we in turn use in our social safety net, that we in turn use for 

education and health care and policing. 

 

And that is very important.  And I would hope that members of 

the treasury benches would give us some kind of an indication 

of who these people are, what their plans are in the future so 

that Saskatchewan people can be ensured that that view of the 

world won't be changed; that we aren't going to get someone 

who only looks inward and only looks at Saskatchewan, on the 

board of directors. 

 

Because that's what the ministers are for.  They're here to look 

after the Saskatchewan issues.  And they aren't here to make 

Cameco Corporation into something that only looks inward. 

 

It's very interesting, Mr. Speaker, when you travel around 

northern Saskatchewan.  And I've had the 

opportunity over the last few years, I think, to be in every 

uranium mine in this province, to be underground in any of the 

underground operations.  I've even had the opportunity to be at 

Cigar Lake and go down into that very exciting potential new 

mine there. 

 

And what it does for you, I guess, Mr. Speaker, is it gives you a 

perspective that most people in this province simply don't have.  

And I would encourage the government to continue on with the 

policy that SARM, the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities, started a few years ago where their members 

have been going and visiting nuclear plants all across Canada. 

 

And also the proactive manner in which Cameco and other 

uranium mining companies have done with Saskatchewan 

people to invite them to the mine sites, to take you actually into 

the processing mills, to go to the open pit mines, to go to the 

underground mines, and give people a true sense of what it's 

like. 

 

I think so many times we expect people to come out of the 

ground sort of glowing in the dark.  And that's certainly 

something that was perpetuated by people that were 

anti-uranium and anti-mining, that if you went anywhere near 

one of these places you somehow would glow in the dark and 

self-destruct in a few years time.  And it's simply not true. 

 

I mean as my colleague pointed out, for aboriginal employment 

in a lot of northern Saskatchewan, the uranium sector is the one 

that has the most opportunity.  It's the one that has the dollars 

that it can dedicate to education that's absolutely necessary to 

have for people that are working in that sector, and it's an area 

that has always been very forthcoming, particularly since the 

formation of Cameco, in scholarships, in trying to do things 

interactively with various communities. 

 

It means that, for instance, that the La Ronge band have been 

able to assemble a fairly large trucking fleet.  It's not a 

well-known fact to many people in this province that the La 

Ronge band is involved with a trucking operation that probably 

has 50 semis on the road in any given week.  Some of those are 

contract positions; some of them are driver-owned units. 

 

But the very fact that they have been involved in the supply 

lifeline of the uranium business means that the La Ronge band 

is able to expand their economic horizons into other areas. 

 

The last time I was up to La Ronge, I know that they had 

purchased the NAPA (National Automotive Parts Association) 

dealership because the NAPA dealership went hand in hand 

with the trucking business because of the parts that are needed 

to keep the trucks on the road.  There's a service component 

that presently was all being done in Saskatoon which in turn . . 

. now some of that servicing component can be moved to La 

Ronge.  That's much closer to some of the people that work in 

the business and it also, I think, makes them a more efficient 

deliverer of services. 



March 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 333 

That component can be expanded and strengthened to other 

bands in the province of Saskatchewan, bands that are looking 

now at the treaty land entitlement process which will give them 

more economic strength, more economic wherewithal to enter 

into various sectors, various economic sectors, various social 

sectors of our society.  And uranium has been a very positive, 

positive benefactor in furthering that process.  It has 

intermeshed very nicely with some of the economic 

development strategies and dreams of a lot of our Indian bands 

in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

And I think it's important that once again as we look at the 

board structure of Cameco Corporation, that we look at the 

people that will influence on a day-by-day basis uranium 

mining in Saskatchewan, that that aboriginal component be 

strengthened as much as possible. 

 

When we see predictions being made that by 1995 that fully 50 

per cent of employment opportunities will be to aboriginal 

people, that commitments are being made to in fact push 

employment opportunities to 100 per cent in that area, I think 

that it's incumbent upon whatever government is in place in 

Saskatchewan today or in the future, that that aboriginal 

component be recognized and strengthened in every way 

possible. 

 

And I know from my involvement with Indian bands in this 

province that they look to this as a very strong component of 

their future for many years to come. 

 

And I think it was also important that we recognized that when 

moving into the joint assessment process with the federal 

government on the environment assessment side of uranium 

mining.  Because when one visited with people from Wollaston 

Lake or visited with people from other communities up there, it 

was a sense of being shut out of the process in a meaningful 

way, I think, that caused some of the problems that seemed to 

crop up. 

 

And once that they were assured that they would have a voice 

in a process that wasn't going to be ultimately flawed and 

dragged through the courts and subjected to all sorts of 

machinations by people on other agendas who didn't live in 

those communities, who in fact may have been from outside 

the province . . . I mean we had people from Greenpeace in 

Vancouver and we had people from various anti-nuclear 

factions from Europe coming over and telling Saskatchewan 

people things that simply weren't true; often for a person that 

hasn't had access to good educational opportunities, could be 

misled by people who are on these kinds of agendas. 

 

And I think that by having the joint federal-provincial process 

with a lot of credibility attached to it, credible people, that we 

then were able to move down that road.  And I only can say to 

government members, I hope that they're totally prepared to 

further that process and make sure that these good people are 

around. 

An area that I also think we should talk about here is some of 

the value added sectors that are available to this province and 

the potential jobs.  And my colleague from Kindersley did, I 

think, a good job in opening up some of those subjects, because 

when one studies the AECL agreements -- and I say 

agreements because there are two of them, but they're virtually 

the same in scope and nature -- and when you look at those 

particular agreements and you look at some of those 

applications, the potential applications, it just boggles your 

mind, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When you talk to people who are on the leading edge -- the 

leading edge -- of technology in the nuclear business, it means 

that this province can leap ahead of anyone else, potentially, in 

the business today.  And that means that the government is 

going to have to be dedicated.  It means that the government is 

going to have to ignore some of those people who are around 

the edge of the New Democratic Party, ignore some of these 

people who would stop this process at almost any cost.  

Because I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, you're not going to get 

large-scale food processing interacting with the nuclear 

business unless there's a very clear strategy and game plan laid 

out.  It's something that has to be handled in a way that 

marshalls the assets of government in many areas. 

 

It means, for instance, the Minister of Agriculture and the 

Minister of Economic Development and the Minister of Energy 

are going to have to cooperate in a whole lot of areas. 

 

You will not see irradiation of food on a boatload basis occur 

unless this government is prepared to sit down with the people 

in the industries involved, sit down with people from the 

federal government, and work in cooperation. 

 

We are told, Mr. Speaker, that the first country that can 

irradiate, for instance wheat, on a large-scale commercial basis 

will have a definite commercial advantage over everyone else 

in the world who's in the wheat business. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that means that perhaps a unit train of grain 

of one specific grade would be marshalled in Saskatchewan, 

treated, put into hopper cars, and delivered directly to a ship in 

the port of Vancouver, offloaded in a port in China or 

somewhere else, and that the storage life of that particular 

boatload of grain would be double or triple what the storage 

life of grain delivered by some other country was. 

 

That means, Mr. Speaker, that means that Saskatchewan then, 

as a producer of high-quality grain, for instance, gets a leg up, 

gets a leg up on people from Australia, or Argentina, the 

European Community, who don't have the same capability that 

we do. 

 

(1645) 

 

That means, Mr. Speaker, that in this province the nuclear 

business, the nuclear business has the ability to interact with 

nearly every significant sector of our 



334 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1993 

economy.  It means things like lentils and peas to potentially be 

irradiated and shipped to markets all over the world and people 

there then can consume the product in the knowledge that it 

isn't going to spoil because of the climatic conditions or storage 

conditions, that bugs aren't going to get into it -- that type of 

thing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I know some of this stuff really bothers the members of 

the government, Mr. Speaker.  And the reason that it bothers 

them so greatly is they know it's the truth. 

 

But that political party fought, that political party fought 

against doing agreements with other governments, doing 

agreements with companies that could bring that about.  It's 

because that political party didn't have the vision, Mr. Speaker, 

the vision or the fortitude to move ahead in some of these 

areas. 

 

And I think that's why we would like to see members of the 

government besides the Associate Minister for Finance stand 

up and talk about this area.  And I would suspect, if there is a 

reluctance, Mr. Speaker, to stand up and talk about it, is that 

they still haven't figured out what the vision is or what the plan 

is for they as a government to interact with people like Cameco 

and get on with the job. 

 

They're still so busy gazing at their collective navel on this 

issue that they haven't got it sorted out yet; that they still go to 

meetings and they listen to the likes of Peter Prebble.  Not only 

do they listen to him, they pay his salary and they pay his bills 

so that he can drag up all sorts of information that's totally 

bogus and present it at the inner sanctums of the New 

Democratic Party and get these people back off of what should 

be the agenda.  And the agenda is moving forward, that when 

you've got the opening, you grab it, you run with it, and you 

bring home jobs to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I suspect if there is a reluctance, Mr. Speaker, to stand up 

and talk about this industry in here, that's why.  We're still 

fumbling around in the dark.  It might almost be beneficial, Mr. 

Speaker, that if you did blow a little bit, that we ship the whole 

kit and caboodle of them up there so that they could take on 

some light and some life on this issue, so they could get 

focused on what needs to be done, and that there be some 

priorizing done.  Not this yipping and yapping that we 

constantly hear from government members as they spread out 

around this province and say one thing out there at various 

meetings and then come into this legislature and all sit. 

 

I mean it is absolutely time, Mr. Speaker, that the next time, for 

instance, that a uranium refinery, a uranium refinery is perhaps 

proposed for this province . . .  And indeed this government has 

the ability to influence the decision of what will happen when 

the existing refinery in Ontario, run by Cameco Corporation, is 

closed down. 

 

And there is no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that there are significant 

environmental questions being asked in 

Ontario right now that might indeed present an opportunity for 

Saskatchewan.  And if that opportunity comes along in the near 

term, that means that this New Democratic Party government 

which is in power in this province probably until 1995, till the 

taxpayers of this province can have another shot at them, that if 

this opportunity in the near term arises, that we have a 

government that's prepared to move down that road; that we are 

prepared as a society to handle the environmental impact study 

that would revolve around a potential uranium refinery, as was 

proposed at Warman in another age; that we would be prepared 

to move into site selection; that we would be prepared to do the 

things necessary for that to happen; that hundreds of jobs that 

could be attached to it, and move on it.  And that requires 

vision and a clear game plan. 

 

And so far beyond this sort of "having to sign the AECL 

agreement even though we didn't want to" attitude that we've 

seen from these people, we've heard nothing.  We've heard 

nothing from the Minister of Energy.  We've heard nothing 

from the past minister of Energy.  We've heard nothing from 

the . . . There's so many associate ministers over there, Mr. 

Speaker, that I can't keep them all straightened out.  But I 

believe the member from Cumberland is an associate minister 

of some kind.  It's like we're beginning to . . . We've got so 

many ministers of Finance over there right now, Mr. Speaker, 

that it's almost boggling. 

 

But anyway, that's why it's incumbent upon some of these 

people that we hope would have . . . be part of a plan on a 

potential uranium refinery, would stand up and sort of give 

people an inkling of where they're coming down on some of 

these issues. 

 

Because I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that the names of things 

like Key Lake, Cigar Lake, and McArthur River, Collins Bay, 

Contact Lake -- these are the kind of names that I think in the 

future are going to ring through Saskatchewan because of the 

potential tied to them.  They are going . . . As I said before, 

they set in place processes that have never been done before -- 

processes that make Saskatchewan the leader in environmental 

assessment. 

 

And I would hope that every school child in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, every school child in this province would know those 

names and know the potential attached to them and know that 

their government did not pass up on the opportunities that are 

presented by those names, and many more that will be added in 

the years to come, to provide them with employment, to 

provide them with opportunities, to make sure that that 

education that they are working hard to garner, that that 

education and the benefits that can come from it can be 

exercised here in Saskatchewan. 

 

The nuclear industry says to thousands of school children in 

this province that if I work hard and am diligent and I move 

into that area of endeavour that there will be a job waiting for 

me.  That I can be here with my family, that I can be a 

productive member of my society, that I can be a contributor to 

building the 



March 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 335 

Saskatchewan economy because my government, my 

government took this exceptional opportunity that countries 

indeed around the world would give anything to have. 

 

That my government took this opportunity -- they didn't let 

ideology get in the way; they didn't let political rhetoric get in 

the way -- that they planned well, that they grabbed hold of the 

issues and the initiatives, and they laid that plan out in such a 

way that I resulted in getting a job; that I resulted . . . That I 

became a taxpayer, and that I contributed to the building of my 

province because they mapped that out. 

 

And I guess what we've been saying all through this particular 

debate, Mr. Speaker, is that we are not positive that these 

people have got that resolve clearly mapped out yet; that 

they've got to have that vision on nuclear issues well mapped 

out.  And if that vision ultimately produces a nuclear reactor in 

this province, produces a nuclear reactor that will generate 

electricity but will also generate the export and sale of nuclear 

reactors all over the world, then I think once again people will 

say they planned well, they thought things out, they provided 

opportunities that would not have been there otherwise. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, down the road 20 years from now, 

people that were in this legislature can say we collectively took 

some credit for that because we all spoke up, we all stood in 

our places and said yes, we want to be part of that plan.  We 

want to be part of that vision; we want to be part of a society 

that would give that kind of opportunity to its children. 

 

And that's why, Mr. Speaker, it has to be more than just the 

members of the opposition speaking today.  It means that the 

roll-call on this issue has to include people who perhaps in the 

past, for some narrow political bias, were anti 

_nuclear; but realizing now that the responsibility of 

government is upon their shoulders, are now prepared to stand 

up like men and women of resolve and put their name to the 

issue, put their constituents' names to the issue, and be counted 

upon. 

 

And it's simply not enough, Mr. Speaker, for the Associate 

Minister of Finance to sneak into this legislature and bring 

forward a Bill which finishes off the privatization of Cameco, 

the privatization of SMDC, and then hope that it'll simply die 

and go away.  Because this issue is so large, involves so many 

people, and has so much potential that what we are talking 

about here is a turning-point perhaps for the province of 

Saskatchewan in how we handle our resources. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, this province is blessed with all five 

natural energies, uranium being one of them.  There's no other 

province in Canada that has all five.  Most countries in the 

world don't have all five.  We are blessed with so much and so 

much diversity in the energy sector that in the past we've been 

able to squander some of our opportunities.  We had so much 

that it didn't matter how we generated our electricity, 

that it was going to be cheap, it was going to be affordable, and 

that we could provide it on a constant basis to whoever wanted 

it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it's time now that Saskatchewan, as we go 

into the next century, starts to really analyse how we make best 

use of those.  And certainly the nuclear option is one that many 

people in this province say has to be close to number one; that 

we have to be a little more conscious of how much coal we dig 

out of the ground, how much more fossil fuel we burn.  How 

do we manage, how do we manage CO2O emissions?  How do 

we manage our contribution to solving the ozone problem?  

And nuclear, Mr. Speaker, demands that it be recognized in 

such a way that it is given that fair opportunity. 

 

And that's why the people of Saskatoon by the tens of 

thousands said to this government, if you miss this opportunity 

with nuclear, you may be missing the opportunity of the 

century. 

 

And that's why they had to back down.  That's why the 

ideology had to get shoved off to the side.  That's why some of 

the nonsense that used to come out of their conventions had to 

be handled.  And as a result -- and I don't believe, Mr. Speaker, 

for a minute that we would have seen this government bring in 

a Bill to finish the privatization of SMDC if that pressure hadn't 

been applied.  It had to be applied in such a way that they start 

to wake up and smell the coffee  

_- and as a result the minister has brought in the Bill and that 

process can continue on providing, Mr. Speaker, that many of 

the issues brought up by members of the opposition are dealt 

with in a proper manner. 

 

In many of those issues, and the only way that Saskatchewan 

people, Saskatchewan taxpayers will have that assurance, is if 

members of the New Democratic Party government stand on 

their feet and give that assurance. 

 

Like I said, Mr. Speaker, it's one thing to go out and skulk 

around the town halls of Saskatchewan and say these things.  

But to stand on your feet in here, in front of the television 

cameras, on record, in Hansard, and say to Saskatchewan 

people that I believe that I want to be part of the vision, that I'm 

not going to short-change the nuclear option, that I am prepared 

to put my electoral success and my seat on the line in support 

of it, means that Saskatchewan people then will have sufficient 

assurance, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it's funny, Mr. Speaker, how that scares members of the 

government.  I mean all of a sudden we've had a polite 

exchange of ideas in here, and the minute that we talk about 

them putting their collective selves -- and that's not the word I'd 

like to use, Mr. Speaker -- their collectives selves on the line 

electorally, that they can't backslide like they have on taxes, 

like they have on health care, like they have on education and 

some other areas, if they would stand and put themselves on 

the line as far . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  It now being 5 o'clock, this 

House stands recessed until 7 p.m. this evening. 



336 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1993 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 

 

 

 

 


