




















































Hansard: April 16, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1003 

 April 16, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  There 

have been a number of citizens from across the province on the 

medicare system that have asked me to present their names in a 

petition.  And I would like to read the prayer on that petition, 

Mr. Speaker.  And it states: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of The Health Districts Act so that 

communities may continue their efforts to organize their 

people and have a genuine impact on the process without 

intimidation or threat of arbitrary action by the government. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are from Macklin — mostly 

Macklin.  There are some from Denzil on this particular one, 

Mr. Speaker; from Cactus Lake.  And most of the others, in 

fact all of the others, Mr. Speaker, are from Macklin.  And I 

would like to lay these on the Table at this time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move that this Assembly now adjourn. 

 

The division bells rang from 10:03 a.m. until 10:13 a.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Toth 

Muirhead Britton 

Devine D'Autremont 

Neudorf Goohsen 

Martens  

— 9 

 

Nays 

Romanow Lautermilch 

Van Mulligen Calvert 

Thompson Murray 

Simard Hamilton 

Tchorzewski Johnson 

Lingenfelter Trew 

Shillington Serby 

Anguish Whitmore 

Goulet Sonntag 

Kowalsky Flavel 

Carson McPherson 

Mitchell Wormsbecker 

MacKinnon Crofford 

Upshall Knezacek 

Hagel Harper 

Bradley Keeping 

 

 

Koenker Carlson 

Pringle  

— 35 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I beg leave to 

introduce guests.  And while I'm doing so, if I might beg leave 

for the entire Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — The member can't ask for the entire 

Assembly.  I will do that now.  Do all members who wish to 

introduce guests have leave? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank opposition 

members and all my colleagues for granting leave. 

 

We have seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, the Regina 81st 

Cubs.  There are 25 Cubs here this day, accompanied by 

Connie Paus, Wayne Temple, Lori Kelln, Gary Hamel, Dawn 

Eckert, and Craig Phillips.  It will be my pleasure to meet with 

this group, this distinguished group, after a while.  I believe 

we'll be having pictures at 11 and refreshments. 

 

Anyway, I look forward to that meeting with them and I ask all 

members to join me in welcoming Regina's 81st Cubs. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I think 

this is some kind of record and probably won't be set again, but 

from Meadow Lake I'm going to be able to introduce guests 

two days in a row. 

 

I have the distinct pleasure of having here today from Meadow 

Lake, Mr. Bob Fenwick, in your gallery, Mr. Speaker.  Bob is 

the SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) agent from 

Meadow Lake and is here meeting with us this morning.  So if 

you'd join me in welcoming Bob Fenwick. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I will be presenting 

a petition with several names on it from the communities in and 

around Macklin, Saskatchewan — Provost, Denzil, and Cactus 

Lake, Mr. Speaker.  And I'll read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of The Health Districts Act so that 

communities may continue their efforts to organize their 

people and have a genuine impact on the process without 

intimidation or threat of arbitrary action by the government. 



1004 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1993 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And I move this House do now adjourn, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The division bells rang from 10:18 a.m. until 10:28 a.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Toth 

Muirhead Britton 

Devine D'Autremont 

Neudorf Goohsen 

Martens  

— 9 

 

Nays 

Romanow Lautermilch 

Van Mulligen Calvert 

Tchorzewski Murray 

Lingenfelter Hamilton 

Shillington Johnson 

Anguish Flavel 

Kowalsky Scott 

Carson Wormsbecker 

Mitchell Crofford 

Upshall Knezacek 

Hagel Harper 

Bradley Keeping 

Pringle Carlson 

— 26 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I have a motion that I 

will move: 

 

 Whereas it is the fundamental privilege of the House to 

establish rules of procedure for itself and to enforce them, 

Beauchesne's citation 33, page 14, and whereas rule 1 of 

the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly 

provides that the rules of the Assembly shall be applied in 

all cases provided therein . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order.  Order!  Will the member 

please be seated. 

 

An Hon. Member: — A point of order. 

 

The Speaker: — Will the member please be seated. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You seen me stand. 

 

The Speaker: — I will warn the member from Arm River, I 

will not allow those kinds of outbursts.  Will the member 

please be seated when the Speaker is on his feet.  He knows the 

rules of this legislature.  I will ask the member to please refrain 

from those outbursts.  Will you please refrain from those 

outbursts. 

 

An Hon. Member: — A point of order. 

 

The Speaker: — I will ask the member to please come to 

order.  I don't want to warn him again.  It is at the discretion of 

the Speaker — and members know this 

well — to recognize members in this House . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Will the member please come to order.  Will 

you please come to order.  Both members stood up before . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Order, order, order.  I've recognized 

the Government House Leader and I will hear from the 

Government House Leader.  I will recognize the member's 

point of order after I've heard from the Government House 

Leader. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, a point of order. 

 

The Speaker: — I will warn the member from Rosthern one 

more time to obey the rules of this legislature and obey the 

Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You too, sir. 

 

The Speaker: — I ask the member from Rosthern to please 

withdraw those remarks. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Speaker, we have rules in this House. 

 

The Speaker: — I have asked the member from Rosthern to 

withdraw those remarks against a Speaker. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — No, sir, I will not remove those remarks. 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order.  Under rule 28, I think most 

members will know I will give the member from Rosthern one 

more opportunity to withdraw those remarks.  If he does not do 

so, I have no alternative but to name him.  I will ask the 

member from Rosthern to please withdraw those remarks. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Speaker, you purposely recognized the 

member from Elphinstone above the member from Arm River 

that was up on his feet first. 

 

An Hon. Member: — No doubt. 

 

The Speaker: — I have asked the member from Rosthern to 

withdraw those remarks.  He refuses to do so.  Therefore under 

rule 28 I have no alternative but to name him.  And I name you, 

Bill Neudorf, and ask you to withdraw from the Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for Regina Churchill Downs: 

 

 That whereas it is a fundamental privilege of the House is to 

establish rules and procedures for itself and to enforce them 

(Beauchesne's, citation 33, page 14); 

 

 Whereas rule no. 1 of the Rules and Procedures 



April 16, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1005 

of the Legislative Assembly provide that the rules of the 

Assembly shall be applied in all cases provided herein; 

 

 And whereas rule 41 of the Rules and Procedures of the 

Legislative Assembly of the Saskatchewan Assembly 

explicitly states that the requirement for 48 hours notice shall 

not apply to motions dealing with the items or with the times 

of meeting and/or adjournment of the Assembly; 

 

 And whereas the practice of unanimous consent for a 

proceeding does not constitute a precedent (Beauchesne's, 

citation 19, page 7); 

 

 Whereas the rule of a Speaker cannot ignore the rules or the 

standing orders of the House except in circumstances where 

amendments to the rules have resulted in unintended 

inconsistencies which had been initially overlooked 

(Beauchesne's, citation 15, page 6); 

 

 Whereas a motion without notice to fix the sitting days or the 

times it meets or adjournment is a debatable motion 

pursuant to rule 32(k) of the Rules and Procedures of the 

Legislative Assembly and therefore would not override any 

rights or privileges enjoyed by members, but on the 

contrary would respect the fundamental right of a member 

to fully debate the question before the Assembly; 

 

 Whereas Beauchesne's, citation 548, page 167 explicitly 

states that in the absence of standing orders to the contrary, 

a motion for fixing sitting days and the time of meeting or 

adjournment may be made without notice; 

 

 Therefore I move that this Assembly shall, following the 

adoption of this motion, sit until 10 p.m., Friday, April 16. 

 

I so move. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, a point of order. 

 

The Speaker: — What is the member's point of order? 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, my point of order, Mr. Speaker, is 

in relation to the proceedings in this Assembly. I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, that the normal process is presenting of petitions and 

that's the point I believe we were on.  And members should 

have been allowed to continue with their petitions in light of 

the ruling that Speakers have made over the past number of 

years and precedent in this House that allows for an hour, and 

the Government House Leader knew that there is only an hour 

allowed for presenting of petitions. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, being aware of the process that is taking 

place in this province and the concern many people have in 

relation to the rulings that . . . many of the rulings you have 

made regarding allowing this 

House to operate fairly, allowing members of the opposition 

and the government to debate and talk about time allocation 

and extending of hours, and in view of the ruling that was made 

last night, Mr. Speaker, I believe in conjunction with your view 

of allowing this House to operate properly and fairly and 

honestly, I find that the motion presented by the Government 

House Leader to be out of order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, in speaking to the 

point of order, I just want to make the comment very briefly 

that under the point that we are at in the agenda of the 

Assembly, we have seen the opposition members move 

adjournment motions.  What we are doing here in terms of 

procedure might seem to be very similar; that is, moving a 

motion to extend the hours. 

 

I would make the argument, a much more legitimate argument 

if you're worried about getting the work of the people done, to 

extend the hours in order to accomplish the will of the 

government which is duly elected by the people of the 

province.  That's a fundamental principle that should be 

allowed in this Assembly. 

 

I'm not making the argument that they shouldn't be allowed to 

use the rules to adjourn the House, but I want to reiterate the 

need of the rules for the government — rule 41 — to extend the 

hours are just as legitimate as the rules presently being used by 

the members of the opposition to obstruct the work of the 

Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker.  I wish to speak 

to the point of order. 

 

The Speaker: — The member may make his point of order. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Last night, Mr. 

Speaker, after much deliberation, you made a very reasoned 

ruling as to the way that this House should proceed on issues 

raised by the member from Elphinstone.  The member from 

Elphinstone rises to the point of order and did not speak to the 

issue of petitions at all.  The member purports to say that how 

the time of the House is allocated is relevant to the discussion 

on petitions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the Government House Leader that member 

has had ample opportunity in the past two months to have this 

House work many evenings when it was scheduled to work and 

made no attempt at all to facilitate those hours.  So for him to 

interject into this point of order, Mr. Speaker, as raised by my 

colleague from Moosomin, which is dealing with petitions and 

the point that you made last night, is simply irrelevant 



1006 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1993 

and facetious because it has nothing to do with it.  That 

member over there has had control of this House for months, 

Mr. Speaker, and hours have meant nothing to him. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I ask the members to just give me a few 

minutes to have a look at this motion, please. 

 

Order please.  I want to inform the members that motions 

cannot be made under presenting petitions except motions to 

adjourn or motions relating to petitions unless they are done by 

leave. 

 

Number two, the motion is out of order also because it contains 

lengthy preambles which we do not accept in this House. 

 

But most importantly the motion is out of order because it deals 

with a similar issue that I ruled on last night and my ruling 

stands as of last night. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and we thank you 

for your ruling. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am proud today too to also have a petition to lay 

on the Table.  I'll just read, as you've asked us to do, just read 

the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of The Health Districts Act so that 

communities may continue their efforts to organize their 

people and have a genuine impact on the process without 

intimidation or threat of arbitrary action by the government. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The division bells rang from 10:45 a.m. until 10:55 a.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Toth 

Muirhead Britton 

Devine D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

— 8 

 

Nays 

Thompson Johnson 

Anguish Serby 

MacKinnon Wormsbecker 

Upshall Crofford 

Hagel Knezacek 

Bradley Harper 

Lautermilch Keeping 

 

 

Murray Carlson 

Hamilton  

— 17 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to ask leave 

of the Assembly for the introduction of a guest. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you and through you, a friend 

of mine from the Canora constituency, in the community of 

Preeceville, who is down here today.  And he's seated in the 

west gallery.  Mr. Duane Karcha. 

 

Duane is a farmer from the Preeceville area, and he has a 

business meeting in town here this afternoon.  But he's taking 

some time out of his day to be here, a little on the early side, so 

he could take in the proceedings of the House. 

 

So I'd ask all the members to offer him a warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today, Mr. 

Speaker, I wish to present petitions on behalf of several dozen 

people from the west side of the province.  I will read the 

prayer, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and then explain about where 

these people come from: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of The Health Districts Act so the 

communities may continue their efforts to organize their 

people and have a genuine impact on the process without 

intimidation or threat of arbitrary action by the government. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, today I have people from the 

communities of Kindersley; Alsask; Coleville; Rose Valley, 

Saskatchewan; Wadena, Saskatchewan; Kindersley; Alsask.  

As you can see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is a great deal of 

interest in this particular issue all across the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I would table these petitions today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and ask that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The division bells rang from 11 a.m. until 11:10 a.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 



April 16, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1007 

Yeas 

Muirhead Britton 

Devine D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

Toth  

— 7 

 

Nays 

Thompson Murray 

Simard Hamilton 

Lingenfelter Serby 

Anguish Whitmore 

Kowalsky Flavel 

MacKinnon Wormsbecker 

Upshall Crofford 

Hagel Keeping 

Pringle Carlson 

Lautermilch  

— 19 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have petitions that 

I want to place before the Assembly.  The prayer reads this 

way: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of The Health Districts Act so that 

communities may continue their efforts to organize their 

people and have a genuine impact on the process without 

intimidation or threat of arbitrary action by the government. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And I have individuals from Kindersley, Flaxcombe, Major, 

Eatonia, the west side of the province, Mr. Speaker, as well as 

Laporte, Mantario, and places in the west side of the province. 

 

And I place these before the Assembly and ask leave . . . or ask 

for adjournment of debate — I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker — I move 

this House adjourn. 

 

The division bells rang from 11:12 a.m. until 11:22 a.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Toth 

Muirhead Britton 

Devine D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

— 8 

 

Nays 

Thompson Hamilton 

Simard Trew 

Lingenfelter Serby 

Kowalsky Whitmore 

Mitchell Flavel 

MacKinnon Wormsbecker 

Upshall Crofford 

 

 

Hagel Keeping 

Pringle Carlson 

Murray  

— 19 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Toth: — To present a petition. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order.  I want to remind the member 

of the rulings that have been made in this House by Speakers, 

that the amount of time for the presentation of petitions will be 

limited to one hour each day. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: — According to order, the following petitions have 

been reviewed and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read 

and received: 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to order SaskPower to facilitate the 

production of non-utility generated power in areas of 

increased demand. 

 

 And of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly 

praying that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to 

postpone consideration of The Health Districts Act. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I give 

notice that I shall on Tuesday next ask the government the 

following question: 

 

 Regarding the government's overall health care policy, 

provide: (1) the proportion of GDP (gross domestic 

product) represented by provincial government 

expenditures on health care in each of the last five years 

with comparative data for other provinces; (2) the 

proportion of GDP represented by all health care 

expenditures in the province in each of the last five years 

with comparative data for other provinces and, where 

available, other jurisdictions. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I give 

notice that I shall on Tuesday next ask the government the 

following question: 

 

 Regarding the health facility studies announced by the 

Minister of Health: what are the names of the persons 

and/or firms actually conducting the study; what are the 

terms of reference of the study; what is the budget for the 

study; (4) does the study have any relationship to or 

potential for impact on the distribution and roles of health 

facilities proposed to be under the jurisdiction 



1008 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1993 

of regional health care boards? 

 

I submit this notice of question, please. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that on 

Tuesday next I ask the government the following question: 

 

 Regarding the reported crisis in health care at the Regina 

General Hospital as described by Dr. John Kim: (1) has the 

Minister of Health ordered an immediate investigation of 

the reported crisis? (2) if so, provide (a) the names of the 

persons conducting the investigation; (b) the terms of 

reference of the investigation; (c) the date on which the 

investigation was started; (d) the persons and papers 

examined to the date of this order in the course of the 

investigation; and (e) the date the investigation was actually 

undertaken. 

 

I now give notice. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I give 

notice that I shall on Tuesday next ask the government the 

following question: 

 

 Regarding the government's policy on public consultation: 

does the Minister of Health intend on tabling a response to 

the petitions of Saskatchewan residents presented to the 

Assembly regarding the de-insurance of optometric care; 

and if so, when can the people expect a formal response 

from the minister? 

 

I so table. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I give 

notice that I shall on Tuesday next ask the government the 

following question: 

 

 Regarding the children's dental plan: (a) how many total 

Saskatchewan children between the ages of 5 and 13 

utilized the planned plan in 1991; (b) how many children in 

1992; (c) how many children have been eliminated from the 

children's dental plan because of the March 1993 budget; 

(d) what is the total number of children from families on 

social assistance receiving benefits from the remains of the 

children's dental plan; and (e) how much money is the 

government saving through denying children access to the 

children's dental plan? 

 

I now present this. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I give 

notice that I shall on Tuesday next ask the government the 

following question: 

 

 Regarding health care consultations: (1) will any 

representative of the Minister of Health attend the public 

meeting in the community of Codette, April 20, 1993? (2) 

if not, why not? (3) if so, upon conclusion of the meeting 

provide: 

(a) the name and title of the representative; (b) a summary of 

the representations heard by the representative; (c) a copy 

of any report provided to the minister by the representative; 

(d) the minister's response to the representations of the 

community. 

 

I submit this question. 

 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I too shall 

give notice on Tuesday next that I will ask the following 

question: 

 

 Regarding cut-backs to the Wascana Rehabilitation Centre.  

After the proposed closure of an entire wing at the Wascana 

Rehabilitation Centre, the Minister of Health ordered 5 of 

the 30 beds to remain open at the facility: (1) will the NDP 

(New Democratic Party) government commit to providing 

adequate funds to the Wascana Rehabilitation Centre so 

that specialized care to the severely handicapped children 

will not be jeopardized and the entire wing will remain 

open and viable; (b) will the Minister of Health commit to 

ensuring no additional jobs or beds are lost at the Wascana 

Rehabilitation Centre? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I table this question. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 

Tuesday next ask the government the following question: 

 

 Regarding the minister's comments at the April 6 meeting of 

the Souris Valley regional health care meeting in Weyburn, 

the minister stated in her remarks that eventually all health 

board members would be elected: (a) will the Minister of 

Health commit to having all board members elected and 

give a date on which this will take place? 

 

I so submit. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I give 

notice that I shall on Tuesday . . . 

 

Deputy Speaker: — Order, order.  Order.  I want to bring to 

the members' attention rulings which have been made 

previously in this House, both by Speaker Tusa and Speaker 

Swan respectively in 1991 and in 1986, when they ruled that 

the prolonged presentation of oral notices amounted to 

obstruction of the House and was therefore out of order. 

 

It has since been ruled that members shall have the right or the 

privilege of presenting . . . each having the opportunity to 

present oral notice but that no further oral notice be . . . or the 

privilege of presenting oral notice be given to the members. 

 

Therefore I will not take any further oral notices. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do now adjourn. 



April 16, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1009 

The division bells rang from 11:33 a.m. until 11:43 a.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Britton 

Devine D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

Toth  

— 7 

Nays 

Thompson Trew 

Simard Serby 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Carson Flavel 

Mitchell Scott 

MacKinnon Wormsbecker 

Upshall Crofford 

Pringle Keeping 

Murray Carlson 

Hamilton  

— 19 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Rural Hospital Closures 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  My 

question this morning is to the Premier. 

 

An Hon. Member: — The Premier's not here. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Yes he is.  Mr. Premier, you, sir, this very 

day are destroying medicare and destroying everything that 

your own party stands for.  This single-minded process of 

yours, sir, this attempt to cover off your political hide, means 

that people who have supported your party for years are 

angered beyond belief. 

 

The people who supported the icons of your party, the Tommy 

Douglases and the Allan Blakeneys and even yourself, sir, are 

saying that you have turned your back on medicare.  The health 

system that took years to build up in this province, you are 

tearing down in a matter of months, Mr. Premier. 

 

For the sake of your own supporters, Mr. Premier, for the 

people who supported Tommy and who supported Allan 

Blakeney, would you say to them today, Mr. Premier, that you 

are now willing to take a second look at this destructive policy 

of yours and that you are willing to take off closure and you're 

willing to give the communities of this province time to do it 

properly?  Would you do that, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I'll 

tell the Hon. Leader of the Opposition, with the greatest of 

respect to him, that I'll look after the concerns of the members 

of the New Democratic Party, if it's okay with him.  If he 

doesn't mind me suggesting, however, I think he's got a bigger 

worry 

with the members of the Progressive Conservative Party, 

judging by all the opinion polls and the standings in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  So you look after your bailiwick; 

we'll look after our bailiwick. 

 

But the truth of the matter is that what you people are doing in 

this childish display of obstruction in the House is typical of 

what you and some Conservatives and Liberals did in 1962 

when you sought to prevent the passage of medicare. 

 

You established the Keep Our Doctors committee.  You spread 

all kinds of mistruths.  You tried to scare the people of 

Saskatchewan.  You said, yes we're for it, but don't do it now.  

You fought it tooth and nail, just like you're fighting this tooth 

and nail.  And why? 

 

You fight this tooth and nail now because you want the system 

to remain as it is.  And the system cannot remain as it is.  The 

system must be reformed.  But you want it unreformed.  And 

you want it unreformed so that your true philosophy as in 

Alberta can come about, and that is privatized, two-tiered 

medicare health care. 

 

I tell you, sir, that is not going to happen so long as we're the 

government.  And I urge you, if you're sincere about the 

defence of medicare and hospitalization, to join us and get into 

the debate, and join us in building a better health care system, 

rather than politicking. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Before I entertain the next question, I 

want to ask members to cooperate and to not interrupt in any 

way when either the questioner or the person who is answering 

the question is on their feet. 

 

The purpose of question period is to put questions and to hear 

the answers, and to not interrupt. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  My 

question is to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, in 1962 I, like the 

majority of people in this province, weren't even old enough to 

vote.  I was 10 years old in 1962, Mr. Premier.  What I grew up 

with in this province, and many like me, was universal access 

to medicare, not second-class citizenship because I live in rural 

Saskatchewan.  That's what I grew up with, Mr. Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — You promised to help the seniors and the 

towns and villages of this province, just as you promised to 

restore the children's dental plan, the prescription drug plan.  

And what you have done, Mr. Premier, is tear down that 

commitment, which I as a 10-year-old grew up with in 1962.  

You have torn it down, sir, in 52 rural communities and made 

second-class citizens out of them. 

 

How do you say to your own supporters, Mr. Premier, 



1010 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1993 

how do you say to them that that is fair?  Mr. Premier, you 

have the option as a Leader of the Government of 

Saskatchewan to reconsider this terrible action on rural 

Saskatchewan.  Would you do that, sir, reconsider for the sake 

of those who were only 10 years old in 1962? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member 

opposite continues to reveal his true intentions about health 

care when he uses the description about the reform we've 

initiated, as tearing down health care. 

 

An Hon. Member: — That's right. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — That's what he says.  Yes, and the 

member from Wilkie says that that's right.  And that is exactly 

the truth of where they believe. 

 

They do not believe in reform.  They believe that this system 

should remain the way they have structured it and the way they 

have ignored it and the way their cousins in Alberta have used 

it and that is by privatizing medicare in a two 

_tier system.  That's what they believe in right across the piece. 

 

I would ask that the members opposite tell them . . . He's made 

his confession of where he was in 1962 at 10 years of age, but I 

bet you half of that caucus over there was on the doorsteps of 

this legislature fighting the medicare initiative in 1962 as the 

Conservative and the Liberal Party was doing it. 

 

We're not tearing down rural Saskatchewan.  We are saving 

rural Saskatchewan and we're saving medicare and health care 

by implementing the necessary reforms.  In fact the Leader-

Post in the province of Saskatchewan today says editorially, 

quote: 

 

 . . . the NDP only did what is necessary and something that 

should have been started much earlier. 

 

And it says, quote: 

 

 . . . now will be the time to pioneer a new, leaner system that 

reflects today's changing financial conditions. 

 

That's what they say.  That's what the folks in rural 

Saskatchewan understand, and we want you to support us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Again before I recognize the Leader 

of the Opposition, I want to ask for the cooperation of the 

members of the House that when the question is being 

answered, to not interrupt the person who is answering the 

question so that we can have a constructive question period. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  My 

question is to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, you seem to have a 

fairly short memory these days, a very selective memory.  Well 

I'm telling you that the promises that 

you made to Saskatchewan people a very short time ago won't 

be forgotten. 

 

Mr. Premier, people in this province remember when your 

party used to have integrity.  They remember when the leaders 

of your party used to have integrity.  And what they are saying 

out there today, Mr. Premier, is that those promises made such 

a short time ago, where you were going to do more in all 

regards for medicare, including rural hospitals, what they are 

saying, where is the integrity of the NDP Party?  Where is the 

integrity of the man that leads it?  Where is the integrity of the 

office of the Premier of Saskatchewan today when we would 

see your Minister of Health do what she did the other day in the 

face of your promises, Mr. Premier? 

 

Your legacy to this province right now is the destruction of 52 

communities. Mr. Premier, I say to you, prove that there is 

some integrity in your office remaining.  Say to the people of 

this province that you are willing to go out and meet and give 

whatever time is necessary to do the proper evaluation of our 

medicare system.  Do that, Mr. Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, again as with the first 

question, I say to the Hon. Leader of the Opposition . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order.  I've twice asked the members 

to respect the purpose of question period, to not interrupt.  No 

sooner had the Premier risen to his feet to answer the question 

put by the Leader of the Opposition, the member from 

Moosomin started to interrupt the Premier when he was trying 

to answer the question. 

 

I ask you again to please respect the purpose of the question 

period and to not interrupt those who are on their feet. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I 

will of course try to appreciate and follow your ruling as well. 

 

I want to say to the Hon. Leader of the Opposition, as with the 

first question with the greatest of respect to the Leader of the 

Opposition, I don't think I need any lectures about political 

integrity coming from you, sir, and the members of the 

Progressive Conservative Party — a party after nine years in 

government which brought this province virtually to the edge 

of bankruptcy. 

 

I invite the people of Saskatchewan and you, sir, Leader of the 

Opposition, to watch the CTV (Canadian Television Network) 

W5 show this Sunday, documenting what your nine years of 

legacy was.  You nearly bankrupted this province.  You put the 

situation in the circumstances which required the reform of 

health care — other factors as well — and you have the 

audacity, sir, to talk about integrity?  I don't think so. 



April 16, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1011 

I think the integrity of the Progressive Conservative Party will 

be restored only after you, sir, are gone from this Chamber, 

other members of this Assembly in your caucus are gone from 

this Assembly, and you stop this issue of trying to scare people 

in their home towns. 

 

I'm telling you that this reform is going to be as the Leader-

Post says.  It is going to be leaner, it's going to be new, it's 

going to be pioneering, and it's going to have the best health 

care system that this province can afford.  And don't try to 

obstruct it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  My 

question's to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, last night you snuck 

out to Milestone under the auspices of a budget meeting.  But 

the folks smelled you out, sir.  They smelled you out and they 

showed up. 

 

And, Mr. Premier, last night you said to them that you thought 

it was about time for you and your ministers maybe to spread 

out across the province and dialogue a little with the people.  

That's what you said last night, Mr. Premier. 

 

Why is it, Mr. Premier, that you sneak out to a post-budget 

meeting in Milestone last night and when you're out there you 

say to the people, I think it's time that I came out and talked to 

you.  But you've come into this legislature, you jam closure 

down the throats of the opposition, and you say, my 

government will not budge an inch. 

 

Mr. Premier, I just asked you about integrity.  What integrity 

do you have, sir, to say that in Milestone and come back in this 

House and deny, deny, deny?  Mr. Premier, say the same thing 

in here you said to the people in Milestone. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — No, no.  No, no, Mr. Speaker.  It's not 

members of our party that use the phrase deny, deny, deny; it's 

members of your party that use the phrase deny, deny.  I think 

again you have your history wrong. 

 

This is a new definition of sneaking in, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

Somehow I snuck in to 450 people without them knowing that I 

was there.  Somehow my colleague, the Minister of Health, 

snuck in in front of 1,100 people out in Eston.  This is a new 

definition of sneaking in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, only the Conservative desperate opposition as it 

is, third in the public opinion polls by such a far distance, 

would concoct such a definition.  Talk about credibility.  No 

wonder you know that your approach is lacking any kind of 

support. 

 

You've got to say once and for all, and tell us now, tell us now, 

are you for health care reform as we have initiated? Yes or no.  

Tell us yes or no, because you're all over the ballpark on this.  

Stand up in this next question and tell us whether you support 

health care 

reform as we've proposed. 

 

And I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that he won't.  And I tell 

you why he won't do it.  Because they do not believe in health 

care reform.  They want it to continue the way it is and to 

collapse under its weight.  And in collapsing to provide, as they 

have in Alberta, for example, a privatized MRI (magnetic 

resonance imager) centre.  I'm saying I'm opposed to that; you 

may be for it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: — My question is to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, 

I'm going to ask you about your comments to the people of 

Saskatchewan and your mistruths.  On November 24, 1988 you 

wrote a letter to the people of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg and you 

said, Mr. Premier, that the latest PC's (Progressive 

Conservative) proposals to close down all five hospitals in this 

constituency are unacceptable. 

 

And you went on to say that you should stop its attacks on 

health care services and its waste and unfair taxes and that you 

invite people to support the NDP so that you can have quality 

health care for all of Saskatchewan people. 

 

You said that, Mr. Premier. And you promised that you would 

stop the pain in rural Saskatchewan, that you would not cut 

hospitals.  Now people went on to believe you, that you would 

do that — protect rural people from cuts and protect their 

hospitals.  And now you've announced that you've just cut 52 

hospitals.  In the face of that, Mr. Premier, your mistruths and 

your half-truths . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order.  I'd like the member to put his 

question without further preamble.  Put it now. 

 

Mr. Devine: — I ask the Premier: how could he mislead the 

people of Saskatchewan by saying in a letter to constituents 

during an election that he would protect them against hospital 

closures, and then turn around right around after an election 

and close 52 rural hospitals, including those that are in this 

particular riding?  How could he do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the former 

premier for his question in this regard, and he of course still 

being the real leader of the official opposition, as we know.  

Yes, I'll answer the question.  You are the real leader and I 

respect the question that you therefore advanced, being that. 

 

And my answer is very simple to you, sir.  You are, and this is 

why your surrogates in this question period maintain this 

position, propagate the myth of cutting hospitals, closures of 

hospitals.  What we're proposing is not cutting or closure; what 

we're proposing is conversion.  We are proposing conversion.  

We are proposing a readjustment of the system . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Tell us the truth. 



1012 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1993 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Yes, the former premier says, tell the 

people.  That's exactly what I'm telling the people in Milestone.  

But I wish you'd tell the people the truth. And the truth is we're 

not cutting. The truth is we're building a better system based on 

the fiscal situation as a result of the financial mess which you 

left behind for all the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Shame on you for having bankrupted the province, forcing us 

to do this in order to build a better health care system.  Shame 

on you, sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I want again to ask the members for 

their cooperation.  The members cannot ask a question and then 

when the answer is provided begin to interrupt those who 

provide the answer.  Members are not expected to like or 

dislike the answers, but the members should respect the right of 

the people who are answering the question and to enable them 

the right to do so. 

 

Mr. Devine: — I go back to the Premier for a similar kind of 

question.  People are looking at what you promised, that you 

would protect people from hospital closures and that you would 

protect them in their health care and in their drugs.  And you 

promised and you said, if you vote NDP we will protect you. 

 

During the debate we had, Mr. Premier, you said that there was 

$14.2 billion in deficit.  And then you said and I quote, the cost 

of medicare is well within the budget.  Which meant that you 

did not have to have these cuts and you did not have to attack 

rural Saskatchewan that has 20 per cent of the health care with 

the urban with 80 per cent, but you went right out in the face of 

your promise and you did not tell the truth.  You knew the 

budget and you knew that it could be within the budget, and yet 

you have not told them the truth.  You have intentionally 

misled the people of Saskatchewan by saying that you would 

protect them, and you've turned around and announced you are 

going to cut 52 hospitals. 

 

I want you to tell the people of Saskatchewan the truth.  You 

knew all along that you were going to cut these hospitals.  But 

to win an election you said, I will promise you anything . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order.  Will the member put his 

question.  What is the member's question? 

 

Mr. Devine: — And the Premier can smile and he can laugh.  

What I'm saying to the Premier and I'm asking the Premier, I'm 

asking the Premier: tell the people of Saskatchewan the truth, 

that you knew all along that if you won on this mistruth that 

you would cut these hospitals and you would raise the cost of 

medicare and you would deceive the people of Saskatchewan.  

Tell the truth today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the former 

premier for that question.  I would say to the former premier 

and still the titular head of the party over there, with the 

greatest of respect, if I may proffer some advice now to you as 

you have been proffering it to me, you would be well advised, 

sir, to get over the fact of the defeat of the election of your 

party on October 21, 1991.  You want to debate the election 

and get into that, I'm perfectly prepared to do that, but as far as 

the people of Saskatchewan are concerned, they want you to 

move to a futuristic approach. 

 

Now I know right now you are still determined, you are still 

determined to prove in question period that the public was 

wrong in electing us.  Well they'll make that decision in '95 or 

'96.  I'm dealing with the issue that you left behind for us, sir.  

You left behind for us the highest per capita debt in the history 

of this province and Canada.  And as a result of that debt . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . And the former premier says, not 

true.  I ask him to watch CTV (Canadian Television Network) 

W5 this Sunday about the Saskatchewan situation.  I ask you to 

invite you and your caucus colleagues to watch the devastation 

that you reaped on rural Saskatchewan, the devastation that you 

reaped on rural Saskatchewan by bankrupting the province. 

 

And what we're trying to do now is clean up the mess and what 

we're trying to do in cleaning up the mess is building a better 

health care system for the future.  As the Leader-Post and other 

people say, we're out here to save medicare and hospitalization 

and what you want to do is fight the 1991 election all over 

again.  Well you're entitled to do that all by yourself and with 

your colleagues; I am out here to save medicare and 

hospitalization.  You're either with us in saving it or you're agin 

it and out to destroying it, and I suspect that you're agin it just 

like the Tories are virtually everywhere in Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — If members continue to interrupt 

when other members are on their feet, we'll move on to other 

items of business. 

 

Mr. Devine: — My question is to the Premier.  Why can't you 

tell the people what your real intentions were?  Why can't you 

tell them the truth?  You debated against a $14 billion deficit 

and then you went on to say the cost of medicare is well within 

that budget.  And then you said you would not cut rural 

hospitals, and now you've turned around and you've cut 52 

hospitals and you've charged for health care. 

 

People are saying you have no mandate to do that; you did not 

tell the truth.  You misled them.  In fact they're saying worse 

than that; they say you lied to the people of Saskatchewan.  

That's what they're saying. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order.  The rules of the House are 

quite clear as to at times there's certain language which may not 

be used.  The member for Estevan has used a word that is not 

used in this House or any House, and I ask the member for 

Estevan to retract that 



April 16, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1013 

word, to retract that word so that we may proceed with 

question period.  I invite him to do that now. 

 

An Hon. Member: — The people tell it the way it is.  The 

people said that.  There's no other word for it. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I ask the member for Estevan again . 

. . and I point out to members that members may not make use 

of or put into the mouths of others words that you may not use 

in the House yourself.  And so again I ask the member to 

retract that word so that we can proceed with question period. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, all of us on this side of the House 

have been around the province of Saskatchewan and the people 

of Saskatchewan don't believe that the NDP . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order.  I ask the member for 

Estevan again to retract the word that he used, to do so without 

any further explanation, to do so unequivocally and to do so 

now. 

 

I want to give the member for Estevan a further opportunity to 

reflect on his use of words . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Order, order.  Order.  The rules of the Assembly are quite clear.  

Certain words cannot be used and one cannot attribute to others 

words that we cannot use ourselves in this Assembly.  Order. 

 

Therefore I want to give the member for Estevan one more 

opportunity to retract that word so that we can move on to 

other proceedings. 

 

I want to draw the attention of the member for Estevan to rule 

28: 

 

 The Speaker . . . after having called the attention of the 

Assembly . . . to the conduct of a Member who persists in 

irrelevance, or tedious repetition, either of his own 

arguments . . .  may direct him to discontinue his speech, 

and if the Member continues to speak, the Speaker shall 

name him, or, if in committee, the Chairman shall report 

him to the Assembly. 

 

I have given the member now, opportunities to retract the word 

that he used.  I invite him again, one last time, to retract the 

word that he used, so that we may proceed on with other 

business. 

 

I've given the member the opportunity to retract that; the 

member has declined to do so.  And accordingly, I name you, 

Grant Devine, and ask you to remove yourself from the 

Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member from Morse on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, I want to ask a question in 

question period. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The time for question period 

has elapsed, and we're now in ministerial statements. 

 

MOTIONS UNDER RULE 42 

 

Hospital Closures 

 

Mr. Martens: — Before orders of the day, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and pursuant to rule 42, I seek leave of the Assembly 

to raise a matter of urgent and pressing necessity — the crisis 

in the communities around this province, the 52 communities 

who have lost their hospital health care and acute care, 

specifically in Ponteix. 

 

And I move: 

 

 That due to the urgency of this matter, this Assembly do now 

debate the elimination of hospital funding for the hospital at 

Ponteix, Saskatchewan. 

 

And that is seconded by the member from Thunder Creek.  I 

ask leave of the Assembly to do that. 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do now adjourn. 

 

The division bells rang from 12:13 p.m. until 12:23 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Muirhead Britton 

Martens D'Autremont 

Toth Goohsen 

— 6 

 

Nays 

Thompson Johnson 

Simard Trew 

Tchorzewski Serby 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Kowalsky Flavel 

Carson Scott 

Mitchell Wormsbecker 

Upshall Crofford 

Pringle Harper 

Calvert Keeping 

Murray Carlson 

Hamilton  

— 23 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a point of order.  Mr. 

Speaker, my point of order is raised pursuant to the ruling 

yesterday, last night, and earlier today, indicating it is 

appropriate for the Speaker to not apply the rules of the 

Assembly where the application of a rule may have, and I 

quote, extreme, severe effect on the operation of the Assembly. 

 

Based on these rulings, Mr. Speaker, I would ask you to rule on 

the unprecedented, prolonged use of motion to adjourn during 

routine proceedings which 



1014 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1993 

opposition members have used 34 times over the last three days 

and I would say has had an extreme, severe effect on the 

traditional operations of the Assembly and that the use of such 

obstructionist tactics during routine proceedings is an abuse of 

the rules of the Assembly. 

 

I say that, Mr. Speaker, because never before in the history of 

the Assembly that we've been able to trace has this kind of 

action been taken by an opposition using adjournment of the 

Assembly over and over again.  And I would very much ask 

you, Mr. Speaker, to rule on this use of an extreme and severe 

effect of the rules and what that might have if allowed to go on 

indefinitely on the working of this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, in speaking to the point of 

order, I'd just like to bring to the attention of this Assembly that 

even though the Government House Leader would argue that 

the process that has taken place over the last few days is 

something that has never been entered into, the Government 

House Leader knows full well the debate that he entered into 

and instigated back in 1989 on an issue that allowed the 

opposition of then 25, 26 members some 80 hours of debate on 

a question that the then opposition felt very strongly about. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we're all aware of the debate that has taken 

place in this House and the fact that the people of 

Saskatchewan have asked the opposition to speak on their 

behalf. 

 

We're also aware of the rules of this Assembly, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker.  The Speaker of this Assembly has already made a 

motion regarding the particular motion that this member has 

brought forward.  And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it would seem to 

me that if this House is to operate properly, if this House is to 

operate efficiently, then the government should have then 

allowed the opposition the time . . . had the opportunity on 

numerous occasions to pull their closure motion and allow for 

the full and open debate to take place. 

 

I therefore would suggest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in light of 

rulings that have been brought forward by the Speaker of this 

Assembly last night and this morning, Mr. Speaker, that the 

Government House Leader doesn't have a proper point of 

order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1230) 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order.  I want to thank the 

Government House Leader and the member from Moosomin 

for raising the point of order and for your comments on the 

point of order. 

 

I want at this point to consider the point further and want to 

reserve my opinion. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Before orders of the day, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, pursuant to rule 42, I again raise a matter of urgent 

and pressing necessity. 

The people in the area of Coronach have had a serious cut in 

their hospital funding and that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is going to 

cause a crisis.  And I would say that in an area where there is 

industrial development as there is in the area of Coronach, the 

fact that there is going to be reduced services there is going to 

seriously cause a problem in the area of Coronach.  And 

therefore, Mr. Speaker, I ask leave of this Assembly through 

this motion: 

 

 That due to the urgency of this matter, this Assembly now 

debate the elimination of hospital funding for the hospital at 

Coronach. 

 

And I ask leave of the Assembly to do that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do now adjourn. 

 

The division bells rang from 12:33 p.m. until 12:43 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Britton 

Muirhead D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

Toth  

— 7 

 

Nays 

Romanow Hamilton 

Thompson Trew 

Simard Serby 

Tchorzewski Whitmore 

Lingenfelter Sonntag 

Shillington Flavel 

Carson McPherson 

Mitchell Wormsbecker 

MacKinnon Crofford 

Upshall Harper 

Pringle Keeping 

Murray Carlson 

— 24 

 

Mr. Martens: — Before orders of the day, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I rise again pursuant to an urgent matter of pressing 

necessity relating to rule 42.  It deals with a motion that asks to 

have the debate about the cuts in acute care funding to the area 

of Mankota.  And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the area around there 

is seriously impacted on this basis.  They have a very, very 

significant distance to drive for any emergency care and that is 

a very serious concern to them.  And that is the reason why I, 

seconded by the member from Thunder Creek, raise this.  The 

motion would be: 

 

 That due to the urgency of this matter, this Assembly do now 

debate the elimination of hospital funding for the hospital at 

Mankota. 



April 16, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1015 

Leave not granted. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The division bells rang from 12:46 p.m. until 12:56 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Britton 

Muirhead D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

Toth  

— 7 

 

Nays 

Romanow Hamilton 

Thompson Serby 

Simard Whitmore 

Tchorzewski Flavel 

Lingenfelter Wormsbecker 

Shillington Crofford 

Mitchell Harper 

Upshall Keeping 

Pringle Carlson 

Murray  

— 19 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 12:58 p.m. 

 

 


