




















































Hansard: March 02, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 57 

 March 2, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that 

I shall on Thursday next ask the government the following 

questions: 

 

 Regarding the Saskatchewan Gaming Commission's purchase 

of a survey from Fox Consulting of Reno, Nevada: (1) what 

was the total amount paid for the services provided by Fox 

Consulting; (2) how much of that amount was to provide for 

travel, lodging, communications, and entertainment expenses 

for the consultant, Ms. Candace Fox; (3) was this contract 

awarded following an open tender; (4) was Fox Consulting 

instructed to consult with people directly or indirectly 

affected by casino gambling, including licensed bingo 

charities, aboriginal peoples, the horse-racing industry, and 

exhibition associations; and (5) with whom did the Fox firm 

consult and at what length during the course of its survey into 

the feasibility of casino gaming? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to introduce 

through you to the House a number of representatives who are 

attending a meeting of the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Development Corporations. There are more than four in the 

gallery opposite, but I recognize four -- Bob Tullis and Doug 

Barker from the Coteau Hills RDC (rural development 

corporation) in my own constituency, and Reuben Wiens and 

Audrey Tenant from the Moose Mountain area. Reuben is also 

a friend from another movie. We used to sing in Greystone 

Singers together a hundred years ago, and I welcome them to 

the Legislature. I ask you to welcome them with me. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Speaker, I would also like to extend 

greetings to the people from the Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Development Corporations. As the hon. member has 

pointed out, there are a few in the galleries now but there will 

be more coming in later, and in case we don't get a chance to 

welcome them then I hope that the members will greet them 

outside and offer them the hospitality of the House. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in the west 

gallery there's also representatives from the Gateway RDC at 

Moosomin, Lyle Severson, the economic development officer, 

and Harry Kessler is the chairman; and Pipestone RDC with 

Terry Shackleton and Jane Laich, and certainly welcome to 

Reuben and Audrey Tenant as well. I'd like the members to 

join me in 

welcoming them to this House. 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Plea Bargaining and Early Release Program 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Premier and it deals with a number of 

concerns that Saskatchewan, and not only Saskatchewan 

residents, but I'm sure residents across Canada have regarding 

the judicial system. And I feel that possibly in Saskatchewan, 

in particular, there is a lot of concern and disenchantment with 

the justice system. On the one hand, Mr. Speaker, we have the 

government refusing to even conduct a review of the Milgaard 

case where there is a serious question about a man's innocence, 

and on the other hand we have prosecutors cutting deals for 

serious criminal offenders. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you order an immediate public inquiry into 

the entire plea bargaining process? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The answer is 

no, but I want to enlarge on that answer and provide a bit of a 

base for it. 

 

I believe that the member's concern with respect to plea 

bargaining has not to do with the Milgaard case but probably 

has to do with the Dove case. And in the circumstances of that 

case it was not so much a plea bargain as a question of an offer 

by the accused persons to plead guilty to manslaughter. 

 

The problem that the Crown had is that it was the opinion of 

our senior prosecutors that we would not be able to prove the 

crime of murder. And there was a great danger of the persons 

who were accused to simply walk away from it, being 

dismissed on the murder charge at the preliminary hearing. So 

it wasn't so much a question of plea bargaining as it was a 

question of accepting an offer to plead guilty to manslaughter. 

 

I think my experience in the last 16 months, Mr. Speaker, tells 

me that there would be no need for any kind of an inquiry in 

this province with respect to the practice of plea bargaining. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, and to the Minister of Justice, 

certainly I want to thank the minister for his response but I also 

want to bring to his attention that people still are not all that 

familiar with the process. And the feeling out there, Mr. 

Minister . . . and certainly is not just in my constituency and 

not just members of the Dove family, but there are many 

people angered over the process. And whether you call it 

bargaining or plea bargaining, almost the entire province of 

Saskatchewan is questioning the integrity of the administration 

of justice, sir. 

 

I just want to quote from Judge Les Bewley who quit the B.C. 

(British Columbia) bench and discussed after being asked to 

approve a plea bargain process. And he said: 



58 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 1993 

Plea bargaining is a venerable disease of the criminal court 

system brought about by the shadowy coupling between the 

defence counsel and the Crown attorney. 

 

And there are many other legal professionals who can attune to 

that. 

 

Mr. Premier, and Mr. Minister, given this wide body of judicial 

and legal condemnation of the bargaining process, do you not 

agree that simply to preserve the integrity of the system, a full 

public inquiry is needed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I don't think so, Mr. Speaker. I 

know that we tread here upon very controversial ground, and I 

know that there is a great deal of unrest in the community fired 

by some cases that are controversial. And certainly the Dove 

situation was one of those. 

 

I think that we have done the right thing, and I have explained 

the circumstances to the hon. member and again to this House 

just a few moments ago. And I think that was appropriate. 

 

The actual practice of plea bargaining as we see it on television 

doesn't occur very often in practice. Typically in a criminal 

case . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Too often. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- No, not too often, as the member says 

from his seat. Typically in a criminal case when you have a 

plea of guilty or when an accused person has been found guilty, 

you will have different submissions made to the judge where 

the prosecutor will ask for a sentence within a certain range and 

the defence will ask for a lower sentence within another range, 

and then it's up to the court to decide whether to accept one or 

the other or something in between. 

 

Now that's how the vast majority of criminal cases are handled, 

and the judiciary generally, I think does a good job. From time 

to time those decisions become controversial but I think overall 

the hon. member would agree that generally the judiciary are 

doing a good job. And Crown counsel . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and again 

to the minister. And I appreciate the minister's comments but 

certainly many people in rural Saskatchewan and certainly 

across Canada are not that familiar. In fact as I talk to people I 

find that many people feel that the best possible route of 

bringing, defining, or answering the question is the fact of even 

a court appearance so the public knows exactly what's going 

on. 

 

But another question begs to come forward, Mr. Minister. The 

federal government has on record the position of the 

government, and the Minister of Justice has continued to 

support the early release of convicted criminals. And given the 

appalling crimes that we have seen and that have been 

committed against many people by criminals out on parole and 

early release, will the minister inform Ottawa that this province 

has changed its position and that we are firmly opposed to early 

release of individuals convicted of serious, violent crimes? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I'm certainly prepared to consider 

that, Mr. Speaker, because in the administration of our own 

early release program we weed out the people who are violent, 

who have a record of being violent, or who we judge are likely 

to be violent. The only ones who qualify for our early release 

programs are people who won't pose a threat to the public, the 

people who are incarcerated for property-related crimes or 

failure to pay fines or that sort of thing. So I'm quite prepared 

to consider the member's request that we record that in a letter 

to the federal government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again to 

the minister. Mr. Minister, a moment ago you made a comment 

about the fact that you didn't think a public inquiry into the plea 

bargaining process was necessary. But I would think, Mr. 

Minister, that certainly it would be something that should be at 

least out in the public, and that there should be individuals 

asked to address the whole process of plea bargaining. 

 

And I'm asking you, Mr. Minister, if you would at least 

consider appointing a group of elected officials to sit down and 

review the process, the plea bargaining process, and bring their 

submission to this House. Would you do that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm not certain that I 

understand the member's request fully, but I'm prepared to 

consider it. And perhaps we can discuss it privately and just see 

what it is that he wants. So I'll check with him later. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I believe when 

we were discussing the issue surrounding the Dove case back 

in the spring, the minister at the time had asked Justice to 

review, to conduct a review. And he stated that he did so with 

his officials and that he was satisfied that everything was fine. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Justice believes in 

the principle that justice must be open, accountable. Therefore 

it would seem to me that this review, if indeed conducted, was 

not open, and that there should be a public inquiry and a public 

view. 

 

Given the secret nature of the minister's own review, and given 

the minister's unwillingness to have a public inquiry, and given 

the Premier's refusal to allow a committee of this House to 

conduct a review, will the Premier at the very least have the 

Department of Justice conduct a full and complete study of the 

issues and simply table it in this House? Will you do that, 

please, Mr. Minister? 



March 2, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 59 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I've tried to tell the member that I 

have inquired in the context of the Dove case what went on in 

that case, and in a general sense, what plea bargaining is about 

in this province; is there plea bargaining that goes on. 

 

I reported to the minister just a few minutes ago . . . or to the 

member a few minutes ago that it wasn't a common practice in 

Saskatchewan, doesn't happen very often. In the vast majority 

of cases the matter is determined by a judge. So we just simply 

don't have that much to inquire into. 

 

I have also made an offer to the town of Whitewood, and the 

member knows this full well, that my deputy minister and the 

director of public prosecutions are quite prepared to go down to 

Whitewood, meet with the town council, meet with Mrs. Dove, 

perhaps even meet with a larger community if we can make 

appropriate arrangements, and discuss the circumstances 

behind the Dove case so that at least in his constituency there'll 

be some comfort with respect to how that particular case was 

handled. And if I may say so, I think that is the issue and not 

some wider inquiry into a practice that really doesn't go on very 

often. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you, Mr. 

Minister. One other question that begs to be asked, Mr. 

Minister. Mr. Minister, in 1989 the Law Reform Commission 

of Canada recommended that no plea bargain be entered into 

without first consulting the victims. And certainly Mrs. Dove 

brought this to my attention, that they were led to believe that 

they would be consulted by the Crown as to the process and the 

proceedings as they took place. However, they read in the 

media about the final decision. I'm wondering if the 

Department of Justice indeed did take the time to consult the 

Dove family before they entered into this process with the 

convicted killers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I have no knowledge of 

that but I'll take notice and get back to the member. 

 

Unemployment 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the Premier. This month's statistical review was released today 

and it indicates that since you've taken power in October of 

1991 the Saskatchewan economy has lost 22,000 jobs -- 22,000 

fewer jobs and the highest unemployment rate in two years is 

quite a commentary on rebuilding Saskatchewan together. 

 

What are you prepared to do for the people your policies have 

forced onto the unemployment rolls? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to respond to 

the member from Greystone, because employment is a very, 

very important issue for the Government of Saskatchewan as 

she well knows. We have worked hard and long with the 

business people in the province to develop an economic 

development strategy. We had over 200 public meetings, 

private meetings, public and private meetings with business 

and working people, to come up with a strategy to deal with the 

economy that obviously includes jobs. 

I have to say that while the unemployment rate in 

Saskatchewan is not as low as we would like it to be, 

obviously, a large part of the unemployment came in the first 

quarter, the first half of 1992. The numbers you quote, I don't 

have the exact numbers about what you're referring to, but I 

know that 7,000 jobs were lost in agriculture early in 1992 and 

many would say it was directly related at the same time as the 

$500 million for farmers did not come for seeding last year. 

And many fewer farmers hired up agricultural workers to work 

on the farms early in 1992. 

 

Now I say to you very clearly that this is in fact a high priority 

for our government. Obviously the job is not completed nor are 

we close to being completed with job creation. This will be an 

ongoing process. And I ask you again for the projects that you 

promised, on a weekly basis. If you would get those to us, that 

would help us a great deal. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the Minister 

of Economic Diversification and Trade. Sir, I will be delighted 

to give you one per week if this Assembly allows me any 

opportunity to say such. 

 

You say that economic development and jobs are your highest 

priority. You talked about a loss of jobs in agriculture. You 

didn't talk about the 3,000 jobs lost in manufacturing or the 

4,000 in trade. And your own Premier has indicated that taxes 

are the silent killer of jobs. Saskatchewan had heavy job losses 

thanks to $340 million in tax increases last year; a spree of 

increases in utility rates, licence fees, and insurance charges. 

 

With new taxes and more charges on the way, I ask you: how 

many more jobs do you anticipate being lost and how many 

more people will have to need social assistance before you're 

done as you say, quote, charting our course to financial 

freedom, with more taxes and bad decisions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear 

to the member opposite that obviously with a $15 billion debt 

we need to look at ways of starting not only to pay down the 

debt, but first of all reduce the amount that the deficit is in any 

given fiscal year. You understand that. You know there's only a 

certain number of ways to do that in a province of a million 

people. Obviously looking at tax reform and tax changes is one 

of them. I would be interested in knowing what you would do 

as a positive alternative to the deficit problem. I'll wait for your 

reply to that. 

 

When it comes to employment statistics though, we would be 

remiss if we didn't comment on those provinces where we have 

Liberal governments and look at the record of unemployment 

in those areas to see how the Liberals are making out. 

 

Obviously the unemployment rate in Saskatchewan in 1992 

was the lowest in Canada. We all know that. But let's look at it 

in other provinces like Quebec, Prince Edward Island, 

Newfoundland. And I just want to quote 



60 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 1993 

for you that in Quebec the unemployment rate in 1992 was 

12.8 per cent; in Prince Edward Island, 17.7 per cent; in 

Newfoundland, 20.2 per cent; and in Saskatchewan 8.2. Now if 

you're saying we want to go to Liberal policy, I think you're 

sadly mistaken. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I think we should have an election today 

and run Frank McKenna, and/or myself, and I'm sure that the 

people of the province would be delighted if you would do 

such. CN (Canadian National Railway Company) announced 

yesterday that it will cut some 3,000 jobs in Canada this year. 

Fifteen of those jobs will be lost and will affect families in the 

community of Melville. 

 

Co-operators Data Services recently announced it will cut 80 

jobs at its Regina office. I'd like you to stand before us and tell 

us whether or not you will admit that your plan to rebuild the 

economy of this province through higher taxes has been a 

dismal failure, and cost 22,000 jobs with more losses yet to 

come. 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm glad that the 

hon. member raised the question in respect to the massive cuts 

of employment in respect of the CN. And I want to say to you 

here that our government has been acting on behalf of that. The 

Premier has written to the president of the CNR. He has written 

to the Premier . . . Prime Minister of Canada. He has asked that 

there be consultation in respect to any cuts. And we are acting 

on behalf of them. 

 

The only reply that we got, Mr. Speaker, when we asked for 

consultations in respect to the impact, from the Federal 

government, was to unilaterally cut the payments under the 

western grain transportation to the farmers of Canada, further 

downloading on the farmers of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps it has 

something to do with Saskatchewan having the very highest 

taxation, as far as rails are concerned, in the entire country. 

 

Mr. Minister, we now have the highest unemployment rate in 

two years. 

 

Even worse is the fate of our young people. For those aged 

between 20 and 24, the jobless rate is over 20 per cent in our 

province. That's up four points from last year and twice the 

provincial average of 10 per cent. In eight weeks there are 

going to be many, many of our young people out looking for 

jobs when our universities close. 

 

What are you going to do, and your government, to give these 

people some sense of dignity and allow them some future in the 

province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to 

the member opposite that obviously employment is a 

high priority, and I think our record shows that. And I listed out 

the other day the number, the large number of projects that 

have been undertaken in the province. I say again that that 

obviously is not a complete list. But I say to you, Madam 

Member, that there are many, many options that the business 

community in this province is looking at to enhance 

employment and to build a better economy. 
 

One of them isn't this always dour and negative attitude that I 

hear from the Liberal Party that everything is bad, everything is 

negative. And I really would ask you that your comments made 

to the Star-Phoenix . . . and I want to quote from June 5, 1992, 

where you said outside of the House: Haverstock said 

Lingenfelter's reaction shows the government has no current 

economic development. She's promising to bring at least one 

project a week to the attention of the government which will 

have real economic potential. 
 

Now having made that comment, having made that comment 

and in the spirit of cooperation, I really would ask you -- you 

should have a list of about 52 projects now -- if you would 

bring them to the Assembly or give them to us to help us with 

the economic renewal. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Jurisdiction on Gambling 
 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the Minister of Justice, and it deals with the issue of gambling 

and casinos in our province and in particular the Bear Claw 

Casino. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say at the outset that no one is 

criticizing the White Bear community for taking the initiative 

to try and develop their economy, but we have a situation 

where a question of jurisdiction is being put to a test - 

_ a test that so far your government has failed to take. 

 

Can the Minister of Justice tell this Assembly if he has received 

any opinions from his department about the jurisdiction of the . 

. . and the capacity of the Indian reserve to have the casino on 

their reserve? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The view of the Department of Justice, 

Mr. Speaker, is that the Criminal Code applies to the operation 

of casinos and that the province has obligations to administer 

the Criminal Code. And we approach the subject on the basis 

that that administration includes all of Saskatchewan, including 

Indian reserves. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since there is in 

your mind a view that the jurisdiction is a responsibility of the 

province, I want to ask you why you have not followed through 

with the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) involving 

themselves in doing the very same things that they do in my 

community on the Indian reserve? Why haven't you done that, 

sir? 
 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I don't think it's a question, Mr. Speaker, 

of what I have done or haven't done. The RCMP 



March 2, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 61 

are following the situation closely, as is the government. We 

had four days of very intensive discussions last week, trying to 

find a way for the band at White Bear to have a facility that 

would fall within the framework of the existing law and policy. 

Those discussions were adjourned on Thursday until this week, 

without being able to find that solution. 

 

The RCMP announced without any direction from me -- I 

mean I don't tell the RCMP how to do their business -- 

announced that in light of the fact that discussions were 

ongoing, they would not be conducting any investigation on the 

weekend. That's as I understood media reports. 

 

We're back in discussions today with the band and with 

representatives of the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan 

Indian Nations). We're hopeful that we will be able to work out 

arrangements whereby White Bear will be able to operate 

entirely within the legal and policy framework. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Are you discussing something that should be 

discussed in the court? Are you discussing and negotiating, as 

the Minister of Justice, a matter that is, in view of your earlier 

observation, a criminal matter under the Criminal Code? Are 

you discussing that with the Indian reserve? And if that is 

what's going on, I think the court should be determining that. 

And I believe that you are in error if you are doing that 

negotiation, sir. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I appreciate that the hon. member 

is trying to give me advice on how I should administer the 

criminal law of Saskatchewan. 
 

What we're trying to do, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Member, is to 

avoid a situation where any crime is being committed. The 

Indian band is asserting that they have jurisdiction to do that. 

We assert that they do not have jurisdiction to run a casino. 

That is a question which really can only be determined in the 

courts. Ultimately this question will be determined in the 

courts, one way or another, some place or other -- if not in 

Saskatchewan then somewhere else. 
 

What we're trying to work out though, is a way in which the 

band can achieve at least some of its ambitions within the 

framework of the Criminal Code and within the policy with 

respect to gaming that is applicable in this province. That's all 

we're doing, Mr. Member. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Martens: -- Since in your mind there is no jurisdictional 

problem but in the mind of others there is, would it not be in 

the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan and also the 

Department of Justice that you would refer this matter to the 

Court of Appeal for some decision and ask the court to make 

the decision rather than the Department of Justice to make the 

decision? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, as I've just said, this 

question of jurisdiction really can only be determined by the 

courts. And certainly the option of referring this whole 

situation to the Court of Appeal is one that we suggested and 

it's been discussed with the White Bear Band and with the 

FSIN during the last few days of 

discussion. 

 

If it went to the Court of Appeal, the White Bear Band or FSIN 

or both, would have to be parties to that reference in order to 

put before the Court of Appeal the Indian claim for jurisdiction. 

So that leads you to a situation where if you're going to make 

that sort of reference in connection with this case it would be 

wise to make it with the agreement of the White Bear Indian 

Band and/or the FSIN. We haven't yet reached that, although it 

is still on the table and still being discussed between us. 

 

But the member is quite right. It is a question of jurisdiction. 

We can take a position on it as has the Indian band, but 

ultimately it is only the courts that can decide. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, are you sure that they have to be 

required to also assist for your right to provide a decision by 

the Court of Appeal, or is it your decision only? And that's the 

question I raise here. Should you be doing that to the Court of 

Appeal? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- There's no question, Mr. Speaker, that 

the government can make the reference to the Court of Appeal. 

No question about that at all. 

 

But the issue to be decided really has to do with the assertion of 

jurisdiction by this particular first nation, and for that reference 

to work and to produce a credible result it requires their 

participation. So we've tried to persuade them that this would 

be the appropriate way to go, and we're still discussing that 

with them. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- To request leave to introduce guests, sir. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce 

to you, and through you to all members of this Assembly, five 

individuals seated in your gallery from around our province, 

representing the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Development Corporations which is a non-partisan group that 

works toward the social and economic well-being of rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Would the members please welcome Chairman Louis Hredecki 

from Meath Park, Vice-Chairman Evan Simpson from 

Ruthilda, Director Paul Chemkora from Hyas, Director Stan 

Gording from Rockglen, and Director Pat Hanke from Beechy. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- To introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 



62 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 1993 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

On behalf of the government and as minister in charge of Rural 

Development, I too would like to welcome these gentlemen to 

the legislature. We hope you have an enjoyable afternoon. 

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Does the member want to introduce guests? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We would be remiss 

as the critic for Rural Development if we didn't also echo the 

words of the previous two speakers and welcome these fine 

gentlemen to our Assembly. The one on the far end, I have 

known his son for many years, having worked with him in 

counselling and assistance. And we certainly do welcome you 

all, and join with me in letting them know how much we 

appreciate their coming. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

CN Cut-backs 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 

response to the announcement by CN for massive cuts of jobs 

and services nationally, I want to indicate to the members and 

to the House the following action taken by the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

A letter will be immediately forwarded to the federal Minister 

of Transport, the Hon. Jean Corbeil, outlining this 

government's wish for full consultation upon the possible and 

probable impact of these unilateral decisions upon jobs and rail 

services to Saskatchewan. Also a letter will be immediately 

sent to Paul Tellier, president of the CN Rail, requesting a 

meeting with the Premier and the Minister of Economic 

Development to discuss these same issues with the railway. 

 

The Saskatchewan government is concerned of course with the 

massive loss of jobs, some 91 immediately in Saskatchewan, 

and also the effect it may have on the level of service provided 

to the province. 

 

But also our concern goes beyond the immediate effect of these 

cuts on jobs and rail services, as important as they are. This 

government is also concerned about the long-term impact of 

these decisions on the increased use of our roads and highways 

that will result from the withdrawal of services, the impact on 

the environment, and the very real economic consequences to 

the communities most directly affected. 

 

We are hopeful that consultation, which we have been asking 

for, will begin. Since last fall when the Premier of 

Saskatchewan wrote to the president and the chief executive 

officer and president of CN, and the Prime Minister, expressing 

concern over the issue, this government has sought to ensure 

that a comprehensive assessment of rail include comprehensive 

consultation 

with the provinces to maintain effective rail transportation 

services and jobs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

respond from our point of view on the ministerial statement 

just read by the hon. member. Here again, Mr. Speaker, it's 

unfortunate that we see the government trying to blame throw 

their way out of a problem that they are mainly responsible for 

themselves, trying to throw the blame to some other level of 

government or someone else when they know full well that one 

of the biggest problems that we have encountered in this 

province with rail transportation being competitive has to do 

with the high taxation that is being charged to these railroads 

that makes them uncompetitive to all of the other provinces in 

this country. 

 

The rail system has determined some months ago to ask for 

some relief in this area, saying that they could no longer be 

competitive with the trucking industry, and that they would 

have to in fact reduce their services if they didn't get some 

relief. 

 

Now it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that if the Minister of 

Transportation was serious about saving jobs, he would have 

entered into some consultation and some negotiations with the 

people from the railroad companies at the time when they told 

him some months ago that in fact they were going to have to 

reduce the numbers of people if they could not be competitive 

and that this taxation problem really existed. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it is with deep regret that we find that we are 

losing jobs in our province and I sincerely hope that the 

minister will do some consulting, truly and honest consulting, 

and meeting with the needs that will in fact make us 

competitive in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 1 -- An Act respecting the Conduct of Members of 

the Legislative Assembly and Members of the Executive 

Council, respecting Conflicts of Interest and to enact 

Consequential Amendments resulting from the enactment 

of this Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill 

respecting the Conduct of Members of the Legislative 

Assembly and Members of the Executive Council, respecting 

Conflicts of Interest and to enact Consequential Amendments 

resulting from the enactment of this Act be now introduced and 

read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, this relates to question 

no. 1 put by the member from Saskatoon Greystone. I would 

ask that it be converted to motion for 



March 2, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 63 

return (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Motion for return (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- With leave, for the introduction of guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you 

and through you to the members of the Assembly a member of 

the High Hopes Rural Development Corporation, which is my 

home, and a member of the executive of the Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Development Corporations, Evan 

Simpson, in your gallery. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Ms. Stanger, seconded by Mr. 

Renaud. 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand proudly as the 

member for Qu'Appelle-Lumsden to enter into the debate on 

the Speech from the Throne delivered last Thursday by Her 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 

 

My first words must be words of congratulations, Mr. Speaker. 

Congratulations to the mover and the seconder of the motion to 

adopt the Speech from the Throne. Congratulations to my fine 

friends and colleagues, the members from Cut 

Knife-Lloydminster and Kelsey-Tisdale. It is an honour to be 

able to move and second the Speech from the Throne and I 

commend the members on their eloquence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I like the metaphor of a journey used in the throne 

speech. It has a noble history. Chaucer had his pilgrims leaving 

worldly London for the city of God as represented by 

Canterbury. Christian in Pilgrim's Progress undertook a 

journey and pioneers journeyed from everywhere to get to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

A journey is indeed what our life is. As we all know, a journey 

together, a journey that includes all members of our society, is 

better than a solitary journey. The throne speech outlines a 

journey for Saskatchewan people. My life has been dedicated 

to preparing the youngest members of our society for that 

journey, and therefore I wholeheartedly endorse the 

government's children first: community action program 

initiative. 

 

All teachers would acknowledge that there are many 

circumstances inside and outside the schools that can affect the 

way children learn and develop. Poor health 

and nutrition, family violence, neglect, and substance abuse can 

all devastate the life of the young. I have seen, Mr. Speaker, the 

effects of all these on children in my care, and any effort to 

mitigate these terrible realities in our children's lives must be 

welcomed and encouraged. 

 

The member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster talked about 

inclusion, and this program is a perfect example. Nearly 20 

communities are now involved in working together, using their 

schools as a base to effectively deliver a broad range of 

services to meet their children's needs. This is wonderful, Mr. 

Speaker. It is easier to meet the educational needs of children if 

their other needs are met as well. The wellness model goes to 

school. 

 

But before I talk about formal education, I want to say a few 

words about education and knowledge in a wider and broader 

sense. We need to know -- and I think we do know -- that 

sound financial management of any institution, whether it be 

family, business, or government, is absolutely necessary for 

confidence and hope. Runaway debt has to be controlled. 

 

Most people in Saskatchewan now know the fiscal reality 

facing us. Indeed the marvellous response to the Saskatchewan 

savings bonds last year shows how well they appreciated the 

need for us to help ourselves gain financial stability. 

 

And the government too in many ways -- like curbing 

ministerial travel, cutting MLAs' (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) communication allowances and cabinet ministers' 

salaries, and reducing the number of boards and commissions - 

_ has helped Saskatchewan become the only province to cut its 

annual operating expenditures. 

 

Saskatchewan people do indeed know that living within our 

means is an important priority, as is our environment, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

As a member of the Standing Committee of the legislature on 

the Environment, I have learned some things which go to the 

heart of effective government. Two I would like to emphasize. 

First, there is a wide variety of opinion in the province on the 

need for legislation to protect the environment. Some people do 

not yet know the extent to which our environment has been 

damaged. Implied in that variety of opinion then is the need for 

many to acknowledge the fragility of the state of our air, our 

soil, and water, and how careful we must all be in maintaining 

their purity. 

 

Secondly, on the committee we have been heartened by the 

response to our hearings throughout the province. People really 

do appreciate having the opportunity to express their opinions, 

however varied, on the Charter of Environmental Rights and 

Responsibilities. Consulting on this proposed legislation, as on 

health, agriculture, economic development, among many 

others, is in keeping with this government's dedication to 

openness and accountability. 

 

Another thing people I think need to know, must know to 

journey through life, is how to take care of themselves. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I am solidly in favour and support of 



64 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 1993 

the Saskatchewan vision for health, the wellness model. The 

more we know of the causes of many illnesses, cancer being 

typical, the more we realize that lifestyle choices can be crucial 

in avoiding or at least minimizing health risks. 

 

(1445) 

 

Smoking causes lung cancer and heart disease, but even unwise 

eating and lack of exercise play a significant role in a person's 

well-being. Our people in Saskatchewan, most people 

everywhere, need every encouragement to eat well, exercise, 

and maintain a positive outlook on life, so that their recourse to 

health services for illnesses caused mainly by lifestyle choices 

is reduced. 

 

Despite much good work done by many good people, there is 

still much ignorance of, or indifference to, the need to 

minimize health risks and live wisely. Saskatchewan people 

working together, communities and health professionals, must 

indeed be given every support in the planning, delivery, and 

governing of our health services. And education promoting 

healthy attitudes and lifestyles could do wonders for more 

people than as yet perhaps has been realized. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some of the mail I have been receiving of late 

reminds me of another need for education in Saskatchewan. 

And I refer to the proposed amendment to the Human Rights 

Code. Extending basic human rights to gay people, rights of 

secure employment and a roof over their head, seems just 

civilized and Christian to me. And I would say that anyone 

who denies such rights to any law-abiding member of our 

community is not enlightened, open-minded, or educated in 

basic human charity. I am dismayed that there are people in our 

province who would deny gay people, with a vehemence 

bordering on hatred, what seven other provinces and the federal 

government have either granted or are about to grant them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a few weeks ago I attended the baptism of an 

infant. At the heart of this ceremony was a series of vows the 

parents and godparents took on behalf of the child. The vows 

are in the form of questions to each of which the parents 

answer: I will, with God's help. The last question was: Will you 

strive for justice and peace among all people and respect the 

dignity of every human being? Mr. Speaker, if that vow is 

followed, this child has a good chance of growing into a strong, 

dignified, morally productive member of society. If, on the 

other hand, that child grows up to follow the dictates of those 

who teach narrow-mindedness, intolerance, and hatred, then we 

will have lost another soul to darkness. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like to say just a few words about agriculture. 

Many of the people in my constituency are dependent upon 

agriculture and it is a very important concern with this 

government. 

 

No one would deny that our farmers and rural communities are 

in crisis. Their farm income this year could well be the lowest 

since 1970. In response to this situation we must continue to 

stand with our farm communities and insist that the federal 

government fulfil its promise to deliver a third line of defence. 

We have also formed a Farm Support Review Committee 

whose responsibility it will be to focus on development of a 

long-term safety net program for farmers. 

 

An exciting new initiative is the consultation paper "Forging 

Partnerships in Agriculture". The purpose of this document, 

and I quote: 

 

 . . . is to encourage discussion of the challenges and 

opportunities relating to Saskatchewan's agriculture and food 

industry. 

 

The member from Kelsey-Tisdale spoke about this paper in his 

address, and we look forward throughout the coming months to 

hearing the results of these discussions which will help us work 

toward security for farmers and all those who are involved in 

the agriculture and food industry. 

 

Before I close, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to return to education -- 

education in its formal, more limited sense. As I mentioned 

earlier, I strongly endorse the children first: community action 

program. I well know from my own experience that the more 

interaction there is between schools and the communities they 

serve, the better educated and prepared for life our children 

become. I like the idea that lifelong learning should be the goal 

of a properly integrated school system. Saskatchewan schools 

have long been considered among the best in Canada, and this 

government is committed to their continued excellence. 

 

Thus, having a Saskatchewan Education Council oversee the 

direction the education system takes must help ensure this 

continuing improvement. Accountability and cooperation in 

education, as in all government activity, are excellent concepts 

to live by. 

 

On a personal note, I'd like to end by saying that one of the 

reasons I entered public life was to restore hope and faith to 

people cynical about politicians and the political process. I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, in cooperation and bringing people 

together, working together. 

 

The Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, with its emphasis 

on cooperation and accountability, should help Saskatchewan 

people see the difficulties and challenges we face. But it should 

assure them that this government is determined to make the 

right decisions on its journal of renewal -- the right decisions 

for the good of us all, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I proudly support this Speech from the Throne. Thank you very 

much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Draper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, sir. It's been really 

fascinating to sit in this Chamber and listen to three successive 

throne speeches by this still very new government and to watch 

history being made. To watch the way our cabinet wrestled 

with the pig's mess that was left by the previous administration. 

To watch the joy of the opposition at the problems that they left 

us -- veritably crowing at the thought that we could not solve 



March 2, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 65 

them. To see that delight give way to doubt last year when they 

realized that we had every intention of solving those problems. 

 

That doubt we shall see turn to anger and despair during this 

session as they see us surmount difficulty after difficulty in 

succeeding weeks of this session. They'll be even more glum 

next year when they see the building blocks that I described 

last year fit nicely into place in the edifice that we are so 

carefully crafting in time for the election of 1996 -- not far 

away. But we're going to get there. 

 

It won't be a rococo contraption like those multi-tiered wedding 

cakes that are so popular, whose icing sugar conceals a block 

of inedible wood. The cake that we produce will be a solid and 

nourishing cake like those that our mothers and our 

grandmothers made for us so many years ago. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Draper: -- Unassuming and practical, the kind that we 

come back for day after day, time after time, for more and 

more slices -- the type that never gets stale and we never get 

sick of. 

 

As a lad at a Boy Scout jamboree, Lord Rowallan, who was 

then the Chief Scout of the world, gave us a motto which went: 

the difficult we do at once; the impossible takes a little longer. 

That motto, sir, has remained with me for over 40 years and 

has sustained me through many tight corners and difficult 

situations. 

 

I see that the present government is putting that motto into 

practice every day in the tradition of our forebears, both on this 

side of the Atlantic and on the other. 

 

Even the choir that sang for us from the government gallery -- I 

think from the Balfour Collegiate School there -- seemed to 

pick up the same theme, as they sang "All Our Trials Soon Be 

Over". That spiritual, sir, was wrong in one respect. It is 

certainly late but, my brother, it is not too late. And we are 

going to prove that very shortly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Draper: -- In my area of the province and in neighbouring 

constituencies, because it covers rather a large area, 

Saskatchewan Water and the federal Prairie Farm 

Rehabilitation Association are cooperating to develop what we 

call the Wood River Utility Board, in order to pipe water from 

Thomson Lake to over 600 farms, and about the same number 

of hook-ups to residents in small towns and villages in the area. 

 

We are chronically short of good water, sir. And by this means 

we should be able to increase our herds of beef cattle and hogs, 

and so stimulate our economy and take advantage of the 

demand for more meat in the United States, Mexico, and Cuba. 

This will create jobs for us and bring some more life into our 

communities. 

 

The total cost will be somewhere between 10 and $11 million, 

a part of which will come from the federal sources, and we are 

hoping that we can get some from 

provincial sources as well. And I share this with you, sir, 

simply to demonstrate that this is an example of what we can 

do with a minimum amount of money and a maximum amount 

of cooperation. 

 

Granted, on a far larger scale there's the new unimproved 

AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.) agreement. There can 

be no doubt, sir, that nuclear power is a valuable source of 

energy. But there are problems -- problems of safety, problems 

of cost, and many problems with disposal of the waste material. 

The only way that we can solve these problems, sir, is by 

research. 

 

And I see no reason why that research should not be carried out 

in this province -- the province that surely must benefit from 

the successful production of safe and cheap nuclear power. We 

are, after all, a major source of the uranium. But we cannot 

afford to get ourselves into the mess that Ontario Hydro got 

with a $3 billion plant that ultimately cost over $14 billion. A 

debt with a deficit like that, sir, would sink this province out of 

sight, and I think that the government has the right idea. 

 

I'm certainly opposed to our beautiful forest being destroyed by 

half the world's nuclear waste. I took the opportunity to go up 

to Rabbit Lake with Cameco and look around their sites. And 

apart from the obvious scars that the actual mines themselves 

form and which will be obliterated by contract once the mines 

are closed down . . . I'd hate to see those beautiful forests there 

and those lovely lakes destroyed by nuclear waste from Hong 

Kong and outer Mongolia and anywhere else. 

 

I repeat, before we go any further down the road to nuclear 

power, we need foolproof safety of the operation; we need low 

costs and absolute safety of disposal. Our province and our 

future demand no less. 

 

There is an ongoing problem with agriculture, as we all know, 

and we certainly need the new initiative of the Farm Support 

Review Committee. GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 

is obviously dead. Alberta had a shortfall in 1991 which was 

supposed to be the great year for GRIP. And now despite the 

fact that it had no changes in 1992, it's going to have another 

$300 million of loss. Manitoba, I understand, is having 

problems with it and wants to get out. And I believe there's 

rumours that the federal government itself wants to make 

changes in GRIP. 

 

We were right last year when we said that there were problems 

with GRIP and they ought to be changed, and everybody else 

was wrong, and we're proving it over and over again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Draper: -- As to renewing health care, sir, along the lines 

of the wellness model, the Minister of Health is to be 

congratulated for her enormous energy. I've seen her 

criss-crossing the province attending countless and 

interminable meetings with stakeholders and the general 

public, not only in the cities but also in any small town that 

invites her. She has total grasp of the situation and is 

enthusiastic and inexhaustible in pursuit of her goals, and I'm 

sure that she will command the overwhelming support of the 

medical profession and the nurses in our 



66 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 1993 

area. 

 

But we shall have to be careful not to so circumscribe the 

freedom to practise medicine of our rural physicians that we 

lose the most capable and hard-working doctors of the 

province. These are the ones that work without the huge 

technology. These are the ones that work using what I was 

taught to use -- the brain, the ears, the eyes, the hand, and the 

heart. 

 

(1500) 
 

We'll have to work hard to keep these 35 per cent of the doctors 

who serve 65 per cent of the population. It is unfortunate that 

65 per cent of the doctors are in Saskatoon and Regina serving 

merely 35 per cent of the population. But I suspect that they're 

the ones that don't have the courage and the tenacity to practise 

real medicine. That's my own opinion. Otherwise we shall have 

no meaningful health care in rural areas at all. The present 

South African doctor-of-the-month club is not only 

unsatisfactory and insufficient, but it can be very dangerous, 

sir. 
 

Mr. Speaker, there's been a lot of discussion of late of the 

apparent excess of MLAs in this House, particularly that there 

are too many rural MLAs, that they should be drastically 

reduced in number. Again, my own personal opinion, sir, is 

that there's not enough of anything in rural Saskatchewan, 

whether it be education, post offices, or health care. And 

reducing rural services of any kind simply compounds our 

problems. 
 

Mr. Speaker, sir, I don't have a thousand voters or a thousand 

residents in one multi-story condominium that I can visit 

simply by using the elevator no matter what the weather. The 

population density of Saskatchewan is four people to the square 

mile. If I want to visit a thousand people in my area I have to 

travel 250 square miles. And I'm not the only one. My riding 

covers 4,500 square miles and it's not the largest one in the 

province, as you know. 
 

Under the latest boundary revision that was not used but would 

have changed my constituency from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg to 

Wood Mountain, that would have added a further 2,000 square 

miles to my constituency. The extra travel that that would have 

involved was enormous. And that was without reducing the 

number of ridings. 
 

The increase in area that would result by reducing the number 

of rural ridings by the magic number of eight would be 

enormous. Frankly, Mr. Speaker, sir, if there is to be a 

reshuffling of ridings, and it can come to reduction in the 

number of seats, I would like to take this opportunity to suggest 

to you and to all the members of this House, on both sides, that 

any new formula be based not just on population alone, but 

also take into account the factor of the area covered. Otherwise 

the rural MLAs will simply not be able to perform the duties 

that are expected from them out in the constituency. 
 

Mr. Speaker, sir, our small communities are having great 

problems at maintaining themselves. This is nothing new, and 

I've repeated it before and I'll continue to do so because this is 

my job coming from a rural constituency. 

 

With the federal government offloading on health care, 

on education and social services onto provincial governments 

across the nation -- not just ours -- where we, in turn, are 

having to offload onto small towns and RMs (rural 

municipalities), and they are having to increase the taxes that 

are already overloading our small towns, now on top of this the 

federal government is welshing on the Crow rate agreement. 

As a result, the streets and other public amenities of our small 

towns are noticeably deteriorating -- our roads are breaking up; 

our sewers are leaking all over the place; it's getting worse and 

it's going to increase. 

 

Sir, Saskatchewan is a province of small towns scattered over 

half of our land mass. If you look on a map you will see that 

our populated area is twice that of Manitoba.  And Winnipeg, 

the biggest single city in Manitoba, has a population that's 

greater than that of Regina and Saskatoon combined. Nor does 

Alberta, with half its population in the twin cities of Calgary 

and Edmonton, have the same problem that we have here. 

 

Farming and ranching are the backbone of Saskatchewan and 

are likely to remain so in the foreseeable future, despite our oil 

production, despite our potash, and despite our uranium and 

timber. Nevertheless, many of our hamlets and villages are no 

longer viable entities. There is just no way to resuscitate them. 

 

Government recognizes this and the population themselves 

recognize this. Studies have been done but no action has been 

taken so far. It is time that we set up a rural services committee 

whose task it would be to plan for the future of rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

If we do not wish all our population to drift into the 10 cities, 

we must say so. If we don't mind the province becoming 

derelict because of inner tension, then again let us say so and 

people will know what we're up against. 

 

What I am suggesting, sir, is a wellness model for small towns. 

Not only do we have to decide what health services and 

facilities should be in certain towns, we need to decide which 

towns should have schools, government buildings, and post 

offices. And yes, sir, I did say post offices and I know full well 

that Canada Post is a federal jurisdiction. In fact it was my 

involvement in helping the campaigns to preserve our post 

office in Gravelbourg and the one in Wood Mountain and our 

partial success in Shamrock that jogged my mental wheels into 

motion on this issue. 

 

As I accept that within reason Canada Post has to rationalize its 

services, and as I accept that health care has to be rationalized, 

these are simply ad hoc rationalizations. They are isolated, with 

no federal-provincial coordination. The announcement by CN 

yesterday is another example of that. And although the 

opposition may make great noises about the fact of our high 

taxes on diesel fuel, how is it, sir, that Alberta, which has low 

taxes on diesel fuel to the railways, has also lost jobs? And 

what's going on in Quebec and down East where they're losing 

another 1,100 people? It's not just Saskatchewan, it's the whole 

country that's being hit by a federal government that doesn't 

give a damn. 

 

We have no real plan; there is no real plan. And it's not 



March 2, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 67 

connected to the larger world of Saskatchewan and Canada. To 

do these jobs properly we need a coordinated plan, not just a 

blind swing of a mailed fist in the dark. That just does damage. 

The same goes for a hockey stick, as I've got plenty of 

experience of. 

 

If we will take inventory of our small towns in a 

comprehensive manner, sir, we should be able to say perhaps: 

above this size we will support a community; below that size, 

or perhaps off on a limb somewhere, we just cannot support 

you. At least our people will know what to expect, where 

they're going, what's going to happen. 

 

I'm not suggesting that we bulldoze these places to the ground. 

All I'm suggesting is that we leave them alone, but let them 

know that in future if they decide they need a new hockey rink 

that we will not finance one. If they need a new curling rink or 

bowling alley, they will have to get together with smaller towns 

in the area and decide that one will be built to accommodate 

them all in a size large enough that the province is able to 

sustain over the long term. There's really no reason why we 

couldn't have recreation districts in the same way that we have 

school districts, sir. It would be very convenient if they were 

coterminous with school districts or even our new health 

districts, but it is not necessary. 

 

Perhaps this is the time, sir, to introduce a county system. I 

really don't see any ideological impediment to this on our side 

of the House. Possibly opposition have; I don't know. I've 

never thought that way. We've no objection at our end. We've 

no objection to health districts or school districts. I don't see 

why we couldn't have counties. Possibly this is something that 

we should look into. 

 

My rural colleagues on both sides of the House must surely 

have noted that there are hamlets occupied virtually 100 per 

cent by elderly widows whose only property is the house their 

husbands left them. They have no services and are virtually 

trapped. Their houses, however good they may be, however 

well maintained they may be, are virtually unsaleable. If they 

could sell them, the money they would get would not allow 

them to buy a house in say Gravelbourg, Assiniboia, Nipawin, 

wherever. 

 

I would like to put into effect a pilot project where we 

transported those houses at no charge to a viable town in the 

neighbourhood where they could get the services they need. 

When we consider the future costs saved in not having to repair 

or replace telephone, power, gas, water, and sewer 

infrastructure to a whole townsite, I think we could at one 

stroke provide services to more people and reduce our 

liabilities. 

 

I've brought this up before, sir, and I'll bring it up again, but I'm 

convinced that some such wellness model for rural 

communities is essential to encourage our local population and 

restore in them confidence in the future of Saskatchewan's rural 

way of life. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I did like the reference to "next year 

country" in the throne speech. It is an optimistic phrase. And 

my wife and I, after staggering without a rudder half way 

around the world, found the secure anchorage in 

rural Saskatchewan where we found a very supportive and 

encouraging neighbourhood to the extent that we plan to retire 

in Saskatchewan, if we ever get around to it. And I would like 

to suggest that we inscribe "next year country" on our car 

licence plates and make it the provincial motto. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'm 

pleased once again to participate in a debate on the 

government's plan for Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, perhaps I 

should say the government's lack of a plan for Saskatchewan. 

But, Mr. Speaker, I will deal with that shortly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my impression of a throne speech is supposed to 

give encouragement, hope. This throne speech gives none of 

that. 

 

But before I go into my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

acknowledge the constituency of Wilkie. Mr. Speaker, the 

constituency of Wilkie is a diverse constituency. We have 

farming, we have a strong base in livestock, we have oil, we 

have a little bit of industry, and we have all the ethnic groups 

and all the churches that you usually find in rural 

Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, I am proud to say that today 

I believe I represent them all and I feel comfortable with them, 

and I'm sure they feel comfortable with me as their 

representative, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier is saying some things that I think I 

have to address, not only because the Premier said them, Mr. 

Speaker, but because it seems that some of his back-benchers 

also seem to have the same view. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm talking about what could be almost called 

misinterpretation, misrepresentation, saying things like, the 

total debt of the province occurred in the last nine years. Mr. 

Speaker, nothing could be further from the truth. And you, Mr. 

Speaker, I'm sure, as well as many of the front benches on that 

side, know that. 

 

What I would like to do today, Mr. Speaker, is talk to some of 

the back-benchers, particularly the member from Cut 

Knife-Lloydminster. Yes, I would ask you to listen. And also 

the member from Tisdale. I would like you to listen, and listen 

with an open mind. Because I will . . . and I will go quite 

slowly and I will show you. And I don't hold that against the 

back-benchers, because I'm sure, Mr. Speaker, when you find 

that the Premier and the Deputy Premier not only fooled some 

of our people, he fooled all of his own people with that massive 

debt that he's talking about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will probably take a little while to do this 

because I want to do it in such a manner that even those in the 

back benches will understand what I am saying. 

 

(1515) 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the broad, primary focus of the legislation 

will be on four broad areas. The massive and destructive tax 

grab; the unrelenting dishonesty of this government; the total 

unfairness of the government's actions -- particularly its 

calculated decision to destroy 



68 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 1993 

the faith and hope of the people of Saskatchewan in their own 

future. Gloom and doom. Mr. Speaker, the total unfairness of 

the government's actions; and of course, Mr. Speaker, the 

hurtful choices the government is making every day. 

 

These are the themes of a government completely lost, 

completely without ideas, and completely bankrupt of 

initiative. Totally incompetent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let me start, Mr. Speaker, by addressing the government's 

fascination with tax increases. The member from Riversdale 

said, I had no choice. He says taxes must go up because of this 

terrible deficit that I was left. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let's examine that deficit collectively and let's get 

rid of the political distortions. Mr. Speaker, I will show you 

and those who have the integrity to listen, the magic pen of the 

Finance minister and the Premier. He said taxes must go up 

because of this terrible deficit I was left. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

let's take a look at it. 

 

The member from Riversdale makes much ado about a letter he 

received from the former minister of Finance which assured 

him the government of the day had the deficit on track at $265 

million. That was the target. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well we hear 

the boys chirping from the other side. I would just ask you to 

listen, get out your pencil, and go through this exercise. 

 

Then that member expressed shock and outrage that the deficit 

he brought forward was much larger than $265 million, Mr. 

Speaker. And I'm sorry to say that some of the media accepted 

that too. But this Premier needs to take responsibility for his 

own action, Mr. Speaker, and I intend to show you where he 

was misleading the people of this province. The deficit of the 

previous government was targeted at $265 million based on the 

policies of the previous government. This NDP (New 

Democratic Party) leader turned all those policies upside down. 

The first NDP deficit was announced at $858 million -- their 

first budget. Mr. Speaker, you'll find that in the Speech from 

the Throne in December of 1991. 

 

So let's do a little basic arithmetic. Even those back-benchers, I 

think, can follow this through. The NDP first cancelled 

harmonization. In doing so they gave up 180 million in the first 

year -- could have gone to 200 million if the economy had 

turned around and the spending had gone up. So if you add, 

Mr. Speaker, 265 plus 180 -- it's not difficult, it's not difficult 

math, you just add it up -- add those two together and you get a 

deficit of $445 million. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, take the 445 million and add a dividend 

from the Crown corporations of $250 million. Now don't let the 

Leader of the NDP tell you there was no money for a dividend, 

Mr. Speaker, because there was. And those in the back benches 

maybe don't know that, but there was. All you have to do, all 

you have to do if you want to know, is to look at his own 

annual reports for those Crown corporations in 1991 and you 

will see that there was a minimum of $590 million stashed 

away in the Crown corporations and retained earnings. The 

money 

was there. We now know with certainty that there were 

sufficient funds available to pay the required dividend to the 

treasury. So let's just add 445 million and 250 million. What 

have we got? It comes to 695 million, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now let's continue, let's continue. Stay with me on this for a 

little while. To continue, if we look at the NDP Finance 

minister's own budget of 1991, we find that he reports $122 

million that was lost due to economic changes. All right, we'll 

buy that. What this means is that more people left the province, 

businesses and farmers went bankrupt and so on, resulting in 

increased cost for government and reduced revenues. Fair ball. 

Fair ball, Mr. Speaker. 

 

These kinds of changes cost the government $122 million. In 

the letter to the NDP leader, the Premier now, it was also 

indicated that there was an oversubscription in GRIP in 1991 

that would cost an additional $58 million. The former 

government was publicly and seriously committed to making 

up for these changes through other spending cuts and that was 

why it reported the deficit on track at $265 million. 

 

But let's ignore the $58 million for GRIP and just count the 

NDP's own number. The NDP's own number's amusing -- 122 

million, and add that to the subtotal; 695 million plus 122 

million -- $817 million. Now the difference between 817 

million and 858 million comes to $41 million. We're almost 

there. We're almost there, at the deficit the ingenuitive Finance 

minister and the Premier got to in their calculations with their 

magic pen, Mr. Speaker. Now we can account for that $41 

million in transfer transition costs alone. Very easily done. 

 

Now if you just add up the money paid to the lawyers at Olive 

Waller to hunt out people to fire, the hundreds of thousand 

dollars spent on the Gass Commission, the money spent on 

phoney corporate headquarters in places like Carragana, 

Saskatchewan, and the fleet of hacks and flacks brought in 

from Ontario by this government, and you'll get 40 million 

quite easy. 

 

But we don't even have to look at that, Mr. Speaker. We don't 

have to look at the detailed spending of the NDP leader to find 

the necessary 40 million. We can leave that out. We just have 

to go to the $85 million left in the Liquor Board that year and 

we have covered off the entire deficit jump the NDP foisted on 

the province and the people after they took power. Quite easy. 

Quite easy to come in with a big deficit when you use this 

ingenuitive type of accounting, Mr. Speaker, with a magic 

pencil. 

 

But I give the minister and the Premier credit -- they not only 

fooled their people, Mr. Speaker, they fooled some of ours. 

And the vast majority of people in Saskatchewan resent that. 

They resent that, Mr. Speaker, and I think you'll pay the price. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let's go on. Let's not forget the trail of 

write-offs and the creative increases in the deficit. Let's take a 

look at those. For example, the government back-billed over 

$25 million in future expenditures on municipal capital projects 

to get the deficit numbers out. They back-billed $25 million. 

And I know the back-benchers don't know that because you're 

not 



March 2, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 69 

exposed to that kind of ministerial material. And they didn't tell 

you and they won't tell you. Why should they? Because you 

can go out and you can get on your feet and in all good 

conscience try to tell the people of Saskatchewan that you 

believe in your government. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that was one we could find quite easy. No 

problem with that one. 

 

They took another $25 million that was to be spent over four 

years and they billed the whole thing in 1991. Isn't that 

creative? Very creative. I wouldn't want one of them to be my 

accountant, Mr. Speaker, because the income tax people would 

take a dim view of some of that stuff. 

 

Mr. Speaker, regardless of this, just a quick assessment of some 

pretty straightforward math -- straightforward math. Nothing 

creative at all about what I'm doing. We can account for the 

entirety of the NDP's first major deficit. It did not have to be 

$865 million. It did not have to be. 

 

I'd like to introduce you to the creative pencil that the Finance 

minister used, Mr. Speaker. It goes like this. It's got three kind 

of ink: it's got the black ink for the truth; the red ink for the 

lies; and the green ink to mix up everything so you can't 

recognize the truth when you see it. And I see one of the 

members shaking his head. I ask you, sir, check what I'm 

talking about. You cannot dispute these figures. They're there. 

They're absolutely credible. And I don't hold you . . . I don't 

blame you for it because you were never given the information 

and you didn't go and search it out. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what is even more unacceptable is that after 

announcing a deficit of $865 million in December of 1991, the 

NDP government went through all kinds of twists and turns 

and loop the loops to announce that their May '92 budget, that 

they had managed to reduce the deficit to $517 million. 

Wonderful, wonderful. Whoopsy do and how do you do. Well, 

golly gee. The Finance minister's magic pencil. Great, great 

creative budgeting. 

 

Then they took their funny figures, Mr. Speaker, and put on a 

smile and got the silliness down from near 900 million to 500 

million. Well that's still not in the ballpark. We've still got 

somewhere to go. But it shows how easy and comfortably these 

people will manipulate the numbers -- with a magic pencil. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the deficit was right back on track to the 

265 million that was targeted by the former government. And I 

hope, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite and some of the 

media will look at these figures. Prove me wrong, if you will. 

I'm prepared. I'm prepared. This NDP government is far more 

interested, Mr. Speaker, in its political agenda than it is in the 

sound management of the province and the protection of its 

people. 

 

So let's take another step forward then, into the next NDP 

deficit. Let's examine how they exploded the debt in the 1992 

budget that they presented -- exploded it. In assessing this trail 

of deception, I insist, Mr. Speaker, that the Leader of the NDP, 

the Premier now, and his Finance minister acknowledge the 

report of his own hand-picked 

investigator, Don Gass, where he spent something like 

$400,000 on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also would like to insist that the media and in 

the government who give great credence to their 

recommendations for write-offs and set-asides and so on, give 

equal credence to a very important assessment by the same 

Don Gass hired by those people. They hired him. They paid 

him. And they gave his report. I insist that they stand by his 

report. 

 

And I quote that gentleman. Speaking to CK television on 

February 18, 1991, Mr. Gass said, and I'm quoting him, sir: the 

Tories made no attempt to hide the province's debt financial 

standing; in fact the books were open all the time to credit 

agencies or anyone else interested. 

 

The books were open all the time. Your own agent, paid by 

you. That is the conclusion, Mr. Speaker, of the NDP Premier. 

His own hand-picked review commission dominated by NDP 

hacks, I must say. The books were open all along. So I insist, 

sir, that they give credence to their own commission. 

 

I don't think we should allow this NDP Premier and the past 

Finance minister to hide under the cover of claiming total 

ignorance. They cannot claim ignorance. And I don't think we 

should allow this Premier to pretend the books were closed and 

that's why he is mounting this enormous tax on our families, 

our farms, and our businesses. It's a myth, Mr. Speaker, and it 

should be challenged, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I beg leave to introduce 

some guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

(1530) 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Pringle: -- I wish to thank the hon. member from Wilkie. I 

appreciate that. 

 

In the west gallery, Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to 

you, and through you to members of the Assembly, my mother 

and father and my aunt from Carnduff, Saskatchewan in the 

Souris-Cannington constituency, and my grandma from Regina 

and my Aunt Kay from Regina. And I'll be popping up to see 

them in a minute. I'd ask that all members welcome them to the 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

(continued) 
 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As I was 

saying, Mr. Speaker, the books were open all the time; there 

was nothing to hide. As reported by your own 



70 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 1993 

commission -- Don Gass -- nothing hidden. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it comes down to choices. The now 

Premier says he had no choices. I disagree, Mr. Speaker. It did 

come down to choices. He had a choice and it's that simple. 

 

Well let us review, Mr. Speaker, some of the choices that this 

government did have. They chose to write off almost a billion 

dollars worth of schools and hospitals. Poof! They're gone, just 

like that. 

 

But I invite all of the back-benchers, all of the members, to go 

out and take a look and see if their local school or local hospital 

is gone. The buildings are all there. It has not taken flight and 

disappeared. No. But they wrote off a billion dollars. They 

wrote a billion dollars of schools and hospitals, this creative 

accounting that the ex-Finance minister, the now Deputy 

Premier engaged himself in. These buildings are still there, and 

they are still providing a value to the people of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

To do that, to do what the NDP government has done, Mr. 

Speaker, would be the same thing as a family with a mortgage 

on their home declaring bankruptcy because they do not have 

the $80,000 that the mortgage consists of. That's the same 

thing. Now the member from Tisdale-Kelsey, I ask him to 

think about that. He's in the real estate business. Is that what 

you do? The mortgage is paid off a month at a time. Very 

creative, very misleading when you won't tell your people what 

you're doing just to create the image of a bigger deficit and a 

bigger debt -- very, very, very misleading. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Premier tries to explain it away by 

saying that the schools and hospitals provide no revenue to the 

government. What nonsense; what total nonsense. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how much revenue does the average house 

generate? I don't know. Maybe the NDP back-benchers have 

got their house paid for and don't pay any mortgage and don't 

have to worry about it. I tell you this, the average person in this 

province looked at the fact that his house was not producing 

revenue, if he did that and therefore the family was bankrupt, 

well that's about as ridiculous as it can get. The only people 

that could pull a farce like this off is the Finance minister with 

his magic pencil, and not tell the folks what he's doing. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there goes a billion dollars onto the debt of 

the province just with a magic pencil. Write off the hospitals 

and the schools. You've got another billion dollar deficit that 

you can blame the Tories for. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, speaking of the debt, isn't it about time that 

the media and the public could come to expect this government 

to decide on at least just one number? Let's decide on one 

number, one or the other, decide whether they want to be 

honest about it or make political hay, but at least let's pick a 

number. Let's at least try to be honest with the public, the 

people of Saskatchewan. 
 

When talking to the financial institutions and investors, the 

NDP pegged the debt at 14 billion. But when reading budget 

speeches or trying to frighten the people, that number is 15 or 

16 billion. We heard the figure of 15 

billion again today in the House, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well they've got to be a number. Do they 

bounce around like this every time a different member gets up, 

you've got a different number? Tell us what the number is. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, they should try to be more responsible. 

Indeed I think they have to be more responsible. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, let's have a look at this situation as well. 

Let's take another look, Mr. Speaker. Let's take the last budget 

of the previous administration and look at page 133. There you 

will see stated the gross debt of the province for 1992. It's 

stated as $13.3 billion. That was the gross. 

 

Now let's take the NDP's first real budget tabled on May of 

1992 and look at page number 61. There you will see the gross 

debt of the province for 1992 listed by the NDP themselves as 

13.8 billion. Well there's a half a billion there. 

 

Now we can quickly establish where they picked up the extra 

500 million. Very creative -- very, very creative. They wrote 

off $716 million in schools and hospitals -- a purely paper 

transaction but one that blows up the deficit number. Very, 

very creative. I'm not so sure that it's honest. Very, very 

creative. They can blame it on the Tories, blame it on the 

Tories. 

 

I hear their Minister of Justice saying: hear, hear. Mr. Minister 

of Justice, how do you look at yourself in the mirror when stuff 

like this goes on? How do you do that? How can you do that 

after the things you've done in this House? How can you look 

at yourself? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, let's take another look at what they did. In 

the Crown sector they wrote off another $900 million worth of 

investments. They wrote it off. Did you back-benchers know 

all that? Of course you didn't. You never knew because you 

never knew where to look. But I'll show you where to look if 

you're interested. 

 

Now here's the curiosity. Here the curiosity . . . how they 

managed the book work to make almost 2 billion in write-offs 

work out to only a half a billion increase in the gross debt. 

They wrote off 2 billion and yet they only increased the total 

debt by a half a billion. Interesting. Very, very creative. Again 

the magic pencil, the magic pencil. 

 

Well here's how they did it. They did it and he'll tell you how. I 

make the point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they made a conscious 

choice to expand the debt as much as possible, expand the debt, 

blame it on the Tories. And again the Premier cannot take 

refuge in the Gass Commission because that commission 

recommended all kinds of things that the NDP government has 

not initiated and has since rejected. 

 

For example, Mr. Speaker, the member for Riversdale is 

refusing to include the unfunded pension liabilities built up 

when he was deputy premier in the 1970s, refusing to even 

acknowledge those. 



March 2, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 71 

The member from Prince Albert was on a radio show a few 

days ago and admitted to three and a half billion dollars but he 

said, we never denied it. We never denied it was there, we just 

didn't tell you it was there. That's supposed to be acceptable? 

That's open and honest? I find that hard to accept, Mr. Speaker. 

I find it very hard for a premier and a deputy premier to stoop 

this low. 

 

These unfunded liabilities would add several billions to the 

province's debt but he doesn't want to include them because he 

knows the responsibility for that debt cannot be fudged off on 

the Tories or anyone else. He knows that that was his. So we 

keep the books closed, Mr. Member for Riversdale. Open and 

honest, but you keep the books closed. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP has come to stand for novel 

deficit principles or nasty debt propaganda. The new word for 

the NDP -- nasty debt propaganda. 

 

Let me give you one more clear example how this government 

is fudging the books. The Canadian Institute of Chartered 

Accountants handbook makes it very clear under what 

conditions loan guarantees should be included as part of a debt. 

Very clear. They explain it very clearly. 

 

Loan guarantees may become contingent liabilities to be 

reported in the debt only when you are persuaded that the 

business being guaranteed will go bankrupt. That's the only 

legitimate reason you can include loan guarantees into your 

debt. Well I refer you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to section 3290 of 

the CICA (Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants) 

handbook which deals with loan guarantees and the conditions 

for including these guarantees -- very clear. That's the only 

legitimate reason you have for doing that. 

 

In layman's terms, what it says is that you have to be very 

convinced that it is unlikely . . . it is very likely, pardon me, 

you will be called upon to honour the guarantee. In other 

words, the business is going bankrupt. You have to be 

convinced it's going to do that. 

 

So according to this government's pronouncements and it's 

predicting the imminent demise of Saskferco fertilizer plant -- 

that's going, going bankrupt -- because it includes a loan 

guarantee; it includes that in the debt. I don't know any place 

anywhere where anyone has said that Saskferco isn't doing 

quite well, thank you. On the other hand, they say it's going 

bankrupt so they can include the debt, and then they turn 

around and give it in the throne speech in another as part of the 

light at the end of the tunnel for Saskatchewan. Very creative. 

 

So let's take another step. According to this government's . . . 

The NDP are predicting the failure of Crown Life and the 

Co-op upgrader. They included that in the debt. They included 

that. How many of you back-benchers know that? I don't think 

any of you do because your Finance people won't tell you that. 

They didn't tell you how they got that debt. Why would they? 

Because they can't use you then as a cat's paw then out on the 

streets and the coffee shops, in this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they are predicting the failure of Millar 

Western Pulp. They're predicting the failure of Millar Western 

Pulp. Have any of you heard that Millar Western's going down? 

I haven't. But they included that in the debt. 

 

Yet, Mr. Speaker, you read the Economic Review of the 

Minister of Finance and you find they list these very businesses 

as the only thing keeping our economy going. Very creative. 

On one hand you say they're going bankrupt so we can include 

them in the debt. And then you turn around and tell the people: 

well, well, pretty good, we've got these things going for us; 

they're working fine, thank you. I wonder how many of the 

back-benchers ever looked at that. Did you yourself, sir? 

Creative, very creative. 

 

(1545) 

 

Now we are supposed to accept that and not look at it? We're 

supposed to accept what the Deputy Premier and the Premier 

tells us is gospel? No thank you. No thank you, sir. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, let's be clear. Let's be clear, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. The deficit is an NDP deficit. The deficit, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is an NDP deficit, pure and simple. You can take 

these, anyone can take these figures and you can find out where 

I got them and you can prove to yourself you've been misled, 

the same as a lot of people in Saskatchewan, by your Premier 

and your Finance minister. 

 

Again I say the deficit, Mr. Speaker, is the NDP deficit. It 

could and should today be $265 million. But it's not because of 

the choices that this government took. Now I do acknowledge 

that debt was incurred under our government, the previous 

government. We did incur debt. And I acknowledge we 

operated deficit budgets. Terrible. Because we had a choice and 

we took them. Now let me ask you, sir, where's the surprise? 

Where would the surprise be in me saying that we had a 

deficit? 

 

How could anyone talk about a deficit that was acquired 

through the last decade? -- 10 years. Take 10 years. And if 

anyone here believes Saskatchewan existed in a vacuum and 

was isolated from the events of the world, they themselves, I 

suggest, were living in a vacuum. We cannot divorce ourselves 

from the economic pressures that was coming from worldwide 

economic downturn. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government made choices. Our 

government made choices that were hard choices, but they 

were choices. The previous government made choices, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and the most fundamental choice it made was 

to go to any lengths possible to preserve the families, the farms, 

the businesses, and the way of life of this province. 

 

I say to the critics, including those on the government side, at 

least be honest about the choices that we faced and that we now 

face. For it is not true for the Premier of this province to sit in 

his chair and say he had no choices. He did have a choice. We 

had a choice; we took that choice. 

 

The Premier, in my opinion, Mr. Speaker, when he says 



72 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 1993 

he had no choice, it's not true. It's a cop-out, a convenient way 

to avoid responsibility and another way to spill more Tory 

blood. That's fine, that's fair, but be honest about it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many choices and they are difficult 

choices indeed. It was difficult for us and it's difficult for you. 

But that's why people seek to govern, to make those choices. If 

they were sincere and said, we can do it better, fine, we accept 

that. But what we don't accept is that you misled the people to 

get in power and then not make the choices that is necessary to 

do better. 

 

The choices of the previous government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

were to build and protect this province in the face of the worst 

economic crisis since the Great Depression. We came off the 

best 10 years this province ever had to the worst 10 years we've 

had in 50 years. What a dramatic turn. 

 

And that's what I asked you to be fair and honest in your 

assessment. We said, people have worked a lifetime to own 

their own homes, and now circumstances completely beyond 

their control are threatening to rip those homes away. We were 

taking on 22 per cent interest rates when the member from 

Riversdale is on record as saying there was nothing he could 

do. He was the deputy premier and told people the government 

didn't care; didn't have the resources in the rich 1970s to help 

these people at 22 per cent interest. The best years of the 

province but he had no help for them. 

 

He had the resources, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to buy potash 

mines, uranium mines, and oil wells, but he did not have a 

dime to help the families. We made the choice to bring interest 

rates on mortgages down to 13 per cent. How many homes . . . 

no one knows how many homes that was saved with that piece 

of legislation. Cost them money. We made the choice that the 

province, the people as a whole, could take that debt better than 

the individual families trying to make a living and maintain 

their home. 

 

And I assert that the man did not care and that he don't care 

now. He's got a political agenda; he's on an agenda that he will 

not deviate from, no matter who it hurts. He is a consummate 

politician, Mr. Speaker, and I'm afraid that is all that he is. 

That's all he is. 

 

The previous administration did care. We did have a heart. We 

took the choices and we spent the money. We decided it was 

easier for the government to bear the debt than for families. 

And we spend hundreds of millions of dollars protecting homes 

in this province. The record is there. 

 

But you would think from the campaign of the members 

opposite that all the deficit was spent on farmers. Nothing 

could be further from the truth. They totally overlooked the 

billions over the decade that went into building and protecting 

urban Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they 

succeeded in deceiving the people, which has brought us to this 

government and to this point in time. And the people are not 

going to forget that. They're not going to forgive you for that. 

This government is set on destruction and despair. 

 

Yes, we did, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We spent money on 

agriculture, and yes it was a great deal of money and yes it 

contributed mightily to the deficit. But I don't say we had no 

choice. We had a choice; we took that choice. I will not disown 

the responsibility, as this Premier so desperately tries to do for 

himself. 

 

I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we made the choice to use every 

means at our disposal to get the farm economy through these 

terrible and hurtful times, and we spent the taxpayers' money to 

do it. We admit to that, but we said that we had a choice, we 

took the choice. 

 

Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we insisted on continuing to build 

and diversify in the face of these enormous fiscal challenges. 

We did not shut the province down nor did we use the magic 

pen to deceive the people. The people of the province knew 

every day the money that they owed -- every dollar. It was out 

there. 

 

Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we built a fertilizer plant. We built a 

paper mill and an entire natural gas industry, two upgraders, a 

bacon plant, turbine factories, and diversified agriculture. And 

it cost a lot of money. It cost a lot of money, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

But these are the very things that are keeping the economy 

alive today, and your government says so; they admit to that. If 

we had not done all of these things, it is true that we would 

have a much reduced debt, no question about it, but we would 

also have a much reduced population. And there are some 

estimates, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that run as high as 600,000 

people we might have lost if we had not invested in 

Saskatchewan. We would have almost nothing left outside the 

major cities. And the cities would shrink as a result, and you 

can make no mistake about that. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I ask you, even if you believe, as 

some genuinely do believe, that we should have allowed the 

massive depopulation and the downsizing of the entire 

province, even if you believe that, do you believe a different 

government would have had a lower deficit? I challenge you, 

Mr. Speaker, to look at every jurisdiction in North America, 

every jurisdiction. And I can challenge you to find one that 

does not have a major deficit and a dramatic fiscal challenge. 

None exists. 

 

The Liberals in Ontario ran up a big deficit. The NDP in 

Ontario took over and made the deficit grow like magic. And 

it's still growing, growing quite seriously -- 10 or more billion 

dollars a year. The Socreds, the Liberals, the NDP, the 

Democrats, the Republicans -- all administrations experienced 

serious deficits in the 1980s. 
 

The difference is that here in Saskatchewan we worked through 

the droughts and price wars and recession and high interest 

rates. We worked through them and at the same time we built. 

We built in this province. We did not shut the door and turn the 

key. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will not go through the list of industry 

and business and accomplishments that are on the record. 

They're there. If you want to take the time, you'll find them, all 

things that happen in conjunction with economic crisis and a 

deficit. No question about it. 



March 2, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 73 

But let's make one more comparison, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Let's make another comparison of the misleading and almost 

dishonest method the Premier and his Deputy Premier when he 

was Finance minister foisted on the people of Saskatchewan. 

Let's compare the debt that the previous administration 

incurred with the debt it inherited from the now Premier. Let's 

compare that. 

 

The leader, the Premier now, takes great joy in talking about 

the debt he left. So let's take him up in his effort. Let's take him 

on. The budget of the now Premier in 1982 projected a surplus 

of 208 million. That was his projection. Well when the PCs 

took over, the Tories took over, they found that instead of $208 

million surplus in the Consolidated Fund, they found a deficit 

of $200 million in the Consolidated Fund. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- . . . you had to sign for that then. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- We had to. Now, for a $408 million 

miscalculation. That was a $408 million miscalculation in the 

previous government's last budget. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there was over 800 million in debt in the 

form of interest-free advances to Crown corporations -- 800 

million. That's exactly the kind of thing this government is now 

writing off and adding to the debt figures and blaming it on the 

Tories to make it look like the Tories done it all. Great creative 

accounting. But don't tell anybody; don't even tell your own 

back-benchers because if they knew some of this stuff they 

wouldn't be happy campers, I don't believe. 

 

There was an additional hundred million dollars in advances to 

the Crowns that did in fact attract interest. There was a further 

130 million reported as interest-free advances to departments 

similar to the advances made to SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation) that are now being called debt. You 

made them advances. You did it. Now you're calling it debt and 

blaming it on the Tories. Very creative. Very creative. 

 

(1600) 

 

Finally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there was $3 billion of debt, 

actually held by the Crowns themselves; $3 billion in the 

Crowns hidden, hidden in the Crowns, never reported to the 

public. So let's take and get your pencil out and we'll add this 

all up. We have a 408 plus 800 plus 100 plus 130 plus 3 billion. 

Figure that out. We have 408 million plus 800 million plus 100 

million plus 130 million plus $3 billion. Total it up. That's $4.4 

billion in 1982 dollars, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I want you to 

note that I am not including the $5 billion in underfunded 

liabilities that the member for Riversdale left us with. We're not 

even talking about the $5 billion of underfunded pensions. I'm 

only including the amounts that fall into the same categories 

the NDP is now using. Very interesting. All belongs to the 

Tories -- the bad Tories. 

 

Now let's take another look at that. If we take that 4.4 billion in 

1982 dollars and translate that into 1992 dollars, it becomes 

something over $8 billion -- $8 billion. 

 

So let's subtract 8 billion from the 14 billion the NDP say 

exists today and you find that the PC (Progressive 

Conservative) administration added $6 billion to the debt -- $6 

billion. You added 8, my friend; we added 6. 

 

Now let's take a look at what we got for your 8 billion and our 

6 billion. Let's take a look at that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . 

. well I seem to strike a nerve every once in a while, Mr. 

Speaker. I believe that some of the back-benchers are getting 

pretty nervous. They don't know about it; you don't look at this. 

You won't even take and open your eyes to look at the truth. 

You won't look at the truth. Socialistic creative accounting -- 

great and wonderful. 

 

Well the member from Gravelbourg can chirp from his seat. 

He's got a good job; he's got a guaranteed income for as long as 

he wants to live and practise. Great. 

 

But we're talking about the people, my friend, that you saddled 

with an $8 billion debt and you're trying to put it onto us. It is 

not there. Check her out; check her out. I'll show you. Sounds 

like you don't like it. You don't like what you're hearing. You 

don't like what you're hearing because it's the truth. It's the 

truth. 

 

Let's go on. Let's go on with this. We're not done yet. We're not 

done yet. In other words, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP 

administration of the '70s left more debt coming out of the 

biggest boom in history than the PC administration left coming 

out of one of the worst and greatest crises in Saskatchewan's 

history. The worst. They went from the best to the worst. 

 

And here's our record, here's our record. We spent $6 billion; 

you spent 8. You were $8 billion in the hole; we're 6 billion in 

the worst years. Now let's see what we got. Let's see what we 

got for your 8 billion and what we got for our 6 billion. Let's be 

fair. Let's be fair about this. Let's take a look . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . I know you don't like it. 

 

Keep in mind, Mr. Speaker, that I have not . . . Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I have not even included the massive debts the PC 

administration had to eat from the NDP deals, the NDP deals 

that were left for us that we had to eat. 

 

I'm not ashamed of the $6 billion that we spent, Mr. Speaker. I 

mention why -- because we had a choice and we took those 

choices. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let's just take a look at land bank. Let's take a look 

at land bank, if you want to talk about the deals that you left us 

with. You went out and bought land at $600 an acre and what's 

it worth when we took over? About 3, about $300. When the 

recession hit that land was lucky, lucky to be worth $300 an 

acre. That was your deal. We had to eat that. We ate that. We 

had to eat those losses, hundreds of millions of dollars of 

write-offs just in the land bank. Just in the land bank, Mr. 

Speaker. Yes. 

 

And we can ask, what did you get? What did you get for your 

$8 billion that you left on the backs of the people of 

Saskatchewan? Well maybe I can help you. Maybe I can help 

you. We got some of the worst deals in history -- deals that 

sowed the seeds of much of our misery in the 1990s. 



74 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 1993 

Independent analysis by Arthur Andersen & Co., privately 

commissioned and independently conducted, that study 

concluded that the NDP's nationalization of the potash industry 

cost the province at least $1 billion in dead losses. Dead losses, 

Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, you want to 

question that man? But this is what he said and I think he is 

right. But you will not . . . you won't open your eyes, you won't 

open your mind, because your leader tells you different. Bury 

your head in the sand. 

 

Let me say something else. The NDP's obsession with buying 

rather than building left us with a shut-in oil industry. They left 

here. They wouldn't stay here. They left us by the hundreds. 

And the mines and wells and factories that produced losses, 

that's what you left us with. You left us with mines and mills 

and factories . . . One of your big projects left us with 

$90,000-a-day loss -- per day, every day. That's what we took 

over from your wise and wonderful friends over there. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and these are not included. These 

are not included in the analysis of the debt that I just presented 

to you. I didn't include these. But an honest assessment 

recognizes those losses and recognizes that they are the 

responsibility of the man who now sits in the Premier's chair. If 

you give us an honest assessment, you'll find that, and you'll 

have to admit that he left us with a $8 billion debt besides the 

rest of it. 

 

Now let's take another look. What did you get for our $6 billion 

that we spent of your money? The debt that we created -- what 

did you get for that? Okay, was that fair? Well I told you what 

we got for your 8 billion. Is it fair for you to listen to what I tell 

you about what we got for our $6 billion debt? That's fair. 

 

I'll tell you what we got. We got a new Wascana Rehabilitation 

Centre; we got a new agricultural college; we got revitalized 

hospitals and schools, an infrastructure worth fully, easily $6 

billion. No question that it was worth $6 billion. We got a 

fertilizer plant; we got a bacon plant; we got a cable factory; 

we got a fine paper mill. And remember when I talk about a 

fine paper mill, it's a fine paper mill, but it also makes fine 

paper. The only one in Canada. 

 

We got a pulp plant. We got a pulp plant; we got two heavy oil 

upgraders; we got a completely digital telephone system and 

we ended party lines. People have got individual lines, paid for 

out of the $6 billion debt. We got a natural gas distribution 

that's throughout the province and we now have a thriving 

natural gas industry. That's what we got. That's what we got out 

of the $6 billion that we overspent compared to what you got 

out of the $8 billion that you overspent. We got Crown Life. 

We got new uranium mines. We got a turbine factory and a 

thriving high-tech industry. We got that, all of that. 

 

No, here's some more out of our $6 billion debt. We got two 

new hydroelectric power plants; we got a major water 

management project; and we got a great expansion of irrigation 

-- all. We also got 52 rural service centres. We got 

decentralization of offices to Moose Jaw, Melville, Kamsack, 

and Kindersley. We got a very good 

deal many, many times the $6 billion. Okay. We got six of 

them. 

 

And on top of that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we continue to pay the 

interest. We're paying the interest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on the 

$8 billion debt that you left. Yes, we paid that. And we saw the 

economy grow at the best of times . . . (inaudible interjection) . 

. . Okay. All you got to do is come and look it up. Go and look 

it up. You'll find it. You'll find it. You're just afraid to look it 

up. It's the truth and you can't stand the truth. You won't listen 

to the truth. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we also managed to save thousands 

of homes and farms. We didn't save them all. We couldn't save 

them all. But we really tried; we really tried hard. We cared, 

Mr. Speaker, and we tried. 

 

So when you talk about the deficit, that's fair. But let's be fair, 

be objective, and mark the apples with the apples and the 

oranges with the oranges, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government has distorted and 

deceived and manipulated so that the people will feel defeated, 

and they can proceed on an agenda of destruction and despair. 

Divide, conquer -- it's true socialist thinking. Divide them, 

destroy them, drive them into despair, and then you conquer 

them. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, they continue to make these excuses, 

distort the truth, and to justify. Why do they do that? To justify 

the massive tax grabs and the unjustified choices that they're 

making, that's why they're doing it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you this, that the way to obtain 

recovery in this province is not to drive people into this 

complete state of despair, hopelessness, that the NDP has 

embarked upon. I tell you that this government has choices and 

it knows it. This government can reduce the deficit and create a 

plan to take down the debt gradually, responsibly, and without 

panic. It will not be done by increasing taxes, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker; it will not be done by abandoning farmers, and it will 

not be done by shutting down half the communities of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

It can be and it must be done by thoughtful, well-targeted 

spending cuts. It can and must be done by structurally changing 

the way we fund and deliver certain programs and policies. 

And we have no quarrel with that. It can and must be done by 

building a partnership with the people, not by mounting an 

attack upon them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

Mr. Speaker, in my heart I feel a fear of the people of this 

province. The sense of caring has utterly deserted the members 

opposite; they do not care. They show no sign of caring; they 

show no sign of compassion -- no sign of compassion. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, they are instead obsessed with their 

political agenda, the prime element of which consists of 

blaming the previous administration and hoping that despair 

will carry them to yet another conquest. I say to you, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, this is a government elected on deception and 

feeding on despair. It is a government with no plan other than 

blame and avoidance -- blame the other guy. If you can't blame 

the Tories in Saskatchewan, 



March 2, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 75 

blame the Tories in Ottawa. 

 

Yes, everybody's out of step but my Johnny. Everybody else is 

out of step but you. You're the only one that's in step. Yes, yes. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What did the voters say? 

 

Mr. Britton: -- What do the voters say? Well I'll tell you what 

the voters are saying; you know what the voters are saying. 

What are the voters saying? Well, well. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I suggest to you that this government was 

elected on deception. And that is where the hurt is. The people 

of the province can tell you very clearly that that is the worst 

deception that has ever been portrayed in the province of 

Saskatchewan. They have shirked their responsibility and they 

have given up on the families of this province. Mr. Speaker, I 

sincerely believe that if they're not stopped there will be 

precious little to build on. 

 

(1615) 

 

Obviously, Mr. Speaker, any member of this Assembly with a 

shred of hope left, with a single strain of faith in the future of 

our people, any member who believes that we have a right to a 

future, must vote against this throne speech. I do believe in the 

people, Mr. Speaker. I have faith in our people. 

 

But I have to say, I have to say this. This is the weakest throne 

speech that I have had the misfortune in having to debate. A 

throne speech is supposed to encourage people. This does not 

encourage people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this one-term government that we have has sown 

the seeds of its own destruction, in my opinion. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I will not be supporting this throne speech. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is my 

privilege to rise today and speak in response to the Speech 

from the Throne. And I wish to acknowledge the excellent 

speeches of my colleagues, the member from Cut 

Knife-Lloydminster and the member from Kelsey-Tisdale. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- I also want to apologize to my mom, who had 

to sit and wait through the hon. member from Wilkie, to hear 

my speech. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'm focusing my comments today on the 

process of change and restructuring. I'm also going to spend 

some time talking about choices. 

 

I met with a constituent today who wanted to discuss mental 

health services. And if I may loosely quote her, she said: we 

just spent nine years dealing with a government that was 

unwilling to deal with these issues, and now that we have a 

government that is interested and concerned about these 

problems, we have no money. However 

there is still many things we can do. And I think she's right. 

 

While we have to be aware of financial limitations, we have to 

pull together to talk about the things we can do and to talk 

about how we can support each other in this process. 

 

As we are increasingly confronted by the impacts of 

restructuring, we have to examine critically what the global and 

national restructuring means to the provinces of Canada and the 

impacts this restructuring has had on the province of 

Saskatchewan which resulted in the choices that were made 

and presented in the throne speech. 

 

First I want to briefly revisit how we got to this point. People 

who have more history in the political process have told me 

that Tory governments create debt. Conservative members who 

are able to manage their own affairs seem to go wild when they 

get elected and get their hand in the public cookie jar. When 

the jar is empty and the grocery bills need to be paid, they take 

no responsibility and they threaten to move elsewhere. 

 

And I want to say that denial ain't merely a river in Egypt. It 

would be very refreshing if even once the opposition would 

acknowledge their responsibility for the situation the province 

is in -- a government that spent 6 per cent a year more than 

they earned in revenue, resulting in the need to borrow that 6 

per cent a year. 

 

The $15 billion debt will take so long to pay off that our 

children's grandchildren will have to pay this debt. Which one 

of us in this room would borrow money that our children's 

grandchildren would still have to be paying back? I'll refer the 

opposition, particularly the member from Wilkie, to read The 

Globe and Mail article that particularly addresses their legacy 

of debt. 

 

I feel compelled to remind the public of how the previous 

government mismanaged and wasted our resources, thereby 

critically limiting our choices. And in the context of limited 

choices, I want to outline the role the federal government plays 

in the process. Oh just a second here. I'm just going to have to 

grab a note. I apologize, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The federal government plays two particularly critical roles in 

our lives. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- The only one listening is your mother. 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- On the one hand . . . I doubt that. On the one 

hand it sets the policies for universal programs in Canada and 

holds the strings on such critical financial instruments as 

equalization payments and established programs financing. 

And on the other hand, they sit at the negotiating table for all 

international agreements and set financial policy for Canada. 

This would be a lot of power in the hands of a wise and caring 

government, but it's been far too much power in the hands of an 

arrogant and self-serving government that owes its allegiance 

primarily to multinational corporations and major financial 

institutions. 



76 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 1993 

As a member of the Saskatchewan provincial government 

caucus, I've become painfully aware of the extent to which 

many progressive actions are effectively blocked by structural 

changes introduced by the federal Tories. These federal 

policies have created a wall, a wall that the Tories have not 

constructed alone. Liberal governments have added their bricks 

to the wall with measures such as Trudeau's removal of the 

inheritance tax. 

 

In Saskatchewan we've experienced a serious revenue loss in 

three federally related areas. A total of 50 million was lost in 

transfer payments under EPF, the established program 

financing, and a Statistics Canada study attributes these 

reductions not to increased social spending but to reduced taxes 

on wealth over the past 10 years -- tax policies of Tories. 

 

We've lost 30 to 40 million in sales and income tax revenues 

partly attributable to declining economies but also related to the 

GST (goods and services tax) and increasingly unfair tax 

structures that are all set at the federal level. Saskatchewan has 

little ability to replace these revenues on our smaller tax base. 

 

Our farmers will experience nothing but further pain as the 

North American Free Trade Agreement continues to undermine 

mechanisms such as the Canadian Wheat Board and as the 

federal government tries to push through changes in the Crow 

benefit, again related to free trade regulations and 

interpretations. The structure of equalization payments has 

created a welfare trap for poor provinces where economic 

growth is not rewarded but instead clawed back. 

 

We've seen changes to fundamental programs such as family 

allowance, pensions, and student loans, that for all essential 

purposes have destroyed the notion of universality. And the 

latest changes to unemployment insurance have me wondering 

if Mulroney should be denied his severance package, seeing as 

he voluntarily resigned. 

 

Even our Crown corporations such as SaskTel are under attack 

with changes introduced by the CRTC (Canadian 

Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission) to 

foster so-called competition. And a recent last straw has been 

the federal drug patent legislation, all of which undermined our 

prescription drug plan and dramatically increased drug costs in 

Canada. 

 

There's no chance that these conditions will improve 

substantially until governments are truly the representatives of 

the public and do not owe their allegiance to multinationals and 

the banks. By definition, this cannot be Liberal or Tory 

governments. 

 

The provinces of Canada and Canadians are not immune from 

the pressures of the IMF (International Monetary Fund) and the 

World Bank. Leaked government documents reveal that the 

IMF -- you listen up -- has already played a role in Canadian 

fiscal and monetary policy. Moving from structural adjustment 

programs to free trade has been the next logical step in 

rewriting the rules of the global economy. 

 

Under free trade the influence of national governments 

and other democratic institutions are considerably reduced. I 

want to bring to your attention just for a moment an article that 

was recently in the Leader-Post. It says: a dollar likely to face 

an uncertain future. And this is an article where the financial 

analysts and the people who run the stock markets are trying to 

convince us that unless we vote for Kim Campbell that they'll 

withdraw their support from Canada. This is a form of 

economic terrorism that is just unacceptable for people whose 

role is to look after markets. The role of governments is to look 

after the public interest, not the private interest. They have their 

own mechanisms for that. 

 

Moving from structural adjustment programs to free trade is 

rewriting the rules of the global economy. Transnational 

corporations have now become the driving economic force and 

they are democratically responsible to no one. 

 

At times in the history of Canada this influence has been more 

benign, but during the past 10 years under the heavy hand of 

Tories there's been an intentional shift of power and privilege 

to the wealthy and to multinational corporations, which has 

accompanied the systematic undermining of our democratic 

institutions and brought us to the sad state that we're in, as well 

as the attack on Canadian cultural institutions. 

 

I just wanted to make those points because this has been a very 

conscious restructuring that's taken place . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . No, that was from The Globe and Mail, the 

Leader-Post, and other radical documents. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we don't want that kind of restructuring, 

then what kind do we want? What kind does our government 

support? And how will that affect the choices that we make? 

Our government believes that restructuring would increase 

fairness amongst citizens and equalize opportunities. And I 

want to give you a few examples. 

 

A recent press release talked about meeting the needs of school 

children, which is part of the child action plan. In an effort to 

meet more than just the educational needs of school children, a 

government-wide initiative has been launched to explore new 

ways of delivering services to school age children and their 

families. The program is called children first: coordinating 

community action. 

 

Under this program, it's designed around the realization that 

schools and teachers are being called upon to meet more than 

just educational needs of our children. Many children have 

difficulty in learning due to health and nutrition, family 

violence, neglect, substance abuse, and illiteracy. 

 

An integrated approach to delivering service will allow for 

better coordination of facilities in community services. And an 

important part here as well, no new money has been provided. 

The government is committed to realigning services to best 

meet the needs of children and their family. And educational 

needs will be best met if the children's other needs are met as 

well, as an example of making choices even within the fiscal 

reality. 

 

The throne speech mentions other parts of the new child 



March 2, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 77 

action plan. As a member of the coalition against racism, I 

requested some information from the Minister of Education on 

what we're able to do to ensure harmonious racial relations in 

the future of our province. I was very pleased with the 

minister's response and I'll share it later with the hon. members. 

 

The Saskatchewan Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat as a 

key element in their mandate is to coordinate a government 

strategy around a joint proactive approach to addressing 

racism, discrimination, and prejudice through cross-cultural 

management and education. And some practical things that are 

happening in terms of staffing, we're hiring more Indian and 

Metis people in recognition of the fact that they are 

under-represented in our workforce. The department also plans 

to deliver cross-cultural training to its entire staff. 

 

The department has obtained an exemption from the 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission. It'll permit school 

divisions who are involved in specific programs such as 

community schools, Indian and Metis education development, 

and the Joe Duquette High School to target hiring aboriginal 

people. And as well, the department is prepared to assist 

schools in developing education equity plans. 

 

Saskatchewan Education recognizes its responsibility to teach 

children about bias and to promote anti-racist education. Very 

pleased with this answer. It was a little more detailed but I'll be 

passing it along to the people in the community who are 

concerned to make sure that we are a harmonious society. 

 

In the previous budget we started the process of equalizing 

income benefits and responsibilities. For example, a 15 per cent 

high income surtax was placed on those who can afford to pay 

more and take more responsibility for our programs in 

Saskatchewan. Benefits were increased for those on assistance 

and persons on minimum wage. 

 

This throne speech indicates an increasing targeting of our 

resources to children and families. This is also the first throne 

speech in a long time that has had a substantial recognition for 

the needs of the North. Mr. Speaker, as the throne speech says, 

these initiatives strengthen the framework for change by 

improving fairness, health, and safety in our communities. 

 

As I start to wind down, I want to discuss whose responsibility 

it is to proceed with restructuring and to create the changes 

needed. I remember a phrase I saw at the beginning of a 

training film a few years ago. It said, if we always do what 

we've always done, we'll always get what we've always gotten. 

It's a little bit hard to digest but I think it has some deep 

meaning. I know that it would be deeper than some of our hon. 

members in the opposition but we'll talk it over after. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- My experience comes primarily from my 

years in non-profit organizations. The old way of funding 

community organizations was for federal and provincial 

governments to provide grants. Very often the 

federal grants were start-up grants. And these grants recognized 

a legitimate need for services, often providing three years of 

seed money to become self-supporting. In all cases the 

programs fell back on provincial and municipal governments 

and often created unsustainable burdens on their treasuries. 

 

(1630) 

 

I also found that programs often were not integrated and tended 

to duplicate managerial and administrative effort. Well I 

believe those days are over. Groups such as the Regina 

coalition of human service agencies are asking to work closely 

in cooperation with government to integrate social policy 

planning and program strategy for Saskatchewan. 

 

The government embraces this offer and will be working with 

the coalition and other social and health care groups to 

restructure service delivery in Saskatchewan. We believe, as 

they do, that a partnership in planning will better enable 

governments and communities to coordinate, access, and utilize 

available resources to support social well-being. 

 

This is the kind of restructuring we support -- restructuring 

based on collaboration and cooperation; a way for government 

and communities to work together to deal with human resource 

problems in the context of current fiscal realities. 

 

I want to close by discussing where some of the responsibilities 

lie for increasing costs in government. I'm going to talk about a 

program that is near and dear to all of us in Canada -- our 

health programs. 

 

In the area of the drug plan our costs have been increasing by 8 

per cent a year. Why has that been? Four per cent has been due 

to cost shifts and 4 per cent due to changing therapies. 

 

I want to give you an example. Recently a member of my 

family became a diabetic, and I'm going to do a little show and 

tell here. This is a little plastic strip that diabetics have to use to 

test whether they're well or not. When you're a new diabetic 

you use sometimes six of these a day. I think once you become 

a more stabilized diabetic, you might use maybe six to ten a 

week. It depends on your situation. But these little strips, little 

plastic strip, are $1 each. 

 

Now I ask myself, when we're looking at whose responsibility 

it is to deal with the fact that these strips are $1 each, you can 

say that government should pay the full cost of that. But on the 

other hand, governments cannot allow themselves to be gouged 

by drug companies who cannot produce a little plastic strip for 

under a dollar a piece. I think it's time that people in Canada 

questioned why our drugs are so expensive, and why people 

have to pay for something that is obviously used on a massive 

quantity basis and thereby should be subject to some cost 

discount. 

 

And I also ask, whose responsibility is it? Do these companies 

only have a responsibility to make profits off of health care, or 

do they have, in the case of some of 



78 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 1993 

these critical diseases, some responsibility to sell some of their 

products at cost? 

 

So I just put that before you in this legislature, and before the 

citizens, that we can't always turn our attention to government 

on these things, because government doesn't manufacture these 

things, they buy them from somebody else who does. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. Order, order. I just want to 

remind the member -- I'm sure she's not aware of it, but no 

matter how insignificant the exhibit may be, you may not bring 

in an exhibit in this House while you are speaking and use it in 

your speeches. So I just remind members of that. 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- I wasn't aware of that, Mr. Speaker. Thank 

you very much. 

 

Now I want to talk a little bit about the role of the federal 

government, which is a different kind of show and tell. Bill 

C-91 alone is going to add 5 million to the drug bill in 

Saskatchewan, and this is for no extra service and no 

improvement in service. It'll also create a problem because 

there's an average of 50 per cent difference in the cost of 

generic drugs and brand-name drugs. So when we examine 

who is responsible and discuss what can be done, we need to 

look at the role of the federal government in creating the 

structural pressures that are afflicting governments across 

Canada and limiting the choices available to provinces like 

Saskatchewan with a traditionally small population and tax 

base. 

 

When the previous government left office, they left many 

friends with fat pockets in a province filled with unmet needs. 

And when our government leaves office it will be after vastly 

improving the fairness, health, and safety for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as outlined in the throne speech, we will be 

making the right choices and will not give the opposition any 

satisfaction for having left us with this mess. Instead we will 

rejoice in what we can accomplish by working together. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand proudly as 

well, as the member from Meadow Lake, to enter the debate on 

the Speech from the Throne, delivered on February 25 by Her 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor, Sylvia Fedoruk. 

 

I want to compliment the mover of the throne speech, the 

member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster, on the fine job that she 

did; and also too, to the seconder, the member from 

Kelsey-Tisdale, on the very fine job that he did. 

 

To the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster, who made the 

comments about the two of the last three individuals who 

moved the throne speech being female, I came across this little 

quote by Charlotte Whitton that I thought you might enjoy. I 

read this quote with apologies to any of my male colleagues 

here today who might take offence to this: whatever women do 

they must do twice as well as men to be thought half as good. 

Luckily this is not 

difficult. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, both of the previous female movers of the 

throne speech did every bit as well as the lone male. I know 

because I was the lone male. I also know the tremendous 

honour it was for me to be asked by the Premier to move the 

throne speech. 

 

I certainly want to compliment you too, Mr. Speaker. I believe 

you showed real courage and leadership in the last session, and 

I admire that. Rumours have it that you showed leadership on 

the tennis court as well. To this point, Mr. Speaker, I'll place 

my confidence in the former rather than the latter. 

 

I have every confidence that yourself, Mr. Speaker, and the 

Deputy Speaker will continue to provide fairness and 

leadership in this session. So good luck and best wishes to both 

of you. 

 

The throne speech, Mr. Speaker, sets out the tone for the 

upcoming session. Last year we set a new direction for 

Saskatchewan -- a new direction both economically and 

socially. I believe this year's throne speech reaffirms that new 

direction. It continues to charter a course to some hope of 

financial freedom. The throne speech continues to outline our 

government's plans for the much-needed renewal of 

Saskatchewan's economy which is already taking place. 

 

Our government believes, Mr. Speaker, that the most urgent 

challenges in rebuilding Saskatchewan is to put our financial 

house in order. We cannot run a government in a manner that is 

inconsistent with the way the average family would run their 

own affairs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Our government is prepared to make the hard political choices 

today. I think people will respect a government that's open and 

honest and willing to tackle our problems. Our government has 

delivered on its promise of open and honest government and is 

working hard to eliminate the waste and mismanagement at all 

levels of government. The people of Saskatchewan deserve 

nothing less, Mr. Speaker, from the government committed to 

earning the public's respect each and every day. 

 

If Saskatchewan continues to run a high deficit, Mr. Speaker, 

our children's future will be in jeopardy. The deficit simply 

must be reduced for our province to have a healthy economy. 

Better services and opportunities in the future are needed as 

well. With Saskatchewan's debt load the highest of any 

province in Canada, we simply, Mr. Speaker, have to act now 

to reduce the deficit or we risk financial disaster. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, this brings me to a point I've wanted 

to raise for some time. The members opposite always say, quit 

talking about the deficit; get on with solving the problem. This 

reminds me, Mr. Speaker, of the years I worked in the credit 

union. When someone across the desk from me was in dire 

financial shape, they wanted to talk about everything, Mr. 

Speaker, except what the problem was. They would talk about 

the weather, their children, their children's children, the 

chickens, and the 



March 2, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 79 

fishing trips they were just on, but they wouldn't want to talk 

about what really needed to be talked about, their financial 

problems. 

 

To the members opposite I say, Mr. Speaker, I am sorry, 

gentlemen, but it takes time . . . but it's time we started to deal 

with the fiscal reality we are in. We have to start dealing with 

the problem that exists. No longer can we bury our heads in the 

sand. The time for action is now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Unfortunately every single decision we make 

has to be based on whether or not we can even get the money 

to do what we want to do. Our decisions are no longer based 

solely on what may be good for the province or the people of 

Saskatchewan. Thanks to the many years of irresponsible 

spending, this government is now faced with the tough 

decisions that have to be made. 

 

I came across a quote, Mr. Speaker, by Dale Carnegie that I 

thought very appropriate here, Mr. Speaker. In the face of 

much criticism, Mr. Carnegie says: any fool can criticize, 

condemn, and complain, and most do. 

 

Within a short time our government will present a budget that 

will demonstrate our continued commitment to control 

government spending. This is evidenced by Nesbitt Thomson's 

report which says: Saskatchewan is the only province in 

Canada that has made substantial progress in getting their 

financial house in order. My compliments, Mr. Speaker, to the 

Premier and his cabinet for having the courage to make these 

tough decisions in the face of enormous pressure from 

individuals who would have us carry on with uncontrolled 

spending. 

 

My compliments, Mr. Speaker, to the good people of the 

Meadow Lake constituency who understand what needs to be 

done. I don't know how many times I've heard people tell me, 

Mr. Speaker. What they say is: I don't like what you're doing, 

but I know that it needs to be done. 

 

While there is an urgent need for financial restraint, we also 

understand the need for fairness and compassion. There are 

many people, Mr. Speaker, in my constituency who do very 

well, but there also many, Mr. Speaker, who are very 

vulnerable and need the protection this government is prepared 

to give them. Our government is committed to its continued 

attack on poverty and other social problems that plague our 

province. I applaud the Minister of Social Services for her 

efforts in that respect. Again, Mr. Speaker, I have many 

constituents who need that protection and help. 

 

Another important step toward revitalizing Saskatchewan is our 

job-creation strategy. I believe the throne speech clearly lays 

out our agenda. I quote: 

 

 There is no more important dimension to . . . (our) future than 

the creation of jobs, and no more important location for those 

jobs than Saskatchewan's smaller communities. 

 

With that in mind, we are committed to the continuation of our 

Partnership for Renewal strategy. 

And two things I'm excited about, Mr. Speaker. First is to 

initiate regional economic development authorities. In Meadow 

Lake we have a strong chamber of commerce and a very 

healthy economic development committee who think that 

development and coordination of services is long overdue. 

 

Secondly, the development of new tourism partnerships is 

something that has exciting opportunities for my constituency. 

As you will know, Mr. Speaker, our area relies heavily on 

tourism dollars. And in a community that has some of the 

nicest scenery in the world, any support for tourism is welcome 

news. 

 

For too long Saskatchewan's economic development has been 

dependent on megaprojects. We must and are returning to a 

common-sense strategy that is driven by a mix of the public, 

private, and small-business sectors. 

 

Much also needs to be done to ensure long-term stability of our 

agricultural producers. In light of the crisis our farmers are in 

and in light of the crisis the Alberta and Manitoba governments 

now find their gross revenue insurance plans, I believe this 

government has vision. The agricultural problems must be 

solved with assistance from Ottawa. It is with that in mind that 

we have put out the paper "Forging Partnerships in 

Agriculture" that sets forth our proposals to achieve a 

commercially viable, self-sufficient, and sustainable 

agricultural industry. The new Farm Support Review 

Committee will help Saskatchewan develop new safety nets. 

With representation from producers across Saskatchewan, I 

believe that we are on the right road. 

 

It is apparent by the reaction from the other provinces that they 

too are finally realizing the stark reality that a very limited 

number of taxpayers, Mr. Speaker, can no longer fund what 

should be nationally funded. 

 

I also at this time, Mr. Speaker, want to applaud the banks and 

especially my old colleagues in the credit union system for 

having the vision in their support of the new six-year leaseback 

program. I think at a time when farmers are having so much 

difficulty and hurting the way they are, it makes good common 

sense for these financial institutions to join in and help us. In 

the end we will all benefit from this cooperation. 

 

Another area of the throne speech I want to touch on very 

briefly is that of education. Our government is committed, Mr. 

Speaker, to building a high-quality educational system that 

responds to the province's social and economic needs. It is with 

these many needs in mind that the Minister of Education 

announced a government-wide initiative to explore new ways 

of delivering services in order to better meet the needs of 

school-age children and their families. 

 

This initiative, called children first: coordinating community 

action, will help schools and other agencies work together to 

provide various services which meet the basic needs of students 

and their families. I am very proud, Mr. Speaker, that the 

school division of Meadow Lake is one of the pilot sites in this 

initiative. 



80 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 1993 

(1645) 

 

I have long believed that educators in our area are some of the 

best, and the fact that Meadow Lake has been selected as a 

pilot site, Mr. Speaker, proves it. Under Children First, projects 

based on locally identified needs are jointly developed by the 

community with a number of partners, including government 

departments, non-government organizations, and school 

divisions. 

 

Within health care, Mr. Speaker, I think it is no accident that 

the new administration in the United States is looking to 

Canada's health care system as they consider major health 

reform. I think this is a real tribute to Canada and especially to 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, where medicare was pioneered. 

 

We are moving forward, Mr. Speaker, toward a reformed 

health care system with emphasis on community involvement 

and control. We are introducing legislation to encourage the 

creation of new health districts. We continue to promote the 

coordination and integration of health services within our 

communities. 

 

To the many people involved in this process in the constituency 

of Meadow Lake and those involved on the health planning 

district committees, I want to give my greatest compliments. 

They are working very hard on a task that needs to be done. No 

more bucks spent on useless mortar and debt, but finally, Mr. 

Speaker, some vision and planning. 

 

Another key to creating a new era of hope and optimism in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is to restore the public's trust in 

the political system and politicians. I am pleased and honoured 

to be a part of a government that has returned to honest, open, 

and accountable government. 

 

The Financial Management Review Commission made 

numerous recommendations that would give the public a better 

accounting of where and how government spends its money. 

Every single recommendation has been dealt with to one 

degree or another, Mr. Speaker, every single one. That's 

something that I'm proud of. As a member of the Public 

Accounts Committee, there is no doubt that the role of the 

Provincial Auditor has been strengthened as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As recently as just a few hours ago, Mr. Speaker, our 

government introduced a Bill respecting the conduct of 

members of the Legislative Assembly and members of the 

Executive Council. We said we would do it and we did it. In a 

time when the public is very cynical and mistrusting of its 

elected officials, I believe this is very timely. I am sure that all 

members, including those members opposite, Mr. Speaker, do 

their best. We can and should continue to improve our 

accountability to the public. 

 

I was amazed, Mr. Speaker, to find that within a few short 

weeks of being elected, I had somehow gone from a reasonably 

well-respected person in our community to a lying, cheating, 

no-good so-and-so. Well I don't know about the rest of the 

good members here, Mr. Speaker, but if that, indeed, is the 

public's perception of what happens to ordinary people when 

we get elected, it needs to change. 

I applaud the Minister of Justice for the introduction of this Bill 

and encourage all members to work towards continued 

improvements in this area. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Finally I want to say a few words, Mr. 

Speaker, about Saskatchewan's aboriginal communities and 

some of the initiatives our government have taken, and how 

they apply to my Indian and Metis friends from Meadow Lake. 

 

Saskatchewan continues to take a lead with respect to treaty 

land entitlements. There will be, I suspect, Mr. Speaker, some 

real changes taking place in the constituency of Meadow Lake 

when all the negotiations relating to land entitlement are 

complete. 

 

I want to commend the affected reserves, chiefs of council, and 

council members themselves, Mr. Speaker, for their 

understanding in wanting to satisfy any and all third-party 

interests. 

 

I was just one short week ago, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatoon 

where the president of the Metis Society of Saskatchewan, 

Gerald Morin, the Hon. Joe Clark on behalf of the federal 

government, and our Minister of Justice on behalf of the 

province of Saskatchewan, signed a tripartite agreement that 

sets out the basic framework for how the Metis community will 

begin to control their own destinies. It will promote the right of 

the Metis people of Saskatchewan to self-determination and 

self-reliance. 

 

I'm not sure who said it, Mr. Speaker, but I think it was Marie 

Curie who said that one never notices what has been done; one 

can only see what remains to be done. It is with that in mind, 

Mr. Speaker, that our most valuable asset, the people of 

Saskatchewan, take on with us, the Government of 

Saskatchewan, what remains yet to be done. 

 

Saskatchewan people are resourceful, energetic, and hard 

working. They have proven in the past, Mr. Speaker, that 

working through a real sense of community we can secure a 

bright and prosperous future. Together on this journey of 

renewal we will unlock opportunity and create a future where 

all Saskatchewan people can be proud. It is on all of this, Mr. 

Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan will judge us. Thank 

you very much. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it being near 5 o'clock, I beg leave to adjourn 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:51 p.m. 

 

 



March 2, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 81 

CORRIGENDUM 

 

On page 44 of Hansard No. 3A Monday, March 1, 1993, 2 

p.m., right-hand column paragraph 5, the name Hon. Mr. 

Lingenfelter should read Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski. 

 

We apologize for any inconvenience this may have caused. 

 

 


