


















































Hansard: May 19, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1821 

 May 19, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, it's my pleasure to introduce to you and through you 

to all members of the Assembly, 56 grade 4 students from 

Sunningdale Elementary School in Moose Jaw, who are seated 

in the west gallery today, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, these 

students have already been on a tour of the Legislative 

Assembly, and today they are accompanied by their teachers 

Mrs. Templeton and Mrs. Sudom-Young, and their chaperon 

Mrs. Engel. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you will notice that around quarter past the hour 

that they and I will quietly sneak out of here, and we will join 

together for a photo and a visit and refreshments, which I look 

forward to.  And I ask all members of the Assembly to 

welcome our visitors and guests from Sunningdale School in 

Moose Jaw. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you I'd like to introduce you to a group of grade 7 

students from the Kindersley Elizabeth School.  They are 

seated in the east gallery, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, they're 

accompanied by their teachers Dave Burkell, Lane Peterson; 

chaperons Mary Schmidt, Eleanor Whyley; and their bus driver 

is Jim Baker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'll be meeting with this group following question 

period for some questions and answering session.  As well, Mr. 

Speaker, I would ask the members of the Assembly, please join 

with me in welcoming these students here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, it's indeed a pleasure and an 

honour to introduce to you and through you to the members of 

the Assembly a visiting delegation from the People's Republic 

of China from the province of Heilongjiang from the 

Department of Agriculture and Aquaculture at Harbin. 

 

They are being hosted by Dr. Maynard Chen who visited 

Harbin last fall in order to examine the opportunities for an 

aquaculture program, and they are here to officially receive 

some fish culture materials, wall-eye eggs, in order to engage 

in a program of exchange. 

 

They are Yang Defeng, the deputy chief of the Bureau of 

Agriculture; Yang Dayu, the director of the aquaculture 

institute; and Zhang Zhihua, the assistant director of the 

Aquaculture Research Institute; and their host, Dr. Maynard 

Chen.  Welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I've left the 

best to last.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you and to all 

other members of the Assembly a group of 27 bright and lively 

young people.  They're seated in your gallery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, now there's no surprise to members of this 

Assembly that they're bright and lively because they attend Ken 

Jenkins School in the constituency of Regina Rosemont.  They 

are accompanied here today with their teacher, Mr. Wally 

Sadowsky. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like all members of the Assembly to welcome 

these fine people from Rosemont here today to this Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Government Contracting Policy 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, slowly but surely 

we've been able to drag the truth out of you and your 

government; so today we're going to try and make a little more 

progress. 

 

Mr. Premier, on Monday the Minister of Labour stood in this 

House and said that there had been no second tender call let by 

Sask Water; then it turned out there had been a second tender 

call.  Yesterday you stood in this House and insisted that there 

was no union tendering policy, but then five minutes later you 

admitted to reporters that SaskPower did have a policy like that 

for contracts of over $150,000. 

 

Mr. Premier, why don't we make it easy today and let's start 

with the truth, for a change.  What is the policy of your 

government for deciding which tenders will be open to union 

contractors and, Mr. Premier, which Crowns and departments 

have such a policy, and what is the criteria upon which 

determination is made to allow union-only contractors? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the policy which I 

articulated yesterday is the same today.  I invite the hon. 

member to take a look at Hansard and he'll see that there has 

been no change. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, whether 

you want to admit it or not, your government has adopted a 

union-only tendering process.  First you tried to hide the 

decision altogether, and now that the facts have come in, you 

refuse to say exactly what your policy is. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you tell us the reason for moving to this 

union-only contracting process?  Why, at the same time when 

your government is preaching fiscal 



1822 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1993 

restraint, why would you adopt a policy that is going to cost 

millions of extra dollars every year?  Why shouldn't contracts 

simply go to the lowest qualified bidder? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the incredibility of the 

member's questioning is exemplified again by this question 

today.  Starting out on a totally wrong assumption, the member 

then concocts a series of straw men and women, and then asks 

the government to respond to it. 

 

I simply say to the hon. member opposite, please listen and 

understand that the position of the government is the same 

today as it was yesterday.  There is no union-only policy.  Do 

you understand that?  There is no union-only policy.  Do you 

understand that?  Now if you can understand that and work a 

question on that basis, we'll try to answer as specific examples 

come up. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, maybe 

you should take the time to read some of the contracts that are 

going out from SaskTel, SaskPower, Sask Water, because that 

is exactly what they say in them.  They say consistently that 

union-only contractors will be given preference to this contract.  

That's what they say in them.  It isn't my tendering calls that are 

going out.  It's you and your government's tendering calls that 

are going out. 

 

Mr. Premier, which way is it?  Is it that there is union-only 

tendering policy with your government as the contracts that you 

have sent out say, or is there not?  Which way is it, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, this is such a 

straightforward, simple answer that the hon. member is either 

incapable and/or unwilling to understand it. 

 

The position of the government is that we seek to develop a 

policy, as I alluded to yesterday, on the basis similar to the 

1970s, where there is a dollar figure, where the bid is open to 

anybody.  Above the dollar figure there is a union preference -- 

note the word preference -- but not a union-only policy; that 

there are circumstances like there was when you were in 

government where there is only unions, like Rafferty, like 

Shand, like the upgrader -- you only had union-only -- 

circumstances of that nature. 

 

And that is a position that your government took and our 

government took.  There is no union-only policy.  Now are 

there tenders being asked where there is a union preference?  

Yes.  Does that say that that means every tender is union only?  

No. 

 

I told you that yesterday; I repeat that again today.  Surely to 

goodness you've got other more substantive matters that you 

can address in question period than 

that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Before I allow the next question, I do 

want to ask members that there is way too much interruption 

when the Premier is trying to answer.  Too much interruption. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, well 

maybe we could let the people of the province judge what it 

says in those contracts.  And I'll just read a couple of the 

paragraphs from the contracts and we can see whether or not 

they believe you when you say that there is no union-only 

preference: 

 

It is a requirement of this Contract that the contractor has a 

collective agreement(s) . . . with a trade union(s) . . . 

 

That is what that contract says.  The next one says: 

 

. . . every new Employee whose employment commences 

hereafter shall . . . apply for and maintain membership in 

the Union as a condition of his employment . . . 

 

That's what that contract says, sir.  The next one says: 

 

Effective immediately construction contracts at the 

Corporation's four major thermal power plants will be 

awarded to unionized contactors . . . 

 

Mr. Premier, there seems to be a great deal of inconsistency in 

your answers.  The contracts say union only and you say there's 

no such policy.  Please, Mr. Premier, take the time to clarify for 

us -- is it or is it not union only? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I don't think it's possible to explain it 

to this hon. member's understanding or satisfaction.  I think 

even the member from Arm River agrees with that statement. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, that it's not possible because if the hon. 

member says that we have three examples of contracts where 

there's union preference or even union only, I say okay, you've 

got three examples.  You may even have another three.  You 

may even have another three.  But to conclude from that the 

government is only contracting to unions in each and every 

case, is wrong.  And I've said that. 

 

So as I say, the assumptions are absolutely wrong.  You've 

gone over this territory yesterday.  The answers yesterday are 

the same as they are today, and the member persists.  Well I 

guess it's his right to persist. 

 

But no wonder they are third.  And when you say let the people 

judge, I want to tell you, Mr. Member, the people judged.  

October 21, 1991 they judged by giving you the biggest 

whopping in the history of Saskatchewan history.  They 

judged. 



May 19, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1823 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, yesterday 

you told media reporters that your government policy was to 

award contracts that are only over $150,000 to unionized 

contractors.  That was what the policy was yesterday.  I don't 

know, maybe it's changed today.  Will you not confirm, Mr. 

Premier, that Crown corporations are now at this very moment 

letting tenders for projects that were previously expected to 

come in at significantly under $150,000. 

 

Is it not true that you are actually applying this union monopoly 

to bids of contracts under $150,000?  Is that not true? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, if the hon. member reads 

Hansard, which I really recommend he should, the hon. 

member's got it right there. Read it, hon. member, and perhaps 

you could get the questioner on the right track. 

 

I indicated that the . . . I certainly did, if not in Hansard, in the 

press conference outside, that the unions with respect to the 

Crown corporations, Crown corporations were looking at 

developing a policy by, I think I said November, early fall; 

we're getting input.  And that's a position. 

 

You can give examples of work which is being tendered now 

where there's a union call.  I don't deny those examples.  There 

are good reasons why that happens in many circumstances.  It 

did in the case of the upgrader when you built it, good reasons 

in the case of Shand and Rafferty when you built it.  But it 

cannot be said as a consequence of that that the policy of the 

government is union only. 

 

Now you can continue this over and over and over and over 

again and I'll give you the same answers over and over and 

over again.  I don't know how it can be made more simple and 

plain and more just than that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, what is 

clear is that is exactly your policy and everyone knows it now.  

Even after confessions that we've dragged out of you in the last 

couple of days, you still insist that there's no such thing and yet 

there is. 

 

I received this morning another tender from SaskPower for 

some foundation work on the Queen Elizabeth power station in 

Saskatoon.  This one again is open to union bids only.  And the 

contractor who sent it in says that it's a fairly small contract, 

worth less than $150,000.  At least if he was allowed to bid on 

it, it would be less than $150,000.  Who knows what the cost 

might end up with your union-only policy. 

 

Mr. Premier, given what you said yesterday, why is 

this small contract, worth less than $150,000, restricted to 

union contractors only?  Why is that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I'll have to inquire 

from the Power Corporation officials as to the reason for that 

particular contract -- presumably there is a justifiable reason by 

Power Corporation -- and provide the member in due course 

with a response in this regard. 

 

What the members cannot understand, but actually they can 

understand, but what they pretend to do is to continue their 

attempt at beating up on men and women who belong to the 

trade union movement.  That's what this is all about.  That's 

what you do.  You beat them up.  You beat them up just like 

the member from . . . Where's D'Autremont from? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Souris-Cannington. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- From Souris-Cannington.  Beats up on 

French language governance. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- It was Maple Creek. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Or Maple Creek. I'm sorry.  I 

withdraw.  Maple Creek.  I apologize.  The member of Maple 

Creek.  I wouldn't imagine that the member from 

Souris-Cannington would be doing that, but certainly Maple 

Creek did this.  This is what it's all about.  This is a question of 

beating up without any factual basis. 

 

And I say to the hon. member opposite: you know why you're 

into third spot, why you're into third spot in the political 

rankings in the province of Saskatchewan?  Precisely because 

the people of Saskatchewan want you to put aside this conflict. 

 

We're building a job-creation tendering policy on cooperation, 

backing Saskatchewan workers, backing qualified 

Saskatchewan workers, union qualified Saskatchewan workers, 

non-union in those cases which are applicable.  We're applying 

a policy of fairness and we're getting consultation from 

everybody that we can. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, so far we 

can document $1 million in excess costs and estimate another 

$3 million on projects that have been brought to our attention 

just in the last few days on union-only contracts that have been 

let by your government.  So just in a few contracts that we 

know about, you are spending at least $4 million of taxpayers' 

money in a totally irrational, irresponsible fashion. 

 

The question, Mr. Premier, is: have any of your ministers, 

particularly the Minister of Health who is closing 52 hospitals 

to save $5 million, has she or any others on the front bench 

complained to you about this policy when they are cutting back 

so severely in 



1824 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1993 

their departments, when you're spending money irresponsibly 

in those kind of things? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't know about you, 

sir, but I must confess to getting a little bit feeling of 

tediousness at hearing the hon. member opposite amongst other 

matters repeating ad nauseam the same questions and me 

repeating the answers ad nauseam. 

 

But what really gets a bit -- how should I describe it -- irritable 

to me, is the hon. member from Kindersley, a member of the 

Conservative Party, getting up and telling us about fiscal 

responsibility.  Now, Mr. Speaker, from a party which brought 

this province to the abyss of bankruptcy -- $15.5 billion -- for 

this member to get up and to be preaching to anybody about 

this kind of responsibility, I tell you is the height of 

irresponsibility. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Premier, Mr. Premier, is it not true that you 

are simply more interested in paying off your political debts, 

than you are in paying off the province's debt?  Isn't that 

abundantly clear from the last few days' events?  You're 

awarding contracts to unionized contractors to pay off political 

debts.  Is that not true, sir? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the simple answer to the 

question is no, that it is not true.  No more would it be true for 

me than I suspect that the hon. member would say it's true for 

him, that he is paying off his political debts for the big 

corporations that funded his campaign, who want a union bust 

and why he's out on this level of questions.  He would say no to 

that.  And I would take his word, as I expect him to take my 

word that the answer is no. 

 

But you know, I don't understand what it is about the question 

of having contracts let on the basis that the hon. member would 

have let, only to see workers flood in from Alberta and 

Manitoba, very often without specifications being set up so that 

they get the benefit of our taxpayers' dollars in contract work 

which is one of the other side effects of what you're getting 

with respect to this questioning. 

 

How in the world this benefits the people of Saskatchewan is 

quite beyond me.  And I think again it's another example of 

why the logic track is so truncated, why the logic track is so 

inconsistent that the hon. member's questioning totally lacks 

credibility. 

 

Look, I've said to you before, I repeat again:  there is no 

union-only policy.  I don't know how many times I've said that 

yesterday and today.  We're working on a policy.  We're 

modelling after the 1970s . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, 

we are.  We're working on it.  We're working on a policy which 

is going to be a fair policy and it's modelled on the 1970s.  I 

mentioned that yesterday.  I told you about the 1970s and I told 

you what we're thinking about in 1993.  We're asking you to 

contribute in a positive way to that debate. 

Please don't do it in a negative way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, you talk 

about companies from outside Saskatchewan flooding into 

Saskatchewan to take government contracts under the previous 

administration.  And who was the contract awarded to for the 

Melfort pipeline?  Who was it? 

 

It was a company from Edmonton -- even though their bid was 

$1,024,000 higher than the contract bid from a company in 

Regina.  That's what the difference is, Mr. Premier.  It was over 

$1 million higher on that contract alone.  And at the same time, 

you have also instituted secrecy in the awarding of tenders so 

that the cost of the winning bid will no longer be released any 

more on subsequent contracts. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you explain to this House why we must -- 

you must -- now keep secret the announcement and the cost of 

the winning of the contract bids. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, again the member 

constructs an argument of straw on erroneous facts.  I don't 

know, I think it was a great American statesman, Bernard 

Baruch, who once said: every man has a right to his opinion, 

but no man has a right to be wrong in his facts. 

 

I say to the hon. member from Kindersley that he would be 

well advised, if he doesn't want to take my advice, to take 

Baruch's advice that he cannot be wrong in the facts. 

 

I believe the situation with respect to Melfort is that no award 

has been made yet, to begin with, contrary to what he says and 

then he constructs a series of questions.  Now I don't know how 

one can answer if the fundamental, base fact from which the 

question is predicated is absolutely false. 

 

I can only repeat what I've said to the member again -- we can 

do this for the remainder of the question period if you want -- 

there is no union-only contract policy in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, you don't 

have enough money in this province to keep 52 Saskatchewan 

rural hospitals open.  You don't have any money for farmers.  

You don't have any money for seniors on fixed incomes.  You 

don't have millions of dollars for anything that the previous 

administration was involved in.  Every time you axe in this 

province, you say to people: you have to make sacrifices; you 

have to continue to cut back, but we won't cut back as 

government. 

 

It seems, Mr. Premier, that you're paying off a political debt.  

That seems to be exactly what you're doing.  Mr.  



May 19, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1825 

remier, how can you ask the people of Saskatchewan to 

continue to sacrifice so much when you spend millions of 

taxpayers' dollars on projects like the ones you're going to be 

implementing shortly for union-only contracting?  Why would 

you do that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well of course, you see, the hon. 

member has a written set of questions designed to take up the 

entire 25 minutes, and the written questions don't correspond to 

the answers. 

 

The question is: why are you having a union-only policy which 

is going to -- as he would have us believe -- lead to millions of 

extra dollars?  And I've said to him right from day one, there 

isn't only a union-only policy; and if there isn't only a 

union-only policy, it doesn't follow logically that there would 

be the extra costs as the hon. member prefaces his question. 

 

So how in the world can you answer logically an illogic and 

inconsequential question?  For goodness' sakes, Mr. Member, 

please put a little purpose and sense to your questioning. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Human Rights Commission Appointment 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Minister responsible for Human Rights 

Commission.  Madam Minister, we have seen over the past 

number of weeks your highly-paid political assistants appointed 

to positions in Property Management, Crown Investments, 

SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation), 

and every other Crown corporation and government department 

possible. 

 

Will you please confirm today that you are now loading up the 

Human Rights Commission, the one entity that is supposed to 

be objective above all others, the council that is supposed to 

fight for fairness to all individuals?  Could you confirm that 

you are now appointing your NDP friends to the commission?  

Would you do that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the member in charge of 

Human Rights Commission is away at the moment.  The 

answer is, the policy of the government is to hire the most 

competent people that we can, those who qualify by way of 

open competition as they can.  We really don't care what their 

political persuasions are as long as they're competent, whether 

New Democrats or Liberals.  Why, you know, we would even a 

Conservative if we could find a competent one. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- To the Premier.  Mr. Premier, would you please 

confirm that you have appointed Nadine Hunt, the former 

president of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour and NDP 

activist, to the Human Rights 

Commission.  Could you confirm that today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- My question is: what's wrong with 

that?  Tell us what's wrong with that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Premier, you've been telling the people of 

Saskatchewan for the past 18 or 19 months that everything 

would be open, that you wouldn't just take your own political 

friends.  I think I heard you say that you just made a 

commitment that you would appoint anyone that had any 

integrity to sit on commissions. 

 

However, Mr. Premier, I would suggest that Nadine Hunt, 

having worked for the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, 

having lobbied governments, having arranged strikes and 

whatever else to promote union workers, I would suggest to 

you, Mr. Speaker, that given this close tie with unions and also 

given that most complaints through the Human Rights 

Commission are between employers and employees, I wonder 

if you can expect Mrs. Hunt to be objective and unbiased in her 

position on the Human Rights Commission.  Can you do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- You know, Mr. Speaker, this is a 

pathetic attack on a person, a woman who has been elected in a 

responsible organization, democratically elected, and served 

that organization honourably for years.  Nadine Hunt has been 

honoured by people inside Saskatchewan and outside 

Saskatchewan.  And being elected by democratic people like 

the trade union movement, the SFL (Saskatchewan Federation 

of Labour), this is nothing short -- I would say scurrilous, but 

it's really a pathetic attack. 

 

And for the hon. member to refer to that and, for example, not 

bring to the attention of the House that we appointed Mr. Dale 

Botting, for example, from the Canadian Federation of 

Independent Business to the Education Council, I believe, 

Madam Minister, and a range of appointments is out and out an 

attack based on sex and based on labour.  And I think that has 

no room, and this hon. member and this caucus should be 

ashamed of themselves for raising that kind of . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier.  Mr. 

Premier, it would seem to me that there were a lot of qualified 

people, unionized and working people across this province 

whom you could have appointed to the Human Rights 

Commission, who haven't been over the years directly involved 

lobbying governments, working against employers, to a 

position that would give them a non-biased opinion. 

 

It would seem to me, Mr. Premier, that if you wanted to appoint 

Nadine Hunt you could have given her another position.  But I 

think you should have picked someone who wouldn't carry a 

biased view into a commission such as the Human Rights 

Commission. 



1826 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1993 

Mr. Premier, I would like to hear your response to that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Look -- look, Mr. Speaker, this is, I 

mean, really, this question period, Mr. Speaker, it's up to them 

how they ask questions, as you know. You can't . . . 

 

Who was the chief executive officer of the Human Rights 

Commission under your regime?  A woman by the name of 

Terry Holizki.  Terry Holizki has actively campaigned for the 

Conservative Party; is actively campaigning right now for Kim   

_- what's her name? -- Campbell, the Conservative leader.  

Actively out there campaigning for her . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . All right, she's likely to be the next Prime 

Minister.  That's fair enough . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Well look, I momentarily forgot her name.  And if the hon. 

member would please let me finish the answer.  This is what 

you have done. 

 

So my point to you, Mr. Speaker, and to members of the House 

is, there are many qualified people in the trade union 

movement.  There are many qualified people in the business.  

And we appointed Nadine Hunt because she is available, she is 

retired as the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, she brings a 

wealth of experience.  She has been elected by her peers.  She 

is a professional and unbiased person, unlike the number of 

appointments that you had on the Human Rights Commission. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 87 -- An Act to amend The Mental Health Services 

Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Mental Health Services Act now be introduced and read 

the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 85 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Medical 

Care Insurance Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to move second reading of The Saskatchewan 

Medical Care Insurance Amendment Act, 1993. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the changes to the medical care insurance Act are 

necessary to implement government's decision to give the 

responsibility and funding for laboratory services to the district 

health boards in Regina, Saskatoon, and Prince Albert.  The 

elimination of the fee-for-service funding to commercial 

laboratories coincides with this transfer 

of responsibility to the district boards. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the boards will decide how best to ensure that 

cost-effective, quality laboratory services are delivered in their 

districts.  The boards are expected to maximize the use of 

public laboratories for processing.  The role that the private 

sector will play in the provision of laboratory services will be 

left to the health boards in each district to decide.  Any services 

which private laboratories continue to provide in a health 

district will be paid through a contract with the board. 

 

Mr. Speaker, by placing the responsibility for laboratory 

services under a single management structure, there is greater 

opportunity to address duplicate testing and inappropriate 

testing, and economies of scale can be gained by combining 

processing of tests in fewer locations. 

 

Overall policy coordination and direction will be provided by a 

central management unit in the Department of Health and the 

department will continue to manage the provincial laboratory 

as a specialized reference and public health laboratory. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this decision supports our health reform initiative 

as it will result in better integration and coordination of 

services, and it is in keeping with this government's 

commitment to publicly funded and publicly administered 

health services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this decision was reached after much deliberation.  

Last summer we established an independent panel to study the 

delivery of laboratory services in Saskatchewan and to advise 

government of how these could be delivered more effectively 

and efficiently.  The panel, chaired by Dr. Kilshaw, submitted 

its report in October.  It was then circulated to key stakeholders 

for feedback on the recommendations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our decisions were based both on the report and 

on the further feedback we received to the report.  We concur 

with Dr. Kilshaw's report findings in saying that there are 

significant savings to be gained by placing laboratory services 

under a single management structure.  We agree with the 

finding that a central government management unit is needed to 

provide overall policy direction.  We agree with the finding that 

says established health boards should be responsible for lab 

services.  And also, we agree with the finding that 

fee-for-service billings for private labs should be eliminated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, laboratory services will continue to be an insured 

service in Saskatchewan.  Monies for the provision of these 

services will flow to the health boards as it does for other 

health services such as home care and hospital care.  

Laboratory services will continue to be an insured service in 

that they will be fully funded by the public purse.  The 

provision of laboratory services will be spelled out in our 

funding agreements with the district health boards. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's important also to note there will be 



May 19, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1827 

no change to out-of-province and out-of-country laboratory 

services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has been faced with many 

difficult decisions this year because of the need for greater 

fiscal restraint.  In order to preserve our publicly funded health 

system, we need to look at ways to provide services more 

effectively and efficiently. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this decision and now the legislation effectively 

achieves that.  Therefore I hereby move second reading of The 

Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Amendment Act, 1993. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, as I was listening to the minister, it 

would appear to me that the Act that is presently been 

introduced is an Act to address some of the concerns regarding 

laboratory services in Saskatchewan and a number of fees that 

have been brought in.  And we're well aware of the debate that 

has taken place over the past, I believe, two or three months 

regarding laboratory services and the private lab services and 

the public lab services. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I don't think there's anyone that would 

criticize the fact or suggest that there isn't room or hasn't been 

room for some of the private labs to work.  We just want to 

reiterate the fact that over the past few years, Mr. Speaker, 

we've seen a number of jobs have been made available in the 

province of Saskatchewan and those jobs have now 

disappeared as the private labs have cut back on the services 

because of the decision made by the government to give more 

of the services again to the public labs. 

 

And certainly individuals in the public . . . working in the 

public labs have always argued that they could provide the 

service more cost effectively.  And the argument they have 

used is based solely on the cost per patient.  But they have 

failed to inform the public of the fact that the public in general 

have already paid for the facilities and the equipment, whereas 

the private labs must recoup that cost.  So in actuality, in 

reality, the private labs are doing the service and have been 

doing it quite effectively. 

 

And I think what we will . . . I think, Mr. Speaker, what we will 

see as we get into the debate, Mr. Speaker, we are going to . . . 

we will bring up some of the concerns regarding the private 

labs, regarding the public labs.  And just to show the cost 

effectiveness of the two services also I think we want to raise a 

number of concerns regarding the different fee increases that 

we're seeing in the Bill as well.  And to allow for that time and 

debate to take place, Mr. Speaker, I move adjournment of 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 86 -- An Act to amend Certain Health Statutes and 

to repeal Certain Other Health Statutes 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm pleased 

now to move second reading of An Act to amend Certain 

Health Statutes and to repeal Certain 

Other Health Statutes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Act will serve several purposes.  These are to 

bring the functions of the Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug 

Abuse Commission, SADAC, into the Department of Health.  

Secondly, to add administrative provisions to The Department 

of Health Act.  Thirdly, to amend The Hospital Revenue Act.  

Fourthly, to amend The Prescription Drugs Act.  And fifthly, 

Mr. Speaker, to repeal two redundant Acts, The Saskatchewan 

Health Insurance Act and The Tuberculosis Sanatoria and 

Hospitals Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the alternative to this Bill would have been to 

introduce five separate Bills to accomplish the changes that I've 

outlined.  And so they are being brought together in this 

omnibus Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse 

Commission, which I'll refer to as SADAC in my remarks, has 

over the years provided a broad range of prevention, research, 

education, and recovery service since it was first established.  

SADAC, Mr. Speaker, was established in 1968 for two 

fundamental reasons.  One was to focus public attention on the 

need to develop adequate addiction treatment services, and the 

second reason was to gain public support for the view that 

alcohol and drug addiction are illnesses no different from 

others and require the same care and compassionate treatment 

by the health care system.  Mr. Speaker, we believe that today 

these goals have been achieved.  Alcohol and drug addiction 

are now widely accepted and understood as illnesses.  And 

prevention and treatment services have been developed across 

our province and enjoy broad public support. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the years SADAC has reported to this, the 

Legislative Assembly, through the Minister of Health.  This 

connection with Health has been very important because it 

affirms the belief that alcohol and drug addiction is a health 

issue.  In addition, SADAC's budget has been administered 

through the Department of Health, and the activities of SADAC 

have been influenced by the department's policies and 

decision-making process.  This close coordination between the 

Department of Health and SADAC has been important for 

developing good public health policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as our health system in Saskatchewan goes now 

through the process of reform and rejuvenation, it is absolutely 

vital that alcohol and drug services are included in the change.  

Consumers, communities, and health professionals want more 

say in how alcohol and drug services are being funded and 

being delivered. 

 

We believe, Mr. Speaker, there are advantages now to 

integrating and coordinating alcohol and drug services with 

other health services administered directly by the Department 

of Health.  There are certainly cost efficiencies to be achieved 

by having alcohol and drug services integrated with other 

Department of Health services; however the big gains, Mr. 

Speaker, will be in the greater efficiency 



1828 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1993 

and effectiveness of service to clients, families, and 

communities across Saskatchewan. 

 

We believe that an integrated approach to program and services 

including alcohol and drug services will be more responsive, 

Mr. Speaker, to the physical, mental, and spiritual well-being of 

Saskatchewan citizens.  Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan vision 

for health is to provide services that address the needs of the 

whole person rather than just the parts, and we believe that this 

vision can be best accomplished by now unifying alcohol and 

drug services with other health services in the Department of 

Health. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the second major component of the Bill now 

before the House comprises a number of amendments to The 

Department of Health Act.  Some of those amendments, Mr. 

Speaker, are consequential to the repeal of The Alcohol and 

Drug Abuse Commission Act.  And others, Mr. Speaker, are 

administrative and housekeeping amendments only.  They do 

not reflect any change in policy. 

 

To be more specific, Mr. Speaker, there is an amendment to 

correct the section of the Act dealing with medically related 

transportation.  The reference to persons was deleted in 1986 

consequential to The Ambulance Act being passed.  This 

section will be amended to include the reference to persons 

again, and therefore to clarify existing provisions. 

 

There is also an amendment to establish more clearly the 

government's ability to charge for the provision of some 

services.  This again is a housekeeping amendment to ensure 

that certain program charges which are already in place are 

being made with the proper legislative authority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government proposes to also here amend The 

Hospital Revenue Act to allow payments of revenues from The 

Hospital Revenue Act to district health boards who will in the 

near future be responsible for the management of district 

hospitals. 

 

(1445) 

 

The Prescription Drugs Act is amended, Mr. Speaker, to make 

the legislation consistent with the original intent and current 

practice.  Current wording suggests that information about the 

drugs obtained by residents can only be released if the 

prescription drug plan has actually paid for the prescription.  

Whether or not the prescription drug plan pays for the 

prescription is really of no consequence in relation to the intent 

of this section since the intent of this section is to address the 

inappropriate use of prescription drugs. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, the government proposes with this 

legislation to repeal The Saskatchewan Health Insurance Act 

and The Tuberculosis Sanatoria and Hospitals Act.  The 

Saskatchewan Health Insurance Act was passed many years 

ago, Mr. Speaker, but was never implemented.  And The 

Tuberculosis Sanatoria and Hospitals Act has not been used 

since the closure of the last sanatorium and the transfer of 

responsibility for patients with 

tuberculosis to the Department of Health. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of An Act 

to amend Certain Health Statutes and to repeal Certain Other 

Health Statutes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, it appears that what this Bill does is 

amalgamate a number of areas into the Department of Health.  

And one area that I think of grave concern will be a concern to 

a lot of people throughout Saskatchewan is taking SADAC and 

putting it right in the department for . . . Certainly, Mr. 

Speaker, alcohol addiction is a problem that many people over 

the years have faced, and it creates a problem in our society and 

that problem is passed on to family members.  It creates 

problems in homes and families and business and work habits 

and the workplace. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, over the past number of years there's been 

quite a consultation process that has worked and been 

developing, working with communities and organizations 

trying to develop a program that would give individuals the 

ability and the access to information and services that would 

give them the strength and the character to overcome their 

alcohol addiction, or alcohol habits. 

 

And I know I've had in my constituency many people really 

raise that concern and wondering where the government is 

today.  And one of the areas that I think we'll be watching very 

closely over the next little while is what's going to happen with, 

say, the facility at Whitespruce, the Whitespruce rehab centre 

there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many . . . The individuals that have gone, the 

young family members or family members that have been 

treated there, have really talked about how it has helped them.  

And I think their areas and the number of questions regarding 

the removal of SADAC and putting it in the Department of 

Health, we want to make sure that, Mr. Speaker, it's not just 

swallowed up in the department, but that it indeed continues to 

provide an effective and efficient and supportive role and 

service to individuals all across this province, be they men or 

women or teenagers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another area that certainly is reiterated and brings out a 

concern and . . . however, there is very little that can be done 

about it right now, but it is the changes to the prescription drug 

plan.  The changes, Mr. Speaker, as many people have already 

found, are creating a major problem, and it's becoming even 

more difficult with the limited resources they have as far as 

income and trying to maintain and pay for the drugs that they 

require due to health problems beyond their control. 

 

And I know the government will argue, well there are some 

steps in place to help people on lower incomes, but there are a 

lot of individuals who are caught in a position where they're 

basically using the maximum -- I believe it's $850 per six 

months plus 35 per cent thereafter -- and that to a lot of people 

on low income or on very limited income, Mr. Speaker, creates 

a 



May 19, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1829 

problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it would seem to me that there are a number of 

areas that we should take the time to look at and review a little 

more carefully so that we can indeed when we get into 

committee have some effective and straightforward questions 

to the Minister addressing the concerns of the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Therefore at this time, Mr. Speaker, I move adjournment of 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Hours of Sitting 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave I move, 

seconded by the member for Saskatoon River Heights, that 

notwithstanding rule 3 in Rules and Procedures of the 

Assembly. . . or the procedures . . . Let me start again; it's a 

little bit noisy, and I think you're having trouble hearing me. 

 

That notwithstanding rule 3 of the Rules and Procedures 

of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan that when 

this Assembly adjourns on Friday, May 21, 1993, it do 

stand adjourned until Tuesday, May 25, 1993, at 2 p.m. 

 

I so move. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 80 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 80 -- An Act 

to amend The Tobacco Tax Act and to make certain 

Consequential Amendments resulting from the enactment 

of this Act by now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I think the other day when I spoke to 

this Act I indicated that it's just another indication of the way 

the government is moving to just quietly and subtly move to 

totally harmonize the provincial sales tax with the GST (goods 

and services tax).  However, I would suggest it's appropriate 

that the federal government be utilized since they've got the 

process in place of already collecting tax at the border, of being 

allowed to do that and working with them.  And so on that 

basis I would give the government a pat on the back with that 

comment. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, at this time I believe that we are more 

than prepared to move this into committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and 

referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 82 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Simard that Bill No. 82 -- An Act to 

amend The Change of Name Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

Originally we thought that this would go through quite 

smoothly, but we did have some concerns, and our phone has 

been ringing somewhat lately on this Bill 82, The Change of 

Name Amendment Act. 

 

And concerns are being expressed particularly with the 

changing of names of wards, the naming of children for 

example, or renaming of children who have had a split family 

where the parents have broken up, perhaps even divorced, but 

certainly where there is shared custody; and some other 

concerns that people are phoning in expressing their concerns. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, while the calls are still coming in we're 

going to get this sorted out.  And I'm not going to hold up the 

process here, Mr. Speaker.  We will let it go to committee and 

these concerns will come forward during the committee stage 

of this Bill. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 83 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Simard that Bill No. 83 -- An Act 

respecting Registered Psychiatric Nurses be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We've done a little 

bit of investigating into the impact that this Act is going to 

have, and certainly the third parties that are associated and will 

be impacted have not expressed any particular great concerns. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would move that The Registered Psychiatric 

Nurses Act be now sent to committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 84 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wiens that Bill No. 84 -- An Act to 

amend The Litter Control Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The Litter 

Control Act is an Act that affects a good number of people 

across this province, Mr. Speaker.  I've been 



1830 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1993 

contacted by a few people with some misunderstandings about 

this Bill, Mr. Speaker.  They think that The Litter Control Act 

is referring to reproduction of animals rather than the disposal 

of garbage, and we had to explain to them, Mr. Speaker, that 

this Act was not limiting the number of kittens or pups or 

piglets that an animal might have.  So perhaps the government 

should make it clear when they're bringing forward an Act, just 

what they're attempting to deal with. 

 

The Act, Mr. Speaker, I think gives the government some 

powers to go ahead with the regionalization of some of the 

waste disposal sites across this province, which is needed in 

some cases but which is not necessarily what the people want 

in all situations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The government has started up a couple of pilot projects, one 

up at Humboldt and one in the Shaunavon area to develop 

regional sites.  And this legislation, Mr. Speaker, I believe 

would give them the abilities to proceed with that type of thing 

without further consultation with the legislature. 

 

It also does one other major thing, Mr. Speaker.  It eliminates 

the environmental protection fund.  Any time now when the 

government imposes what could be called an environmental sin 

tax, this money will now revert to the Consolidated Fund rather 

than going to the protection of the environment or for 

environmental benefits. 

 

That's not to say that money will not go to those things, but this 

money will no longer be dedicated to that, but rather will go 

into general revenues for the general government's business.  

And then the government in turn will allocate back from the 

Consolidated Fund whatever it feels is appropriate. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we need to discuss this with the minister to 

find out exactly what they plan on doing on both of these 

concerns.  So we're prepared to do that, Mr. Speaker, in 

Committee of the Whole. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

(1500) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 51 -- An Act to amend The Wildlife Act 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the minister at this time to please 

introduce his official. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm pleased to introduce 

Mr. Dennis Sherratt, the director of wildlife in the Department 

of Environment and Resource Management. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, and official, Dan, could you, 

just to set the stage for the ensuing discussion, could you set 

the record straight in terms of the bodies, the third parties, the 

stakeholders, as it were, with whom you have consulted during 

the implementation . . . not the implementation, but the drafting 

of the Bill, the motivation of the Bill -- whether it was the 

Wildlife Federation, which other organizations, and any 

concerns that those people had during the various stages of the 

Bill coming before this committee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I thank the hon. member 

for the question.  I'm sorry for taking so long to prepare to 

answer it. 

 

There are a number of features to this Bill.  And for the most 

part they're a response to the ongoing dialogue of the 

department with the public it serves.  First of all, the need to 

amend the definition of wildlife as a result of court cases where 

there was a lack of clarity with respect to what was included 

under the definition of wildlife.  Actually the way it was 

written, it excluded certain kinds of animals from regulation 

because it was not written clearly. 

 

The second feature of the Bill is to remove the one-year 

suspension of hunting privileges for minor infractions.  Those 

kinds of . . . I believe that was in response to a resolution from 

the Wildlife Federation.  But the difficulty with the section as it 

was written was that the penalty for a very minor infraction, for 

example, failing to sign your licence when you carried it with 

you or leaving your licence at home, the minimum penalty was 

suspension for a year and therefore the conclusion was that 

there never would be a penalty applied, which rendered some 

of the provisions useless.  So they've tried to reduce that 

extreme penalty and allow fines in those circumstances in 

response to requests from the Wildlife Federation. 

 

With respect to the next feature, it clarifies the context under 

which people may possess wildlife.  One of the difficulties that 

exists presently is the rules under which you may, for example, 

pick up an animal killed on the highway and the circumstances 

under which you may possess that animal.  This clarifies those 

circumstances; so that's in response to public concern about the 

nature of the regulations previously. 

 

The fourth one is to allow non-Indians to hunt with immediate 

family members who have treaty Indian hunting privileges.  

And the consultation with respect to that has been done with 

people in that circumstance.  As a result of the passage of Bill 

C-31, you may be aware, there are now because of redefinitions 

of who is allowed to have treaty status, there are many 

circumstances where there are family members within families, 

some of whom are treaty and some of whom are not. 

 

And at the same time, the present Act requires that someone 

under the age of 16 be accompanied by a parent, but a parent 

that was not treaty wouldn't be able to accompany them under 

the previous writing of the Act.  So that's being introduced to 

allow greater reason with respect to who can accompany their 



May 19, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1831 

family members on a hunting trip. 

 

Another feature of the Bill is to provide conservation officers 

with authority for routine inspection of facilities or businesses 

which house wildlife or wildlife parts.  This is in response to a 

growing concern that sometimes wildlife may be taken illegally 

for purposes of trade or other purposes and there wasn't the 

ability to properly inspect.  And these measures, I understand, 

have the support of wildlife federations and conservation 

organizations. 

 

The sixth feature of the Bill is to provide a broader range of 

regulatory-making authority related to the care, holding, and 

the definition of wildlife which may be kept in captivity.  And 

this is really introduced in order that we can regulate according 

to the changes in definition at the beginning of the Bill, zoos 

and game farms and those kinds of things. 

 

And with respect to that we most recently had a discussion with 

the game farmers association of Saskatchewan and will be 

introducing a House amendment here later on with respect to a 

particular concern that they had, just to clarify the intent of the 

Act in that regard. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  I was 

following along on what you were saying basically by taking a 

look at your second-reading speech where you came very 

closely paralleled to what you said at that time.  I want to delve 

a little bit into more detail in some of these aspects. 

 

Regarding the new definition of wildlife, you claim that recent 

court decisions have found that the definition is unclear and 

only refers to exotic wildlife like your Hungarian partridge and 

ring-neck pheasants.  And there's a statement here saying: a 

court decision stated that the definition of wildlife included 

indigenous wildlife and introduced exotic wildlife, but 

excluded all other exotic wildlife. 

 

And I guess that begs the question, what do you mean: but 

excluded all other exotic wildlife. When you've got indigenous 

and introduced exotic wildlife, what else is there?  I guess that's 

the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the opportunity 

to answer that question.  This is all in the language of lawyers 

and courts, and the interpretation of the courts was that the term 

"introduced exotic wildlife"  doesn't apply to wildlife unless it's 

introduced and released.  So that any species that would be 

introduced, but, for example, kept in your house as a pet -- 

which might be a cobra or a tiger or something else -- that was 

not released into the wild in the province, would have been 

exempt from the Act under the previous definition. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  That leads me to 

my next question which is the regulatory aspect of being able to 

determine and put restrictions on, let's use your example of a 

tiger, that could be construed as being dangerous to some of 

our indigenous wildlife or exotic wildlife that has been 

released. 

What are you planning to do to tighten that up?  Will this be 

done through regulations, first of all.  And if it is being done by 

regulations, what have you got in mind?  Surely you must be 

on the road to developing these regulations.  Could you be a 

little bit more precise along that line? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member opposite, 

without getting into the specifics, the regulations around the 

management of wildlife were already substantially in place so 

that there is really not need for a lot of new regulation.  The 

difficulty only arose when a segment of that population defined 

as wildlife previously was all of a sudden defined by the courts 

not to be included. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  While you were 

talking we were discussing an upcoming issue here.  But thank 

you for that answer.  I will read part of it in Hansard I guess.  

Thank you. 

 

The next issue that I want to address is this business of fines in 

lieu of the penalties for breaking the law.  Let's say you had a 

hunting licence and you forgot to sign your licence. I 

understand that if you forgot to sign your licence, then you 

would be in violation of The Wildlife Act which meant that if 

you were going to be charged there was only one penalty that 

they could enforce which was suspension for one year. 

 

But I read here on the explanatory notes 18.1, no person 

convicted of a violation . . . and it goes on to say, section 37, 

shall apply for or obtain a licence during the period of three 

years from the date of conviction. 

 

Is this the old way?  And how does that relate to what you are 

contemplating under the new penalties for violations? 

 

(1515) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to just reiterate the 

answer that I gave before with respect to the protection of the 

regulations for the wildlife.  It was not the absence of 

regulations but the fact that all of a sudden a sector of the 

wildlife population was excluded by the definition of the 

courts.  That was a problem.  So the regulations continue to be 

in existence as they were before for that sector.  It's just that the 

sector that was eliminated by the court decision now is covered 

again. 

 

Oh yes, the second question had to do with the suspensions.  

There was . . . On a serious infraction under the law as it was, 

members . . . people accused and convicted of a serious offence 

could have suspension of privileges of up to three or five years 

but it could not be less than one year for a minor infraction, 

plus a fine.  What this change allows is that the suspension 

period can be eliminated for those minor infractions and then 

only a fine would be applied. 

 

That's the end of the answer.  But I wonder with leave 



1832 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1993 

of the House whether I might take time and introduce some 

guests, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Thank you.  Mr. Chairman says that leave 

is granted.  Thank you for that privilege. 

 

I'm pleased to introduce to you a group of Guides from the 

Elrose area who have just been visiting Her Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor to be presented with their All Round 

Cords.  This is the last year for the All Round Cord and it 

represents the completion of the Guide program, and I 

congratulate the young women who are here who have 

achieved this feat. 

 

They are accompanied by their leader Janette Belle and parents 

Bonnie Hartman and Patti Thompson.  And I want to introduce 

the young women who have just received their All Round 

Cord.  They include: Amanda Belle, Christen MacDonald, 

Melissa Sofman, Laurie-Anne Thompson, Terry Hartman, 

Serry Howta, Christine Crockette, and another two young 

women who are with them, Leah MacDonald and Barbara 

Hartman are also members of the Guides. 

 

I welcome you here and I ask the House to join me in 

welcoming you to the legislature today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, with 

permission to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like 

to introduce in the west gallery, Martha and Ferdinand Begin 

and another special couple, my parents, Hugh and Vi 

D'Autremont who are in today visiting in Regina.  I'd ask the 

Assembly to welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 51 

(continued) 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The business of 

three years to five years, I guess the three, five years would be 

something for jack lighting and offences of that nature.  Or 

could you give me some examples of what would be three to 

five years and also an example of what normally would have 

been the one year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The serious infractions include poaching 

or night lighting or serious over-harvest.  The shorter-term 

suspensions would be for improper dress, failing to sign your 

licence, or not carrying your 

licence with you -- those kinds of things. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, to get at that you're 

contemplating fines.  Now I think the concept of fines, I 

wouldn't have a problem with but I want a little bit of a 

commitment from you as to what you're talking about. 

 

If, for example, you said if I had on the wrong colour of clothes 

or if I had forgotten to sign my licence, you were going to fine 

me $5, I would say that's ridiculous.  If you're going to tell me 

that you're contemplating in the regulations that a fine might 

exist of $50 for something like that, I would say, well you're in 

the ballpark. 

 

But on the other hand, if you're contemplating a $5,000 fine, I 

want to be assured that the regulations are going to be within 

some certain parameters that I would like you to give me a 

ballpark figure on. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, my official assures me that 

the kinds of concerns you have in that regard are taken care of 

by the traditions of the court.  These fines are court imposed 

and there is no minimum and there's a fairly high maximum.  

But there is a justice within the court relative to the seriousness 

of the offence and my official tells me that, as you suggest, the 

fine for improper dress might be something in the vicinity of 

$50. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Okay.  So, Mr. Minister, what you're doing 

then is that this is enabling legislation enabling the court to 

assess a fine and it will be up to the court to make the decision 

as to the amount of the fine; that there is a scale of fines 

according to the seriousness of the event, is that right? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, yes that's right.  And I 

should clarify that that's not new.  The fine structure was there 

in addition to the suspension before.  What this change in 

legislation allows is to remove the suspension piece to allow 

only the fine to exist for some minor cases.  That's what's being 

done here. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister.  I want to go 

on to another section here, and you alluded to Bill C-31, which 

of course gave status back to a lot of non-status Indians.  I'm 

not sure whether I follow. 

 

Does this mean now that a child who may have been 

considered to be a status Indian, that he is exercising the rights 

endowed upon this fact that he is a status, but he's got some 

non-status parents who want to accompany him on a regular 

hunt or on a hunt that Indians are allowed on Crown land.  

Could you clarify that for me? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, this is so that a non-Indian parent can 

accompany their family on a hunt.  They cannot hunt; they 

cannot do the shooting.  But because children need to be 

supervised under the age of 16, this allows the non-Indian 

parent to supervise a child in a circumstance you describe on a 

hunt under the treaty conditions for hunting. 



May 19, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1833 

It is also . . . enables and clarifies that in the regular hunting 

season that they can hunt together; only the non-treaty person 

would have to have a hunting licence when they're 

accompanying them. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Okay, Mr. Minister, that clarifies that, and I 

expected that was the case.  I want to go on a little bit further 

on a section I think that we'll be discussing in some detail later 

on as well, and that is the House amendment that you're 

proposing, dealing with the authority of conservation officers to 

inspect facilities that house wildlife.  I guess, Mr. Minister, we 

can either do it now, or we can do it later when we come into 

that section.  Maybe we'll wait with that until you come 

forward with that section. 

 

You have rules for possession of wildlife.  Now I understand 

that this particular section deals with who can have wildlife in 

his home and under what circumstances.  Am I correct in 

assuming that before there was the word "knowingly" in there 

that indicated that if you knowingly had an animal perhaps that 

you should not have, that you were not either licensed for or 

whatever the case happened to be, you were then subject to 

fines and conviction.  But as long as you could prove to the 

people that you didn't know it, that you were all right. 

 

So how does this new regulation or this amendment affect that 

possibility?  Could you clarify that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, as I understand it, the 

difficulty with the Act with the word "knowingly" in it was that 

it was up to the department to prove that you were not aware 

that you were . . . or that you were aware that you had indulged 

in an infraction.  And so that's virtually impossible to prove. 

 

The rewriting of the Act in removing the word "knowingly" 

from the terms now requires . . . the regulations will require 

that you either will have a licence which will justify your 

possession of wildlife, or the regulations will require that you 

report within 48 hours the possession of wildlife for which you 

do not have a licence, which might be something that was 

killed along the road that you're taking home or you want to do 

something with.  So that it will put an onus on the person in 

possession of the wildlife to report.  And if you've not reported 

within 48 hours, then you will be in violation of the 

regulations. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- But, Mr. Minister, was the stipulation not 

always there that you were required to report?  For example, 

let's take an owl that has been killed or fried on a power pole 

and you want to get it stuffed.  Was it not your responsibility to 

report that?  Or did you only do that if you required it to be 

stuffed by an authorized dealer, taxidermist, let's say? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The circumstance you describe is exactly 

the dilemma with the word "knowingly" because you could 

then contend that you didn't know that it was improper to have 

that owl in your possession or you didn't know the regulations 

around reporting. 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, a little earlier on the minister had 

made mention about wildlife picked up on the side of a road.  

And I'm wondering what the minister was referring to.  I'm not 

sure if the minister would be familiar, the wildlife officials may 

not have brought you up to date, but certainly some concerns 

were brought to me a year ago regarding two forms of owls that 

happened to have been hit by cars.  And there was a couple of 

individuals that had these birds mounted, and they had reported 

them and actually had the wildlife conservation officer . . . had 

picked them up and they didn't get them back.  And they were 

wondering why they wouldn't have access to them.  They're 

developing a little museum and would just like to add these to 

the exhibits they have in their museum. 

 

And I'm wondering what you were referring to when you were 

referring to wildlife being picked up on the side of the road, 

and who's got control or access to that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- They are two separate questions, Mr. 

Chairman, in the question the hon. member asks.  I'll answer 

the latter one first. 

 

If the owls were a variety of owl that was an endangered 

species, then the wildlife officers would take the owl and 

ensure that it had not been shot, but then normally would return 

it to the person who had found it. 

 

If it were a rare and endangered species, it would be retained 

because they do not allow those even to be processed for 

retention because of the risk of trade in parts from rare and 

endangered species. 

 

So if there was a circumstance where the actions were 

inconsistent with that, I would suggest that the person you're 

talking about get in touch with the department.  That's the 

guideline for it. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So what you're saying then is that the department 

normally does send the bird or whatever -- whether it be an owl 

or whatever bird it is -- would be sent back to the individual if 

they want to mount it and use it, display it in their museum. 

 

For endangered species, even for mounting, could they . . . You 

had talked about parts, but if it's just a matter of mounting it to 

put it into a museum, would they be able to get a permit just to 

allow them to do that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Normally when it was a rare and 

endangered species it would not be presumed that it would be 

returned, but each case will be examined on its own merits with 

respect to the return of those species for a special purpose.  So 

again, if that kind of purpose existed, I think you should have 

the person who called be in touch with the department on that. 

 

With respect to the reference I was making though 



1834 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1993 

earlier about animals picked up at the side of the road, it was in 

the context of a previous question where . . . or any other 

animal one might find in the wild, that if you don't have a 

licence then it's your responsibility to report that you have 

wildlife for which you don't have a licence, and that then you 

would . . . under the Act as it was, it would be the wildlife 

department's responsibility to prove that you didn't know you 

shouldn't have it. And under the change that's been put in place, 

it will now be your responsibility to report within 48 hours or a 

charge could be laid. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 7 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's not 

very often the opposition actually gets called first, and I 

appreciate that, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Minister, in clause 7 I know that you're coming up with an 

amendment to strike out the wildlife farming.  But I have a 

different concern, Mr. Minister, and I will be proposing an 

amendment that I think is very fair and well worded and will 

accomplish what you're trying to accomplish at the same time. 

 

What we have a concern about, Mr. Minister, is in the preamble 

to 49.01 where it says: 

 

. . . for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this Act 

or the regulations, a wildlife officer may, at any reasonable 

time without a warrant (do all of those things): 

 

. . . enter and inspect any premises . . . for which a licence 

or permit has been issued (etc.) . . . 

 

So what my question to you is, Mr. Minister, first of all I 

suppose, is what is meant by reasonable time and to whom is 

that interpretation open?  And secondly, without a warrant 

there are concerns that I have here.  For example, if you say 

without a warrant, there's no description as to what type of 

warrant are you talking about.  There are different kinds of 

warrants, and you're leaving it open-ended by simply saying, 

without a warrant. 

 

A subsequent concern would be that on 7(c) it says that this 

wildlife officer may: 

 

(c) enter any premises containing any books, records, 

papers or other documents that are required to be kept . . . 

 

Any premises, Mr. Minister.  And these records or books could 

conceivably -- and in many, many cases, I would submit to 

you, are -- going to be kept in dwellings, in homes, in houses, 

in people's bedrooms. 

 

Now are you telling me that you are giving a wildlife officer 

the authority to do exactly that, to enter a person's bedroom in 

search of records and so on?  And if not, I want you to reassure 

me where that says in this 

regulation that that is not the case. 

 

So there's a number of topics. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I thank the hon. member 

for the question.  The understanding or the . . . there is a 

parallel section like this under The Animal Products Act which 

presently is used to regulate products under the . . . for game 

farmers.  The intent of this is to make sure that a similar 

discipline is in place for zoos, pheasant farms, meat processors, 

etc. 

 

With respect to the specific concern the member opposite 

raises, premises in this case does not refer to private dwellings; 

this is a business premise.  So that people cannot have their 

privacy infringed upon without a warrant.  Then a warrant 

would still be required in that case. 

 

It is the contention of the department as well as others who 

have previously regulated the game farming industry that these 

measures to ensure compliance are far preferable to court cases 

where you use up the penalties of breaking the law, as opposed 

to just working with people in order to ensure compliance with 

the regulations. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, what assurance can you give me 

that you say that you do not intend this for private dwellings, 

but it doesn't say that.  It says, "any premises."  Now, Mr. 

Minister, I can assure you that a court case three years down 

the road, a judge is not going to be asking for a transcript of 

Hansard to see what the minister of the day had to say about it.  

He's going to make an interpretation and the way I interpret it -- 

and I am not a lawyer, for which of course we are all thankful 

-- but under that it says "enter any premises containing any 

books." You're saying to me it does not include dwellings. 

 

Now is there a parallel legislation somewhere that would be 

overriding, that would ensure that indeed that is the case in this 

particular case; and if not so, would you then be amenable to 

having an amendment which would include the word 

"business" between "enter any" and "premises" and put down 

"business premises"? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm under the disadvantage 

of not having the lawyers here; I can only rely on their words of 

advice in referring to this.  These matters apparently have been 

through the courts and the circumstance I described is a fact of 

law that you cannot enter a private premise for these purposes.  

The note that I have here is that in a private dwelling, if 

inspection is refused, there are no provisions to allow in 

inspection; the only option open for an officer would be to 

obtain a search warrant.  Those are the words that I have in the 

explanation. 

 

But I can send forward to the member opposite the internal 

legal explanation for that at a later time.  Appreciate the 

concern and give you my assurance of that. 



May 19, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1835 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  I have the 

same sneaking suspicion as you do as well, that it is 

somewhere.  But I wanted the assurance from you that you had 

looked into this matter and indeed this was not going to allow 

something like that to happen, which I am sure all of us would 

not want to see happening and would regret if that was the case. 

 

I initiated this clause with a question that you haven't answered 

and I'm sure you forgot about it and that was, it says, "at any 

reasonable time." What do you mean by a reasonable time?  An 

officer that has driven 50 miles through snow and gets stuck a 

few times and comes to your house at 1 o'clock in the night is 

going to consider that reasonable. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, again deferring to the 

judgements of lawyers who I always presume know what 

they're writing when they're writing things like this.  And in 

this case maybe a little more doubt, but would maybe give 

some comfort to the member opposite, that it's my 

understanding that these very words are in The Animal 

Products Act in an Act passed by your government several 

years ago.  That's a parallel wording, but I would only say that I 

believe this would be standard wording to in fact prevent 

officers from doing such things at times unreasonable which 

courts would then have to judge. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, to get on with the business at 

hand here, it also says in 49.01, "at any reasonable time without 

a warrant." And that causes me some concern. 

 

And what I'm proposing, Mr. Minister, is that clause 7 of the 

printed Bill, Mr. Chairman, I would move that: 

 

Amend clause 7 of the printed Bill by striking out the 

words "without a warrant" where they appear in the 

general words preceding clause 49.01(a) as being enacted 

therein and substituting the following: 

 

with agreement of the proprietor or with a warrant issued 

by a Justice of the Peace or a judge of the Provincial 

Court. 

 

I so move, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

(1545) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to move an 

amendment to section 7 of the printed Bill: 

 

Amend section 49.01 of the Act as being enacted by 

section 7 of the printed Bill by striking out the words 

"wildlife farming" in clause (a). 

 

Just in explanation, those words were included there to include 

farming of wildlife, not game farming, and was creating a 

concern for the game farmers.  The remaining words in the 

clause continue to allow the department to carry out the intent 

of the Act without 

those words in it, and this is giving comfort to the game 

farmers so that they have no fear of it being misinterpreted. 

 

I so move. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 7 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 8 and 9 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, I would like to take this 

opportunity to thank the minister for a useful discussion and his 

official for helping to answer the questions.  I'm sorry to see 

that he did not see fit to agree to the amendment that we 

brought forward. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank my 

official, who is leaving, for his cooperation in these measures, 

and thank the members of the opposition for their very sound 

and incisive questions and their cooperation in moving this Bill 

forward.  Thank you very much. 

 

The Chair: -- Before we proceed to the next item, I'd like to 

remind the members of the committee, the members who are 

here, that: 

 

. . . Speakers have consistently attempted to discourage 

loud private conversations in the Chamber, and have urged 

those wishing to carry on such exchanges to do so outside 

the House. 

 

And that's from citation 336 of Beauchesne's. 

 

Bill No. 65 -- An Act to amend The Corporation Capital 

Tax Act 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the Minister of Finance at this time 

to introduce the officials who have joined us. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you very much, Mr. 

Chairman.  On my right is the deputy minister of Finance, John 

Wright.  Behind him is Len Rog, assistant deputy minister.  

Next to Len is Kirk McGregor, executive director, taxation and 

intergovernmental affairs.  And next to Kirk is Brian Smith, 

executive director of Public Employees Benefits Agency. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Madam 

Minister.  This Act, while it doesn't seem to be all that large -- 

one page -- can have a major impact on the oil industry in this 

province, an oil industry which I suggest, Madam Minister, is 

very important to this province as an economic generator. 

 

What you are doing with this Act is increasing the corporation 

capital tax resource surcharge by 20 per cent -- 20 per cent, 

Madam Minister, is what the 



1836 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1993 

increase is.  And this can have an impact in some areas. 

 

You've stated that this should not impact on the small 

producers of this province, those with less than $10 million 

paid up capital.  Well in the oil patch, Madam Minister, $10 

million is not a lot of money to have invested.  There are a 

good number of farms in this province that have $10 million 

invested in their operations.  So it can have an impact. 

 

And if this impact turns out to be more severe than you would 

suggest, it can have an impact on the number of jobs in this 

province, jobs that we can ill afford to lose, because your 

government's job creation programs have been less than 

adequate, much less than adequate. 

 

The impact is also in the mining industry, Madam Minister.  

And we've already seen that a good amount of the mining 

dollars that should be invested in this province are moving 

elsewhere.  A lot of them are moving to South America, 

Madam Minister, particularly into Chile. 

 

One of the major items that we see happening in the mining 

industry in this province as new business generates, is the 

drilling for diamonds.  But that is just an industry in its infancy, 

Madam Minister.  The other industry is the uranium industry.  

And this kind of a tax will have a severe impact on that 

industry, because the prices, Madam Minister, are not that great 

in the uranium industry. 

 

So, Madam Minister, how many businesses do you estimate 

will be affected by this tax? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, first of all with 

respect to taxation, this government believes in fair taxation, so 

the burden has to be shared not only by individuals, but also by 

companies.  But we have to ensure that the share being paid is a 

fair share. 

 

What I'd say with respect to this legislation is that almost all of 

the small petroleum companies will be virtually exempted from 

paying this particular tax.  Companies with assets of $100 

million or less will be eligible for special exemptions. 

 

I would also, with respect to your specific question, 240 

companies will be affected. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, how many companies 

will receive the exemptions of under the $10 million? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, we wouldn't have 

that number because really what you're asking me is to tell you 

who does not pay a tax.  The only people that we have records 

of are people who actually have to pay the tax.  So we do not 

keep records of who does not have to pay the tax.  We only 

have records of who has to pay. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well I find that surprising, Madam 

Minister, that you would not know of the 

companies.  Because these companies are obviously paying 

taxes at some point in time.  They're paying their E&H 

(education and health) tax, they're paying GST, they're paying 

income tax, they're paying royalty taxes, they're paying some 

taxes to the government, Madam Minister.  And I find it 

surprising that you would not know how many of them there 

are out there that are exempted from this.  Surely you made 

some studies, Madam Minister, before you implemented this 

increase in this taxation. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, let me clarify this.  

What I'm saying is I don't have here at my fingertips the 

number of companies who are exempted.  Certainly that 

statistic is available and I can get it for you.  It's a simple 

calculation.  How many companies are there in the province 

minus the 240 that would have to pay this tax, and you'll have 

that number.  But I don't want to speculate off the top of my 

head as to what that number is.  But it is attainable and I will 

ensure that you do get the information. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Madam Minister.  Then 

perhaps when you make your statements you should be clear in 

what you're saying.  You said the information was not 

available.  You did not say that it was available in my office 

and that I will get it for you; you said it was not available.  And 

I would ask you to be clear when you make those statements. 

 

Madam Minister, you talked of a hundred million dollar 

threshold level, and below that you could receive an exemption.  

We've seen the Minister of Health say that of the 52 acute care 

bed facilities which are slated for closure in this province, there 

could be exemptions.  But we don't see any of them getting 

exemptions. 

 

In this particular case, Madam Minister, what are these 

exemptions about and who would qualify for them? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, just to once again 

make it clear to the member opposite what I said.  The 

Department of Finance only keeps records of companies that 

pay taxes.  We can get from the Department of Energy and 

Mines a list of all of the companies that exist in the province, 

deduct from it the ones who are going to be exempt, and then 

tell you what that number is. 

 

But they're separate departments.  We have no problem getting 

the statistics for you, but what we have here are only the 

records of the Department of Finance. 

 

Now with respect to your second question, effective January 1, 

1990, resource corporations with gross assets of less than $100 

million are entitled to a deduction in computing their capital tax 

surcharge.  This equates to a maximum tax reduction of 

$90,000 per year. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, what do you 

have to do to qualify for these exemptions? 



May 19, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1837 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, you have to have, as 

I mentioned in the response to the last question, less than $100 

million in gross assets.  The amount of the surcharge deduction 

is dependent on the proportion of salaries and wages paid by 

the corporation and its associated corporations to Saskatchewan 

employees.  That is, the more you pay in salaries and wages to 

Saskatchewan employees, the greater your deduction. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, what if your 

corporation was wholly located within Saskatchewan; therefore 

all of your salaries were paid within Saskatchewan.  Would you 

be totally exempt from this tax if your assets were less than 

$100 million? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, what would happen 

is that you would have a ceiling on the amount that you would 

be allowed to be exempted.  And the ceiling would be $90,000.  

So you have a maximum tax reduction of $90,000 per year. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So, Madam Minister, you could 

potentially pay on this $100 million -- what? -- $360,000 minus 

the 90, so 250,000. 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Let me give you a concrete example 

of how this would work, which might help to clarify it. 

 

Say you are a company with $3 million in annual resource 

sales.  You pay a tax at the rate of 3.6 per cent, which would be 

$108,000, and you would be eligible for an exemption of 

$90,000, assuming that those salaries and wages were paid to 

Saskatchewan residents, which would mean that you are taxed 

only on the 18,000. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay, Madam Minister, this tax is then 

based on your corporate sales and not on your corporate assets? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, on the value of your 

sales. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, you talked of a $3 

million sales.  What if you have the $100 million sales?  What 

kind of a percentage are you going to save on that? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I would speculate 

that if your sales are $100 million, your assets will probably 

exceed $100 million and you will not be eligible for the 

exemption because you will not be considered a small 

petroleum company. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay.  So your asset base is $100 

million but you're only taxing the sales of that company . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Okay.  Thank you. 

 

Madam Minister, who did you consult with before 

making this change to this tax rate? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, the Department of 

Energy and Mines had extensive consultations with people in 

the oil and gas industry.  I'm sure when they come for estimates 

they can give you a list of who they consulted with specifically. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I would think 

that since this is your Bill and it's your tax increase, that you 

would be aware of who they consulted with.  Or does the 

Energy and Mines . . . you just ask Energy and Mines, do you 

think this is okay that we go ahead and increase the taxes here?  

Or do you talk with the Minister of Energy and find out who he 

did indeed consult with on this? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 

would know that we asked them at the time who they consulted 

with, but the member opposite would know as well that we 

have hundreds of pieces of parts of the budget so I can't tell you 

off the top of my head the list of who they consulted with.  

Such a list exists.  If you would like to see it, I'm sure that we 

can get it for you. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay, Madam Minister, would you give 

the commitment to supply that information to us please? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I will ask my 

colleague, the Minister of Mines, to provide information as to 

what consultations occurred. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Were any 

studies done as to how this would impact on business across 

this province? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, with respect to that, 

it's the same as other parts of the budget.  What we did was we 

took the economic projections for the province -- the rate of 

growth, the rate of employment, the rate of inflation -- we built 

a model, and then we put into that model all of the changes that 

came as a result of the budget, including the expenditure 

reductions and the revenue measures, and that is included in the 

appendices to the budget. 

 

We did not do specific studies of specific parts of the budget.  

Instead we did an overall study of the total impact. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I recall hearing a 

fellow who made a presentation to the uranium industry 

discussing the economic impacts that the uranium industry 

would have in Saskatchewan.  This fellow was a professor of 

economics at a university in eastern Canada.  And his statement 

about your kind of modelling was that you tell me what the 

results you want are and I'll make the model that will give you 

that result. 

 

Madam Minister, I think a lot of people across this province no 

longer trust models such as that.  I think actually what you've 

done with this tax Bill is you've increased the taxes and sat 

back and waited to see 



1838 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1993 

what kind of a reaction you were going to get, to see whether or 

not people were prepared to swallow these increases and just 

what kind of an impact they were going to have on the 

province. 

 

If there are some studies, Madam Minister, we would like to 

see them, please. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I've already answered 

the question with respect to studies.  What we did is we 

provided with this budget the most comprehensive information 

available ever in the history of this province to the taxpayers 

about the assumptions upon which we based the budget and the 

effects of the budget in terms of the growth of the province.  So 

no specific studies on each and every part of the budget exists.  

Instead there is an overall study. 

 

I don't know the economist you're speaking of.  It's unfortunate 

his ethics are not of a higher quality that he actually believes 

that he would be willing to give the answer that somebody 

requested.  All I can say to you is this.  This budget and the 

different parts of it have been analysed by agencies across 

North America, and consistently what they have said is they are 

impressed with our plan, and they're impressed with the 

comprehensive nature of the plan, and they believe the targets 

in the plan are attainable. 

 

So I would put on the record those comments by reputable 

agencies relative to the comment from an unnamed economist. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, the people who 

do the bond ratings across North America were so impressed 

with your budget that they left the ratings the same, and the 

bond rating agency from Toronto dropped your ratings.  That's 

how impressed they were with your budget, Madam Minister. 

 

Madam Minister, the economist I was talking about was not 

saying that he would do it, but he was saying that when 

somebody as a lobby group brings forward a model to give an 

answer, that those results can be skewed in any manner they 

wish, and that results of a partisan nature are not to be believed. 

 

Madam Minister, you've made a revenue projection of $15 

million for this tax increase.  What details did you base that on, 

Madam Minister?  What criteria did you use to come up with 

that $15 million, and how accurate is your projection? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, with respect to 

DBRS's (Dominion Bond Rating Service) downgrade, it's 

totally ironic that the members opposite would mention that.  

Because what DBRS said specifically was the downgrade was 

as the result of factors beyond the control of the government, 

specifically the long-term debt that this government inherited 

from the previous government; and went on to say that our 

particular budget was impressive and they supported the 

direction. 

 

So I don't understand why the members opposite 

would like to get into the financial situation because we know 

where the roots of that problem lie. 

 

Now with respect to the estimates about the revenue, the 

estimates of revenue are based on exchange rate estimates, 

they're based on the estimates of the price of the commodity, 

and the production levels. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, what prices did you 

place on the commodities, on the oils and the minerals that you 

were using for this projection?  Were you projecting increases? 

And if so, what were they based on? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I would draw the 

members opposite to the budget which was introduced in the 

legislature on March 18, and if they would turn to page 30, they 

would find out the estimates that we based our revenue 

projections on.  And they assume, for example, that the price of 

oil in 1993 will be $20.35 U.S. (United States) a barrel, and the 

price will be as follows.  As I say this information is available 

on page 30 of the budget. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Madam Minister.  The 

people of this province can only hope that your projections are 

accurate and that these taxes . . . that the commodities will not 

drop in price and therefore your projections will be out. 

 

You talked about the long-term debt, Madam Minister.  Part of 

that long-term debt came from the purchase of the Potash 

Corporation.  It came from the purchase of SMDC 

(Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation) monies.  It 

came from unfunded pension liabilities that were generated 

during the 1970s in the previous incarnation of the NDP 

government.  So while, Madam Minister, you can point fingers 

if you want to, you should be pointing some of them back at 

yourself because half of that debt came from your previous 

governments, Madam Minister. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 66 -- An Act to amend The Income Tax Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, I 

wonder if you would take a few moments for us, please, to 

outline the changes that this Bill sets forward. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Yes, I'd be pleased to do that.  The 

Bill introduces policy changes which improve the 

competitiveness of the corporate tax system for small 

businesses and also introduces a series of technical 

amendments required by the federal government in its 

administration of the provincial income tax system . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Did the member from Kindersley 



May 19, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1839 

want the answer? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Yes, please. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- I would like to update members on 

the status of our work in reforming the tax system.  We, along 

with other provinces, are anticipating the federal government 

allowing us more scope in designing our own tax system, and 

this is a move that we welcome. 

 

A tax-on-income model would simplify the system.  The 

income tax system can be used to deliver economic as well as 

social policy.  And what was announced in the budget were a 

series of tax measures to target tax incentives, tax reductions to 

small businesses and co-ops, small co-ops, in order to stimulate 

the economy and to create jobs. 

 

These specific measures were a reduction in the small business 

corporation income tax rate so that it went from . . . it was 

reduced from 9 per cent to 8.5 per cent effective January 1, 

1994 and to 8 per cent effective January 1, 1995. 

 

There was also the announcement of the introduction of a 

manufacturing and processing tax credit which was equal to 8 

per cent of the value of equipment that was going to be used in 

manufacturing or processing.  This credit will be in effect from 

April 1, '93 through to December.  I should also point out that 

we have arranged with the federal government to coordinate the 

administration of that tax so that there will be no extra costs for 

administering that particular credit. 

 

In addition, these initiatives make technical adjustments to The 

Income Tax Act which are required by the federal government 

in order to allow them to collect the taxes on our behalf. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, is that not 

simply just another step towards coordinating the two taxes 

then? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, no.  We have been 

party to tax collection agreements for years with the two levels 

of government.  So it's just a continuation of a long-standing 

policy. 

 

The Chair: -- This is a Bill of 33 clauses over 17 pages.  Do 

the members agree that we proceed page by page?  That's 

agreed. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 33 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 72 -- An Act to amend The Superannuation 

(Supplementary Provisions) Act 

 

Clause 1 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, I 

wonder if again you would care to outline briefly the provisions 

that this Bill sets out. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, I would be 

pleased to do that.  What we're doing here is we're amending 

legislation to provide an additional qualification for the 

restricted retirement option.  Employees of government 

departments and the Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation whose positions are abolished and whose age plus 

years of service are greater than or equal to 80 now qualify for 

the restricted retirement option. 

 

This is an addition to the existing provision of age plus years of 

services greater than or equal to 75.  That is essentially what 

the Bill does. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, I wonder if you could just 

explain to us why these changes are necessary. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, there were some 

amendments made last year.  This is an extension of those 

amendments to ensure that long-term employees of the 

government who are going to lose their jobs because of 

downsizing have appropriate cushions in place to make the 

transition out of government. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- How many employees will be affected by this 

legislation? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to date there have 

been 109. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We'd just like to 

thank the minister and thank the officials for coming in this 

afternoon to help out with the questions. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you very much, Mr. 

Chairman.  I'd like to thank the officials for their assistance and 

the opposition for moving through the Bills. 

 

Bill No. 67 -- An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue 

Sharing Act 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the Minister of Municipal 

Government to please introduce her officials. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  To my right I 

have Grete Nybraten, the manager of the urban revenue 

sharing; and to my left I have Doug Morcom, manager of rural 

revenue sharing. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, and 

welcome to your officials.  Madam Minister, please outline for 

us this afternoon the 



1840 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1993 

changes that are set forward in this Bill and what impact they 

will have on the municipalities, as you see it. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, this Bill establishes a level of 

funding to the urban and the rural municipalities through the 

rural and urban revenue-sharing pool, and it implements the 

second year of a two-year funding strategy where the urban 

revenue-sharing pool is down 5 per cent and the rural 

revenue-sharing pool goes down by 3.6 per cent.  This is a part 

of our overall budget strategy towards a balanced budget. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you.  Madam Minister, did you conduct 

any . . . or your department conduct any studies as to what 

impact these changes would have on municipal governments? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I can tell the member opposite that 

according to analysis that was done by the department prior to 

the budget, a 5 per cent reduction, which was 3.1 million in 

urban revenue sharing, was anticipated to increase mill rates by 

1.1 per cent, and a three and a half per cent reduction which 

amounted to $1.3 million for the rural revenue sharing, 

anticipated a corresponding 1.3 per cent increase at the 

municipal level. 

 

We are now watching the budgets being set and the mill rates 

coming in.  It looks like most of the municipalities have been 

able to absorb those decreases in our revenue-sharing grants.  

Some have actually decreased their mill rates.  Some have held 

the mill rates similar to last year, and there are some who have 

had a slight increase.  But all the budgets haven't been set yet 

and we're watching and tracking that as it goes. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, I wonder if you would give us 

the commitment that you and your department would provide 

us with the changes in the mill rates that you have received to 

date as well as you are anticipating coming in. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- We would be able to provide that 

information for you later this summer as we do the final 

analysis when all of the urban municipalities and rural 

municipalities have provided us with that information. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well could you provide us with the information 

on the ones that you say you have set.  You mentioned that 

some of the municipalities have set their budgets to date, and I 

just wanted to have a look at it and be able to confirm what you 

just said. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I can provide you with the preliminary 

list of the cities that have set their mill rate and the mill rate 

changes and percentage of change, if you like.  This, at this 

point in time, is what we have. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Does your department have an estimate . . . that's 

for the urban ones only?  Does your department have an 

estimate of what the impact will be on the rural municipalities, 

if there will indeed be an increase in rural taxation levels at the 

property tax 

level as a result of these changes.  Is there an estimate your 

department has worked on? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I can provide you with information that 

we have when we analyse the reductions.  As I said, the total 

impact was about 1.1 per cent for urbans and 1.3 per cent for 

rurals.  But I'll provide you with this information.  It might be 

useful. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Does your department foresee the -- we'll start 

with the urban municipalities -- foresee lay-offs, employee 

lay-offs as a result of the budget cut-backs? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- In consultation with the urban 

governments that we've had so far, there will be a combination 

of some lay-offs, some reduction in services, some increase in 

fee for services.  It's not altogether through job lay-offs that 

they will be able to manage the budget.  It's a combination of 

many factors. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, I note on the exchanges in the 

municipal tax rate for urban municipalities, Melfort had a 

reduction of 6.7 per cent.  And I'm wondering if you could tell 

me what the amount of transfer Melfort received with respect . . 

. change over last year, and what would account for that 

difference. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well I think I can answer that quite 

easily.  There was a re-evaluation in the assessment this year in 

Melfort.  And because of that the assessment went up about 

$1.3 million; so there was a corresponding decrease in the mill 

rate.  But essentially the budget stays much the same . . . 

(inaudible) . . . two-year grant allocation to Melfort, if you like.  

But really the mill rate went down in Melfort because of the 

increase on the assessment side. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- So it had nothing to do with the changes then that 

this Bill is setting forward.  It had simply to do with the 

changes in the assessment. 

 

I note that that's . . . when you look at the overall changes then, 

if you discount the Melfort one because of those changes, every 

single one with the exception of Prince Albert, is going up.  

And perhaps they changed for the same reason.  Did Prince 

Albert change for the same reason as the Melfort situation? 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I don't know if Prince Albert had a 

re-evaluation of their assessment or not.  I can tell you that 

Melfort did have a decrease this year in their grant allocation as 

far as I . . . minus 2 per cent from last year in their 

revenue-sharing grant. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  So in every 

situation except Prince Albert, the taxes to property owners in 

those cities with the exception of Prince Albert and Swift 

Current, would be going up.  Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- There are some urban 



May 19, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1841 

governments who have remained the same.  I have only given 

you a partial list over there.  It is true that there is a lot of 

pressure on urban governments' budgets.  And those 

governments that have been able to manage have cut back a fair 

amount of their budgets through either reduction in services or 

through reduction in employment.  But some of them could not 

find any further efficiencies and they did increase their mill 

rate. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- So, Madam Minister, it'd be fair to say that as a 

result of your budgetary cut-backs, that property taxes in most 

of the urban municipalities throughout Saskatchewan would be 

going up. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well I guess . . . I'm not about to concede 

that it was only because of our reduction in revenue sharing.  

There are a lot of pressures on urban governments outside of 

our allocation for grants.  We only provide a small portion of 

the operational funds for urban governments, and there are 

other outside pressures as well that cause their budgets to 

increase. 

 

So it's a combination of factors.  Where there were no increase 

in assessments or no increase in revenues outside of our 

allocation from provincial funds, then of course they had to 

look at increasing either their revenue through property tax or 

decreasing their services. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well I guess that's true, Madam Minister.  There's 

no question that there's other outside pressures, as you refer to 

them.  I would think that they are confined pretty much to your 

government though -- the utility increases as a result of changes 

that your government has made, fuel tax increases as a result of 

changes that your government has made, cut-backs with respect 

to fine revenues as a result of changes that your government . . . 

 

Is there any other cut-backs that you can think of, or any other 

outside influences beyond those that would impact on these 

budgets?  Because I, quite frankly, can't see a whole lot of ones 

other than the ones your government has imposed. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well I believe that urban municipal 

governments, like everybody else in Saskatchewan, understand 

that we have a debt we have to pay off.  And that $847 million 

that we have in interest payments is everybody's responsibility.  

And if we didn't have to pay for it, we could be allocating that 

money towards a revenue-sharing pool for urban governments.  

But it's not possible at this point in time to say that we're going 

to balance the budget without affecting somebody. 

 

And I know that at the convention both SUMA (Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association) and SARM (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities) asked the provincial 

government to move towards a balanced budget.  We're doing 

it and it has an impact on people.  There's no way you can deny 

that.  But it's not . . . I would say it's not the fact that we have 

misspent money in the past.  There's $847 million worth of 

interest payments we make this 

year and it's going out of the province.  If we didn't have to 

send it out of the province, we could allocate it to urban 

governments.  That's the way life is in Saskatchewan at this 

point in time. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  In your 

information you provided here you say the total impact on the 

average farm will be 1.4 per cent or $51.  Now I'm wondering 

what you're basing that on.  The average . . . what is the 

average farm size in this province, and how did you possibly 

come up with that $51 increase? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- We estimate the average farm to be about 

1,300 acres.  We don't have the average assessment with us at 

this point in time, but it was taking an average of the size of the 

farm and the average assessment across Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thirteen hundred acres, would you say a 

reasonable estimate would be, what, 3,000, 3,500 per quarter, 

per 160 acres?  Would that be considered a reasonable 

estimate? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- It's within reason, yes. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- And on the average quarter at, say 3,000 or 3,500, 

4,000 -- any figure you want to pick out of there -- what would 

the amount of taxation be on that currently, and what would the 

increase be? 

 

Quite frankly, I don't buy your figure there.  Fifty-one dollars 

seems minuscule on 1,300 acres. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I'm not quite sure how to answer the 

question because I'm not clear about what your question was.  

But if you take the average mill rate on a rural municipality is 

46 mills times 3,000 acres for an assessment . . . times the 

assessment of 3,000 times 160 which is acres per quarter, 

divide by 1,000, then your average tax bill is $862 per quarter.  

And then we factored into that what we thought would be the 

approximate size of the decrease of the grant to the 

municipality and tried to factor that as a percentage of what 

they raise through their revenues on their property tax, and it 

came out to $51. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you.  So you're saying, Madam Minister, 

that on the average farm which you said was 1,300 acres in this 

province, that they will see an increase of $51 only on their tax 

bill that's coming out this fall.  That's what you're saying. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well as we calculated, it's hard to be 

specific because I know the RMs (rural municipality) around 

my constituency, some actually decreased their mill rate by 10 

mills, so there's a variation across the province.  This isn't an 

overall increase.  Some of them have been able to hold the line.  

A lot of them have been drawing on reserves that they've had, 

so they have not increased their mills.  It depends upon the 

operational needs of that municipality; it depends on the 

reserves that they have; and depends on their tax arrears. 

 

So it's hard to make a general statement that 



1842 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1993 

everybody's tax bill is going to go up by $51 across this 

province.  I think what we are trying to do is calculate on 

average what might happen but there's so many factors that 

impact on the final analysis that you can't make a universal 

statement about that. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well, Madam Minister, you are the one that made 

it, not me . . . total impact for RMs, average farm 1.4 per cent, 

$51.  And I'm just saying I seriously doubt when I get my tax 

notice this fall that it will be $51.  I think the average tax 

increase will be substantially higher than that.  Would you care 

to comment? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well again, our percentage of revenue . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the member for Arm River on his feet? 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Could I ask leave of the House to introduce 

guests? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  

Sitting in the Speaker's gallery is my daughter-in-law, Valerie 

Muirhead, and with her are some of her relatives from 

Colorado and Kansas.  It's her mother and dad, Herb and Doris 

Weede, and Herb and . . . I'm sorry, Reuben and Bernice 

Bandall, and they're from St. Francis, Kansas. 

 

And I'd like all the members to welcome my daughter-in-law 

and her family and our good neighbours from the South.  

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 67 

(continued) 

 

Clause 1 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, I'm sort of at a loss here.  I can't 

remember what I was saying, except 21 per cent of the revenue 

that comes from the provincial government is part of the budget 

of the municipal government.  And when you are saying that 

you anticipate your tax bill to be much greater because of the 

decrease in revenue from the provincial government, it's hard 

for us to be able to say across the board, that's the way the 

picture is going to look, because there are so many other factors 

that have to be taken into account. 

 

Now as I said, 20 or 21 per cent of a municipal budget comes 

from the provincial government through revenue sharing.  If 

they have been able to find other efficiencies within their 

operation, then there won't be an increase in the mill rate. And 

some of them have been able to do that. 

Some of them will have increases, but it depends upon the 

financial stability of that municipality.  If they have a lot of tax 

arrears and their cash flow is a problem, then they will have 

also a problem at balancing a budget and they may have to look 

at increase in mill rates. 

 

So to make a generalized statement about the increase across 

the board is simply inaccurate. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Would you give us 

the commitment then that later this fall when the tax notices are 

going out to the people across this province on their property in 

rural municipalities, that you will substantiate this $51 figure 

because it's your estimate.  And I'm simply calling it into 

question.  And obviously I understand what you're saying about 

the impact and all of the changes. Maybe it is difficult to 

calculate. 

 

But in the analysis at the end of the day, we can come up with a 

figure, I think, just based on municipality by municipality 

across the province to see how close you are in your estimate.  

Because I think most municipalities that I've talked to in my 

constituency, and most municipalities certainly on the west side 

of the province, anticipate a whole lot more pain than you're 

trying to portray here.  Fifty-one dollars to the average farm 

operation in Saskatchewan isn't a whole lot of money these 

days I don't think, but I think that it'll be significantly higher as 

a result of the cut-backs that your government has imposed on 

them. 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- There's no doubt that there will be a 

variation across the province.  I have four RMs in my 

constituency.  Three of them held the line and one had a 10 mill 

decrease.  So it's very hard for us to stand up and say across the 

board there is going to be a corresponding increase in mill 

rates. 

 

I will again point out to you that if we had a preference we 

would not decrease the revenue-sharing pool for municipalities, 

either rural or urban.  But we don't have any choice here and it's 

again a matter of not having enough money to go to all the 

places that have a legitimate use for that money.  So it's simply 

a fact of living in Saskatchewan where we have to pay for 

former debts. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 68 -- An Act respecting Financial Arrangements for 

Urban Parks 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, this 

certainly is a reduction to the urban parks.  We mentioned the 

other day just briefly that I 



May 19, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1843 

think the government has to be careful that at some point the 

existence of those parks will actually be threatened.  And I 

would just open it up for you to enlighten us, if you care to, 

about where that position will be met.  Are these parks in 

danger of actually collapsing as a result of these reductions? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- No, they are not in danger of collapsing. 

 

The Chair: -- I'll ask the minister as well if you'll introduce the 

official who's joined the committee. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, thank you.  I have to my right John 

Edwards. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 69 -- An Act to amend The Assessment 

Management Agency Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, I 

wonder if you could tell us what the reduction to this agency is 

over last year. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- There has been no reduction.  In 1990-91 

it was $7 million.  In '91 -- no, just to get my years straight here 

-- '91-92 which was the budget of the last administration, the 

payment was $7,049,200.  Last year the allocation to SAMA 

(Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency) of the 

1992-93 year was $7.5 million.  This year it remains at $7.5 

million.  So in the last two years, it has remained stable, up 

from the last year of the last administration. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 70 -- An Act to amend The Urban Municipality 

Act, 1984 (No. 2) 

 

Clause 1 

 

The Chair: -- First I'll ask the minister to introduce her 

officials. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, again I have John Edwards who is 

the director of municipal policy and legislative services.  And 

Lorne Tangjerd who is the senior policy analyst with the 

department. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

why did the government find it necessary to amend the Act 

twice in one session?  Why didn't you just do it all in the one 

revision that you did earlier? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, we separated out the wards 

provision out of the rest of the amendments which were 

housekeeping amendments. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Could you outline the consulting process that was 

used in drafting the Bill? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- This Bill before us was . . . we consulted 

with SUMA, and through SUMA with most of the 

municipalities. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Did you accept all of the recommendations that 

SUMA and SARM had with respect to the Bill? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- SARM is not involved in this because it's 

the urban Act.  All the amendments were reviewed with 

SUMA.  SUMA asked for one change to be made in the 

amendments and that was with regard to the percentage of 

signatures that were needed in order to go to a binding vote.  

And we agreed with their recommendation and we changed it.  

So the amendment here reflects the proposal made by SUMA. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 24 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 71 -- An Act to amend The Local Government 

Election Act (No. 2) 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

why is it that you feel it's necessary to force these changes on 

the cities in our province when they have asked through their 

representative SUMA that they not be . . . ward system not be 

imposed on them? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- This Bill doesn't have anything to do with 

wards. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

The Chair: -- I recognize the Minister of Municipal 

Government; I think she would like to thank her officials. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, I would.  Thank you.  I would like to 

thank the officials from the department for being with us today, 

and I would like to thank the members opposite for the 

cooperation that they have shown. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  We thank you for 

your answers and for the officials' help as well. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 51 -- An Act to amend the Wildlife Act 



1844 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1993 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that the 

amendments be now read a first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 

Assembly, I move that Bill No. 51 be now read the third time 

and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 65 -- An Act to amend The Corporation Capital 

Tax Act 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 66 -- An Act to amend The Income Tax Act 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

(1700) 

 

Bill No. 72 -- An Act to amend The Superannuation 

(Supplementary Provisions) Act 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 67 -- An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue 

Sharing Act 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 68 -- An Act respecting Financial Arrangements for 

Urban Parks 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 69 -- An Act to amend The Assessment 

Management Agency Act 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this 

Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 70 -- An Act to amend The Urban Municipality 

Act, 1984 (No. 2) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 71 -- An Act to amend The Local Government 

Election Act (No. 2) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:04 p.m. 


