




















































Hansard: March 05, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 139 

 March 5, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am very pleased 

this morning to introduce to you and through you to my 

colleagues in this Assembly a group of children, 48 of them 

actually, representing grades 4, 5, and 6, from South Shore 

Elementary School in Regina Beach. 

 

They are accompanied by their teachers JoAnne Beach and 

Shawn McCall; their chaperons Carla Gusway and Kenda 

Ashton; and their bus driver Tone Pearce. 

 

They invited me to their school last week and I thought it only 

fitting that I should invite them back here.  So I ask all 

members to join me in welcoming them here this morning.  

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I am very pleased this morning to have the 

opportunity to introduce through you to all members of the 

Saskatchewan legislature, representatives in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker, who are visiting our province.  They represent the 

China National Waterproof Building Materials Corporation. 

 

They are here, Mr. Speaker, meeting with provincial, civic 

officials, as well as with the officials of Moose Jaw Asphalt 

and Saskoil, looking at developing a cooperative project in the 

city of Moose Jaw here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have enjoyed having the opportunity this 

morning to meet with the delegation, and now I would like to 

introduce them to all members of the house:  vice-president of 

the corporation, Mr. Chen; chief engineer, Mr. Zhang; chief of 

the research institute, Mr. Liu; and economist with the 

corporation, Mr. Xu. 

 

They are being hosted in Canada by two representatives of the 

Happy Trading Company, Mr. Joseph Chan and Mr. George 

Shaw.  And with us this morning also in the House, Mr. 

Speaker, from Moose Jaw Asphalt, Mr. Ed Long, who's 

vice-president and general manager; Paul Picherak, who's our 

refinery manager in Moose Jaw; and from Saskoil, Mr. Tim 

Jeffery, corporate affairs coordinator; and Mr. Doug 

Wakabayashi, corporate affairs assistant. 

 

So please, members, assist me in welcoming this delegation. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On behalf of the 

official opposition, we too want to welcome the delegation here 

from China.  It's a unique experience.  I have a nephew of mine 

who's a doctor of veterinary medicine who's teaching land 

range management in 

Hohut in Inner Mongolia, I believe that is, in China.  And he's 

teaching there right now.  And I want to welcome you.  It's of 

interest to me that you're here, and I hope you enjoy your stay 

here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a pleasure for 

me this morning to introduce to you, sir, and to the other 

members of the gallery, Mr. Charles Stonecipher, who is 

attached to the U.S. (United States) Consulate in Calgary.  Mr. 

Stonecipher, if you'd stand up, please. 

 

Mr. Stonecipher is naturally interested in what happens in the 

political process in western Canada.  He represents our largest 

trading partner, and certainly the trends in Canada in what we 

do with our relationships in the North American continent is 

something that we all need to be cognizant of all the time.  And 

I would just like to welcome Mr. Stonecipher to the Assembly 

this morning. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Utility Rate Increases 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question 

today is for the minister for SGI (Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance).  Mr. Minister, you have announced a range of 

increases which you called modest.  But when the bills start 

coming in to the people of Saskatchewan in the farming sector, 

they're being knocked for a terrible loop. 

 

The increase for farmers is not anything approaching modest.  

Mr. Minister, I have an actual example here from a farmer in 

the Last Mountain-Touchwood area, where his farm truck 

plates have gone from $567 a year to $718 after your 

announcement.  That's a 26.6 per cent increase, Mr. Minister -- 

26.6 per cent when Saskatchewan's inflation rate is zero. 

 

Is it your view that a 26 per cent increase falls into the category 

of modest?  Is that the kind of modest annual increase that we 

can expect every year from your government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

indicate to the hon. member that the increase, average increase 

that was effective April 1, was 7.6 per cent in respect to 

registration across the board.  And I want to say that that is 

considerably modest compared to when his party was the 

government of the day. 

 

I want to indicate here that in respect to registration, in 1982 

the fees were increased 15 per cent across the board.  In 1984 

they were increased 11 per cent.  In 1987 they rose 20 per cent.  

That's the record that your government indicated.  And I want 

to indicate in respect to registration in respect to farm vehicles, 

67,000 mini-vans, quarter tons, half tons, $75 registration fee, 

percentage increase: none -- zero. 

 

In respect to heavy farm trucks -- two-, three-, four-axle 



140 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 1993 

trucks, 74,800 of them -- increases range from $4 to $11.  I 

think that is a reasonable increase in comparison to the record 

of your government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, the minister talks of 11 per 

cent increases, 15 per cent increases, and yet this is a 26 per 

cent increase.  This is a farm truck that increased by $151 

dollars -- not $4, Mr. Speaker, not $7, not $11.  Again I ask the 

question to the Minister for SGI:  is this type of modest 

increase, in his terms, going to continue year after year with his 

government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: -- I want to indicate to the member, as I 

have indicated, the increases in respect to registration, the 

average is 7.6 per cent.  The only indications of any increases 

is in respect to five-axle trucks which comprise about 25 to 40 

per cent equivalence to commercial trucks.  There was some 

increase there, but in no case was there 26 per cent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, the auto insurance rates for 

1972 to 1982 increased 80 per cent under the previous NDP 

government.  Under the previous administration the insurance 

rate increases from 1983 to 1991 were 9.5 per cent.  There's a 

big difference there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the 26.6 per cent that occurred for this farmer from Elfros, 

he wants to know if he's going to be facing the same thing next 

year and the year after.  And, Mr. Minister, you have not yet 

answered that question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, in regards to the 

increases on SGI, we had a 4.75 per cent increase.  And the 

reason for the increase, so that the member understands, is that 

the losses we're incurring are $40 million approximately, over 

$40 million in the past two years. 

 

And also, for the member's knowledge, we are now . . . had to 

deal with a court case where 80 per cent of the cases now in 

liability are on whiplash, and they had gone up from 25,000 to 

$50,000. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, the minister talks of 

whiplash injuries, but how many people in large farm trucks 

suffer whiplash injuries?  Perhaps he should be looking in that 

area. 

 

I understand why they're looking at increasing the profits of the 

Crown corporations. 

 

I'd like to direct a question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier, or to 

any of the other economic ministers in his empire.  Mr. 

Premier, according to all the numbers publicly available, the 

inflation rate in Saskatchewan now has only one significant 

component.  Almost the whole province's inflation rate consists 

of increases in government fees and taxes. 

Mr. Premier, will you acknowledge today that you are 

responsible for all the inflation in the province of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Speaking on behalf of the Minister of 

Economic Development, let me say that we have a relatively 

low rate of inflation today.  It is lower than it has been in 

almost two decades. 

 

That comes about because . . . I think that, Mr. Speaker, I think 

that comes about largely because of this Conservative 

prosperity which we have visited upon this nation, both 

federally and provincially during the last decade.  So there is 

perhaps one and only one benefit of having Conservatives in 

office federally and provincially, and that is the economy is so 

depressed, we do have a low inflation rate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, it seems we have a couple 

of Finance ministers too many, because we have to get the 

Minister of Labour to answer the finance questions. 

 

Again I would direct to the Premier:  have you been suggesting 

that without government increases that in all sectors of this 

province that the province would not have an inflation rate?  

Actually, Mr. Premier, without your tax increases we would 

have a deflation rate in this province. 

 

Now you're arguing that the rate increases for utilities should 

be funding the deficit, yet you are also arguing that you cannot 

take dividends out of the Crown corporations to pay down this 

deficit. 

 

Mr. Premier, without getting into your whiny rhetoric about the 

past, let's deal with your responsibilities today -- your 

responsibilities.  You're raking in hundreds of millions of 

dollars of profit from the Crown corporations.  Will you at least 

agree today to use these profits to reduce the operating deficit 

of this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The 

member opposite asked a number of questions, I'll answer 

some this time and some the next time.  With respect to utility 

increases.  I have here an article from The Globe and Mail, 

February 23.  They say: "electricity rates rose 6.5 per cent 

nationally" in Canada. 

 

Now what's interesting is in Saskatchewan they only rose 4 per 

cent.  They talk about comparisons with other provinces that in 

fact, across the piece, rates have tended to go up about 10 per 

cent.  So our record compares very favourably. 

 

Now with respect to what happens to monies that go to Crown 

corporations, some of those monies are used to finance the bad 

deals which we inherited from the previous administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 5, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 141 

Import of Video Lottery Terminals 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the minister responsible for the Gaming Commission.  Madam 

Minister, the continued confusion and lack of direction by this 

government is causing havoc in the gaming industry.  It is 

hurting volunteers, church groups, sports organizations, and 

Indian bands. 

 

Respecting the White Bear Reserve casino, my first question is 

whether or not the province gave any approvals or authority of 

any kind for the video lottery terminals to enter our province 

from Wisconsin? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, the Gaming 

Commission had no involvement with those video lottery 

terminals.  The policy of the government and the Gaming 

Commission is that the only video lottery terminals that we will 

approve are government owned through Western Canada 

Lottery Corporation. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, the question to the Gaming 

Commission minister again.  Under Wisconsin state law, an 

American law, any movement of slot machines must be 

reported to the Wisconsin Gaming Commission.  U.S. federal 

law also disallows the sale of video lottery terminals to certain 

jurisdictions.  Is the minister aware of whether Canada or 

Saskatchewan is one of the allowed or restricted jurisdictions?  

And can you tell us what communication took place between 

Wisconsin and Saskatchewan on the transfer of these 

machines? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, if there was any 

jurisdiction involved with respect to those machines, it would 

be federal because it would be customs at the border. 

 

One of the problems we have with what is happening at White 

Bear is that the machines, we have no knowledge of.  They are 

not government-approved machines.  So we have no 

knowledge of where they come from or the conditions under 

which they arrived here. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Madam Minister, it has 

been reported that the business transaction on these video 

lottery machines was facilitated by a so-called middleman.  

Will the minister tell us who this middleman was? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, if I could go through 

the constitution.  When any commodity crosses a border from 

another country into Canada, if any jurisdiction is going to be 

involved in that transaction, it is going to be the federal 

government not a provincial government.  So if there was any 

contact with the government, it would have been the federal 

government. 

 

Our concern about . . . one of the concerns about what is 

occurring at White Bear is we have no knowledge about the 

machines.  They are not our machines.  So these questions are 

questions that the government cannot answer. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the Minister 

of Justice then.  Does the Minister of Justice know whether 

these machines entered the province of Saskatchewan legally 

or illegally? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I don't know.  

I think you should probably address that question to your 

cousins in Ottawa.  We have no jurisdiction with respect to the 

entry of those machines into Canada.  All we can say is that in 

the administration of the criminal law, for which we are 

responsible, those machines can't operate legally. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, the 

responsibility of gaming in the province of Saskatchewan is the 

responsibility of the Minister of Justice for the province of 

Saskatchewan under the Criminal Code.  And my question to 

you, sir, is: are these -- and you just concluded by stating that 

they were not here legally -- are you saying that they entered 

Canada illegally? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, they can't be used legally.  

I think that unless and until they're used, no offence has been 

committed.  At least I'm not aware of any offence that's been 

committed.  But when they're set up and functioning as a 

gaming machine, then they do run into problems with the 

Criminal Code, and then it is illegal.  And then it is our 

obligation in the administration of the Criminal Code to do 

something. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, were these 

machines in operation the past weekend? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- As the member well knows, they were.  

Media reports make that quite clear, and there were television 

pictures that show that to be the case. 

 

And I would just like to know, Mr. Speaker, while I'm on my 

feet, just what is the position of our friends opposite.  Is it the 

position of the member from Morse, who seems to be critical 

that we didn't act; or is it the position of the member from 

Souris-Cannington, who was on the radio this morning 

criticizing us for not allowing this casino to operate? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Let the member have his turn 

asking his question. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, did the 

terminals that entered into Saskatchewan . . . were they 

checked at all by the Gaming Commission to see whether they 

were legal machines or illegal machines?  The responsibility, 

Mr. Minister, or Madam Minister, is that the Gaming 

Commission is responsible to exercise its authority under law 

in relation to the Criminal Code.  Did you inspect them? 



142 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 1993 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, if I could go through 

that again.  The Gaming Commission makes policy with 

respect to gaming in the province of Saskatchewan.  If there is 

a legal problem, it goes over to the Minister of Justice.  If it is a 

problem with goods being transported across the border, it goes 

to the federal government.  Our jurisdiction is quite restricted -- 

gaming policy and the enforcement of that policy.  It's not 

imports; it is not Justice. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, while we can understand it is a 

complicated issue, Madam Minister, we believe this 

government's lack of action is making the situation worse.  Will 

the minister confirm whether or not the government has 

received any advance recommendations or communications 

from the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) about the 

province's jurisdiction in relation to this matter. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The answer is no, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, is it then the 

possibility that individuals from all across Saskatchewan, 

whether they are bingo hall operators, whether they are Indian 

reserves from across Saskatchewan, can bring these kinds of 

machines in any time from anywhere in the world? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Again, Mr. Speaker, that would be 

an issue for the federal government.  The issue for the Gaming 

Commission is to detect any breach of gaming regulations.  So 

if we became aware of a machine in operation, it is a breach of 

a gaming regulation.  A machine coming across the border is 

not a breach of our regulations.  If there is a breach because 

there is a gaming facility in operation in contravention of our 

regulations, then we turn it over to the Department of Justice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, there were . . . 

in the media it said between 1500 and 1800 people were at the 

casino during the time of its operation.  Does the minister know 

how much money was gambled there? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, immediately that I 

became aware that there was a casino operating in 

contravention of the gaming regulations of this province, it is a 

Criminal Code offence and I immediately informed the 

Minister of Justice and he took over that file after that point. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay.  Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, then 

I'm going to ask the same question to the Minister of Justice.  

Does the minister know how much money was gambled over 

the past weekend? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The answer to that piercing and 

devastating question, Mr. Speaker, is no, I do not know how 

much money was wagered in White Bear last weekend. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Martens: -- Will the minister acknowledge to this 

Assembly, either one of them, whether there was any 

arrangement between the Indian band and the Department of 

Justice or the Gaming Commission for any volume of dollars 

returning to it in relation to an agreement that you have reached 

between the two of them? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, if I could try to explain 

this again. 

 

Immediately that we became aware that there was a casino 

operating in contravention of the regulations it became a legal 

problem which was turned over to the Minister of Justice. 

 

We have no agreement with White Bear with respect to 

anything, because from our point of view, they are in 

contravention of the Criminal Code and therefore the Minister 

of Justice will take the file from this point on. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Madam Minister, from the 

public remarks of the band leadership yesterday, we understand 

that the band offered a policy solution that would leave the 

issues of jurisdiction completely alone, and set it aside. 

 

Will the minister acknowledge that the Indians themselves 

offered a compromise that would see all people in 

Saskatchewan treated equally without even dealing with the 

issue of band rights? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, that is not accurate.  

This government has come out with a gaming policy and it is 

the only jurisdiction in Canada which has provided a legal 

framework in which Indian and Metis people can participate in 

gaming, in casino activity. 

 

We have developed a policy for the whole province.  We 

attempted to work with White Bear to fit them under the 

umbrella of that policy, but that was not successful.  But as I 

say, what we are proud of is that we are the only jurisdiction in 

Canada that has legally provided a place for Indian and Metis 

people to participate in casino activity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Did this discussion take place between the 

minister and the band or the Gaming Commission and the 

band? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- We're taking turns trying to shed some 

light on the member's obvious confusion about this thing. 

 

The discussions that went on over the past two weeks involved 

myself at a couple of stages, involved the minister responsible 

for the Gaming Commission on at least one occasion, and 

involved throughout senior officials from the Department of 

Justice and from the Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat as 

well as a representative from the Saskatchewan Gaming 

Commission. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 5, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 143 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Madam Minister, did the 

minister have representatives of the Gaming Commission 

present during the time of the apparently illegal action taken by 

the White Bear Indian Reserve? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, if I can understand 

your question, if you're asking if the gaming officials were at 

White Bear, no is the answer. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Madam Minister, and 

Minister of Justice, did the Department of Justice . . . or were 

there any RCMP or any of those people at the site during the 

time of the action taken by the Indian band? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, there were no members of 

the Department of Justice or representatives of the Department 

of Justice at the White Bear facility last weekend. 

 

I'm not able to tell the member whether there was anyone there 

who was in any way representing the RCMP.  I simply don't 

have that information. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Madam Minister, my 

question to you is this. What is . . . Or Mr. Minister of Justice, 

whoever.  What are you going to do today in light of the fact 

that today they may be opening up the casino there today 

again?  What is your response to that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, the RCMP is of course 

aware of the plans of the band to the extent that those plans 

have been announced and reported in the media. 

 

I said yesterday and I repeat today that the RCMP is among the 

finest police forces in the world.  They have as part of their 

obligation the enforcement of the Criminal Code.  And it is my 

understanding that they will be enforcing the Criminal Code if 

indeed this turns out to happen on the weekend at White Bear. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Accountability of Crown Corporations 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Premier.  Mr. Premier, the Provincial Auditor has made a 

number of recommendations pertaining to how Crown 

corporation monies are reported to the Legislative Assembly 

and how those monies should be viewed in relationship to the 

Consolidated Fund.  Those recommendations were made some 

months ago. 

 

I'm wondering if you could tell the Assembly this morning if 

you are prepared to follow the recommendations of the 

Provincial Auditor that Crown corporation profits should be 

routed through the Consolidated Fund so that this Assembly 

and its members can deal properly with them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm again very proud 

of this government's record in complying with the Gass 

recommendations with respect to the accountability of Crown 

corporations. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- I truly find it incredible that the 

member opposite would talk about the accountability of the 

Crown corporations in light of their record.  Under their 

administration Crown corporations could be created without 

the public being aware of the mandate, without the monies 

being spent accountable to the legislature, and we could find 

out as we did with Saskatchewan Diversification Corporation 

that the taxpayer was left with a bill of $14 million.  So as I 

say, I am very proud of our record in complying with the Gass 

recommendations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question once 

again is to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, it's amazing how your 

Minister of Finance can stand up and hide behind the Gass 

Commission when it's appropriate in this House.  I mean, to use 

the Gass Commission as a reason to try and steal the funds of 

the wildlife people in this province, and now we hear that that 

same raison d'être is going to be used to take away the charities 

monies in this province. 

 

I didn't hear the Finance minister talk about the Provincial 

Auditor at all.  We're not talking about me or anybody else in 

this Assembly.  We're talking about the only individual in the 

Government of Saskatchewan that has no political agenda, who 

simply deals with responsibility of the taxpayers. 

 

Now I ask again, Mr. Premier: the auditor has made a 

recommendation based on, amongst other things, the report of 

the Gass Commission.  It deals with how Crown corporations 

and their profitability will be handled in this Assembly.  Do 

you agree that there should be some consideration for the 

auditor's recommendations? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, this government 

always takes the auditor very seriously.  The auditor's 

recommendations have gone to the Public Accounts Committee 

and we will await their report.  But I think what is important 

here is that the progress that this government has made thus far 

in ensuring that Crown corporations are accountable.  Their 

financial statements now all have to come to this legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- We will be passing legislation in this 

session to ensure that in future if a Crown corporation is going 

to be created, this legislature has to be aware of its mandate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- And we will ensure that the Crown 

Corporations Committee can review in detail the financial 

statements and other affairs of these Crowns. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



144 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 1993 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 6 -- An Act to amend The Prairie and Forest Fires 

Act, 1982 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that An Act to 

amend The Prairie and Forest Fires Act, 1982 be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 7 -- An Act respecting Social Workers 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

Mr. Speaker, I move that The Social Workers Act, An Act 

respecting Social Workers, now be introduced and read a first 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on a Point of Order 

 

The Speaker: -- Before orders of the day, yesterday after 

question period a point of order was raised by the member for 

Rosthern regarding language used by the Minister of Health in 

replying to an oral question.  The member did not identify the 

words that caused him concern.  And in future I ask members, 

be prepared to cite the words that they find to be 

unparliamentary. 

 

I have reviewed the verbatim for yesterday's question period 

and I sense that the words at issue are the ones used by the 

minister when she said, and I quote: "I don't know what these 

guys have been smoking . . ."  I am concerned about the use of 

innuendo and personal reflections such as these which have the 

potential to create disorder in question period. 

 

Earlier in yesterday's question period I cautioned the member 

for Rosthern for accusing the minister of using blackmail 

tactics, as I found those words to be inflammatory.  While the 

comments were of a different character, I also want to caution 

the Minister of Health to refrain from using the language she 

used yesterday.  To make such insinuations about other 

members, whether made in jest or not, is inappropriate in this 

place. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

We'll move that this question be converted to an order for 

return (debatable). 
 

The Speaker: -- Order for return debate.  Order. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Ms. Stanger, seconded by Mr. 

Renaud, and the amendment thereto moved by Mr. Boyd. 

 

Mr. Jess: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It is once 

again a great honour to stand before you and bring greetings to 

this Assembly on behalf of the residents of Redberry.  It is . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I'm not able to hear the 

member from Redberry.  Could we please have order in the 

House. 

 

Mr. Jess: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is indeed a privilege to 

represent them at the third session of the twenty-second 

legislature of Saskatchewan.  I would like to commend the 

Lieutenant Governor for her fine delivery of the Speech from 

the Throne, and the Premier for clearly establishing a new 

direction for our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to congratulate the member 

from Cut Knife-Lloydminster for moving the Speech from the 

Throne, and the member from Kelsey-Tisdale for his 

seconding.  Both members spoke on issues of major 

importance to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I would also at this time like to congratulate the Kinettes, the 

Kinsmen, and the people of Saskatchewan for another very 

successful Telemiracle. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess: -- It was a very successful weekend involving 

thousands of people, many months of work, which was 

responsible for raising just over $2 million. 

 

It is interesting that this whole performance, this whole 

process, and all these hours and months of work and donations 

raised approximately the same volume of money that 

Saskatchewan people collect each and every day to pay the 

interest on the Tory debt.  Over $2 million each and every day.  

Isn't that just divine! 

 

I am pleased to have this opportunity to inform the Assembly 

about the people of Redberry, and to share some of their hopes 

and dreams for this province.  Redberry consists of many small 

towns and farms in the north-central part of the province.  The 

people of Redberry are made up of a vast range of ethnic 

groups with the people being as diverse as the countryside.  

However the people have a common thread, and that is the will 

to work together to once again rebuild Saskatchewan. 

 

Last August, Mr. Speaker, we had an official opening in my 

constituency for the Redberry Lake Interpretive Centre, a 

centre that will allow the public to observe the pelican nesting 

grounds without disturbing them -- another project of 

cooperation which this throne speech talks about. 

 

I learned something at that opening that I would like to pass on 

to the members of the opposition.  A pelican swallows its lunch 

whole, then brings the same lunch 



March 5, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 145 

back in a slightly different form.  That's for its offspring or for 

itself.  It eats the same thing twice.  It may change it slightly 

the second time, but it's still the same old, stinking fish.  I've 

been listening to the speeches of the members of the opposition 

for a while, and it's the same old fish. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess: -- Yes, the same old fish that we've been smelling for 

about 10 years now.  They have learned nothing.  They realize 

less about what they have done to Saskatchewan. 

 

I often hear people question the wisdom of the former premier, 

the present member for Estevan, question him because of the 

massive debt that he left future generations.  They suggest that 

he has failed because he did not understand what he was doing 

to the people of Saskatchewan.  Unlike so many, I don't think 

as an economist he was a failure.  I believe we are in this mess 

because he did know what he was doing.  He deliberately 

planned to have the people of Saskatchewan so burdened with 

debt that even this government, with its social conscience, 

could never be able to restructure this province so that it could 

once again be a leader in North America. 

 

In spite of the situation in which we find ourselves in, 

Saskatchewan is rebuilding and this throne speech is just one 

step on the long road to recovery. 

 

I was pleased to hear that the Lieutenant Governor state that of 

the hundreds of the new expanding and potential business 

projects in this province, more than half of them are outside of 

Regina and Saskatoon.  Those outside our two largest cities 

have the potential to create or maintain almost 8,000 jobs.  The 

regional economic development authorities will empower 

communities to deal directly with development.  This is truly 

an approach that will increase opportunity for input in 

development by people in small communities such as I 

represent in Redberry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, like more than a third of the constituencies in this 

province, Redberry depends on agriculture for its prosperity 

and for its identity.  It may be statistically fair to say that 

Saskatchewan is becoming more urbanized, that the movement 

from farms and the small towns into cities is happening all over 

the world.  But for some time to come agriculture will remain 

the economic, social, and cultural background of this province. 

 

I am proud to represent the people of Redberry and I am deeply 

concerned for their welfare, Mr. Speaker, because of the 

current farm revenue crisis -- a crisis not of their making but a 

crisis none the less.  The throne speech indicated the strong 

support our government is prepared to make to the family farm 

as we know it in Saskatchewan.  The recent attempt to 

assemble large tracts of farm land near Eston has shown the 

need for amendments which will be introduced this session to 

The Saskatchewan Farm Security Act. 

 

Efforts are being made to consult with farmers and farm groups 

to develop an improved safety net system.  Sadly the federal 

government refuses to become involved.  Responding to the 

crisis in agriculture needs the 

commitment from all levels of government.  The government 

of Saskatchewan has responded; the government of Canada is 

sitting on its thumb.  The members of the opposition are 

holding that thumb that the feds are sitting on. 

 

Members of the opposition support that the third line of 

defence is being withheld from Saskatchewan farmers by the 

federal government.  Mr. Speaker, we took a bad program, that 

Tory Bill, GRIP (gross revenue insurance program), made out 

of tar paper and chewing gum.  We consulted with farm groups 

throughout the province.  We listened to their advice.  We 

made a bad program somewhat better.  Considering what we 

started with, it's not bad, but as the Premier said, it wasn't good 

enough. 

 

(1045) 

 

We did our part, and are doing our part now.  The federal 

government reneged on its responsibilities.  Mr. Speaker, one 

could make some pretty good guesses as to why the federal 

Tory government is no longer interested in helping the farmers 

of Saskatchewan.  One could argue that there are some reasons 

having to do with the political expediency and upcoming 

federal election.  Some might argue that. I don't. 

 

I only know the third line of defence was promised by the 

federal government and it has not yet arrived.  Rather than 

provide support, they've reduced it and delayed it.  To my 

mind, Mr. Speaker, that is not cooperative, not cooperative 

federalism at all.  But we will continue to press the federal 

government to assume their responsibilities.  The solution is 

international.  The agent is the Government of Canada. 

 

Since the Speech from the Throne was prepared, Saskatchewan 

people find themselves set back another $106 million by 

another strange deal between Ottawa and the previous 

Saskatchewan government.  Odd how that money came 

forward to Saskatchewan prior to the election and then is being 

reclaimed after.  Just another method of the Tory government 

trying to buy an election with the taxpayers' own money. 

 

Ottawa says that they have to have it back.  That was the same 

day that they announced an additional billion dollars-plus to 

expand the purchase agreement for helicopters -- a deal that 

itself will cost more than a third of the total provincial debt.  

This is just one more Tory debt for us to deal with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many commendable ideas and issues in 

the throne speech.  Those issues I would like to address, but 

two in particular are important, and I believe important and 

connected. 

 

As a part of our mandate for change, the throne speech 

announces that the government will continue to restore the 

Saskatchewan spirit of community and cooperation and it will 

use this spirit to help its aim of bringing about economic 

recovery, the Partnership for Renewal. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess: -- Mr. Speaker, I applaud the idea of 



146 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 1993 

cooperation as outlined in the minister's Partnership for 

Renewal.  I am in favour of streamlining the many economic 

development programs left over from the Tories into one 

department. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, as we all know, real economic recovery and 

real community cooperation will be spearheaded by our 

small-business sector.  The sector that employs the most people 

in our province.  The sector that most directly mirrors the ups 

and downs of our economic life.  The sector that asks for the 

least from government.  And over the past 10 years the sector 

that has been kicked around the most by the previous 

government. 

 

As economic recovery happens once again, our small-business 

people are leading the way quietly and efficiently.  It is the 

nature of the small-business person to be self-reliant.  It is their 

survival that demands that efficiency.  It is their character that 

ensures they will hire within their own community, within . . . 

but within the community and contribute to the prosperity of 

that community. 

 

Especially in a constituency like mine, Mr. Speaker, small 

business provides a barometer for the health of the community 

as well as providing leadership in maintaining that health. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there are signs, preliminary signs, that the 

health of our province and of our small business is coming out 

of the critical stage.  I am not much of an economist, but I 

know that if the customer leaves the territory, business suffers.  

Even the member from Moosomin understands that. 

 

And for 10 years, Mr. Speaker, customers were leaving this 

province in droves, fleeing the plague of the Tories.  They 

campaigned in 1982 on the theme of bringing the children 

home.  And then they drove the children away.  Our population 

shrank.  Our customers fled.  Our businesses suffered. 

 

Take a year, any year, Mr. Speaker.  Take 1990 for instance.  

During 1990 Saskatchewan's population shrank by 6,596 

people.  That's taking all factors into account -- births, deaths, 

and in- and out-migration -- 6,596 fewer people than the year 

before.  That's like losing Meadow Lake and a couple of 

villages thrown in.  And that's a lot of business gone elsewhere. 

 

By comparison, Mr. Speaker, during '91 our population shrank 

by only 187 people.  But what's interesting, what's hopeful, Mr. 

Speaker, is this.  During the last three months of 1991 from the 

time the election was called to the end of the year, our 

population actually grew by 254 people.  Not a huge number, 

but compared to the 1,975 people who left during the same 

months the year before, not bad at all. 

 

All members will know that housing starts are up substantially.  

These figures show one thing, Mr. Speaker, they show the 

attitudes are changing.  They show that where before there was 

gloom and doom, there is now hope.  They show that 

Canadians are coming to where they believe the economy will 

improve.  They might even show that some of Saskatchewan's 

children, now 10 

years older, are finally coming home. 

 

They show that people are responding to this new government 

and what it represents.  They show that people are eager to be 

part of our mandate for change.  And leading the way will be 

our self-reliant, quiet, efficient, small businesses.  Those 

businesses are hiring Saskatchewan people, buying 

Saskatchewan goods and services, and enhancing 

Saskatchewan life, but with a smile on their faces for the first 

time in many years. 

 

The economy is improving.  People are coming.  They're 

coming to a place where financial order is being restored -- a 

place where optimism begins each day once more.  It is 

encouraging to know that while we are providing the 

responsible government which we promised, we are still able to 

do positive things for our people. 

 

For the last 15 months the people of Redberry have assisted me 

as we work towards improving health care.  Their efforts will 

be rewarded when they become part of the new health care 

districts.  I remember the strong dedication to the betterment of 

health care that was shown by many Redberry residents over 

30 years ago when medicare was first being introduced.  The 

kind of wellness model that is being developed will serve the 

need of that constituency of Redberry as it will indeed serve all 

of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

As a member of the caucus committee on health, social policy, 

and justice, it has been a great opportunity for me to work with 

others as the wellness program develops.  We are fortunate in 

this province to have the Minister of Health who is truly a 

leader in her field. 

 

As an integral part of wellness, but also enhancing social 

justice, we are initiating an action plan for children.  All 

citizens of this province must have adequate food, clothing, 

shelter, and a safe environment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess: -- Changes to The Workers' Compensation Act, 

Labour Standards Act, are long overdue, and I'm pleased that 

we are dealing with these important matters this session. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in fiscal management development, in agriculture, 

in education, health, and labour this throne speech announces a 

program that is people directed, a program that puts the needs 

of Saskatchewan people first.  Not only that, Mr. Speaker, for 

the first time in a decade, we have a government with a 

program that considers the children and the grandchildren of 

Saskatchewan people. 
 

Right-wing governments talk of family values on the one hand, 

and then they squander the family's heritage on the other.  

That's what those Dan Quayle think-alikes did.  They talked 

about how they loved their children, and then they snuck out of 

town leaving a family-crushing debt for their children.  Great 

parenting. 
 

Mr. Speaker, Christmas is a time when children ask Santa 

Claus for what they want and adults pay for it.  Deficits are 

when adults spend what they want and the children pay for it.  

The government is setting a course where our 



March 5, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 147 

children will be allowed to make their own mistakes and not to 

pay for ours.  That is the difference between this government 

and that government. 

 

Because this throne speech commits this government and the 

people of Saskatchewan to prepare for the future, not rob from 

the future, I am happy to support it.  I will be opposing the 

amendment and supporting the motion.  Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wormsbecker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise today to 

speak in support of the Speech from the Throne delivered by 

Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan on 

February 25 last.  The central theme of last year's throne speech 

was a mandate for change, a mandate for change not just for 

the sake of change, but a mandate to restore the fiscal 

responsibility and integrity of this province for the benefit of 

our children and our children's children. 

 

The throne speech for the fiscal period '93-94 invites each and 

every one to continue the journey of renewal undertaken this 

previous year.  In pursuing this undaunted task of renewal, both 

economic and social, coupled with fairness and compassion, 

we will be able to build once again a vibrant Saskatchewan in a 

land filled with many untapped opportunities waiting to be 

explored. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the first step taken last year by our government in 

the journey for renewal was deficit control.  As was stated in 

the throne speech last week, Saskatchewan was the only 

province in Canada to reduce its expenditures this past fiscal 

year, a reduction of 3 per cent.  An interest payment of $760 

million on our total accumulated deficit of $4.7 billion was the 

only obstacle in preventing a budget surplus. 

 

The most serious threat to our economy is a deficit spiralling 

out of control.  In order to restore consumer and investment 

confidence in our economy, it is of utmost paramountcy that 

our government send a signal of fiscal restraint and 

responsibility to all stakeholders in our province.  There is no 

economic confidence with runaway deficits which was the 

hallmark of the previous Tory administration. 

 

I am proud to be a caucus member of this government and a 

team player in staying the course of deficit control, which one 

day shall give us the financial freedom to re-implement 

adequate funding for social programs that are experiencing 

temporary cut-backs just to provide basic, necessary, no-frill 

services. 

 

It is no secret that our province must operate in a survival 

mode.  This requires everyone, including labour, business, and 

farmers, to work cooperatively with each other and government 

to plan a strategy for economic renewal. 

 

(1100) 

 

Over the past six weeks I've held five public meetings 

throughout my constituency.  My constituents have expressed 

concerns and asked questions regarding the 

following subject matters: deficit control, taxation, agriculture, 

jobs, health care, and human rights.  I would like to spend some 

time, Mr. Speaker, addressing the concerns of my constituents, 

which I presume are not unlike the constituent concerns of my 

caucus colleagues gathered and assembled around this 

Chamber. 

 

On the subject matter of deficit control, most of my 

constituents are supportive of the direction this government has 

taken over the past year.  The deficit was accumulated over the 

past 11 years and most agree that balancing the operating 

budget within the next three years is a reasonable approach. 

 

Some state that the budget should have been balanced within 

the first or second year of our term of office, emphasizing that 

expenditure reduction should be the only key in balancing the 

budget.  Our government chose not to follow this approach 

because government is a big employer.  Such a massive 

reduction in expenditures would have created immediate shock 

waves throughout the economy. 

 

On the other hand, some constituents state that our government 

is paranoid over our emphasis on deficit control and that what 

is needed is massive infusion of capital expenditures toward 

our public infrastructure, for example, roads, bridges, and 

educational facilities, to stimulate the economy. 

 

This strategy has some merit, provided the rest of the economy 

starts to grow and expand at a fast rate to generate the tax 

revenue needed to pay for these capital expenditures.  The 

projected rate of economic growth within the reasonable 

foreseeable future is approximately 2 to 3 per cent.  This rate of 

growth is not sufficient to warrant large capital expenditures.  

The people of Saskatchewan must live within their financial 

capability, even if it means a lower standard of living for a 

short period of time. 

 

On the subject matter of taxation, Mr. Speaker, no one wants 

more taxes.  Taxation reduces disposable income, resulting in 

fewer goods and services being purchased by families.  

Increased taxation means doing with less.  No one enjoys a 

reduction in one's standard of living.  However, most people 

also realize that our government is strapped for cash and that 

the budget must be balanced. 

 

The issue of taxation immediately becomes an issue of fair 

taxation.  It is not the intention of our government to place 

taxation burden on the backs of any one group or any one 

sector in our economy.  Our government is committed to a fair 

and progressive taxation system.  There is plenty of speculation 

regarding budgetary detail and increased levels of taxation.  

This debate will run its course when the budget is delivered by 

the Minister of Finance within the next several weeks. 

 

On the subject matter of agriculture, Mr. Speaker, the farming 

and non-farming communities of my constituency are equally 

concerned about the future of agriculture because of the 

economic importance of agriculture to our economy.  Right 

now farmers are in need of cash to put their crop in this spring.  

The seriousness of this problem cannot be overstated.  As one 



148 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 1993 

farmer stated to me, and I quote:  I signed up for GRIP because 

the federal government promised a third line of defence.  

Where is the payment?  End quote. 

 

There is a quiet desperation in the farming community which 

has the serious potential of becoming militant.  Our 

government has pressed and is pressing Ottawa for the 

promised third line of defence payment.  Farm organizations 

are also pressing Ottawa.  Thirteen thousand farmers gathered 

at Saskatoon on January 26 of this year and pleaded with 

Charlie Mayer for a third line of defence payment.  To date the 

federal government and the federal Tory MPs (Member of 

Parliament) have said no to the province, no to the farm 

organizations, and no to the farmers. 

 

Our government is committed to supporting agriculture, is 

committed to helping farmers and farm families, and is 

committed to working with our government in Ottawa in 

designing a new, long-term agricultural income net program.  

But cash is needed now.  Our government has stated and 

continues to state that we as government are prepared to do our 

fair share in supporting our most important economic engine in 

this province -- agriculture and farmers. 

 

At one of my public meetings, a farmer attempted to engage 

me in the debate over '91 and '92 GRIP, stating that he was 

worse off under '92 GRIP.  Another farmer interjected 

immediately, without being challenged by any other farmer 

present, and stated that the debate had moved beyond '91 and 

'92 GRIP comparison to, firstly, an immediate third line of 

defence payment, and secondly, a restructured, viable, 

long-term, safety net program. 

 

Several farmers have stated they want out of GRIP, whether '91 

or '92 GRIP.  The farm community realizes that '91 GRIP was 

not intended to meet their long-term income support needs in 

an unfriendly, subsidy environment caused by the Europeans 

and the U.S. in competing for traditional Canadian wheat 

markets. 

 

I've been asked what in my opinion is fair, provincial, financial 

support for an agricultural safety net program.  I've responded, 

Mr. Speaker, by stating the following, and the following are the 

matters that should be taken into consideration:  firstly, the per 

capita debt load each province has in comparison to all other 

provinces; secondly, the ability of each province to finance 

additional debt to make the expenditures towards a safety net 

program; and thirdly, the number of taxpayers each province 

has as a taxation base. 

 

On the first count, Saskatchewan has the largest per capita 

debt.  On the second count, Saskatchewan has the second 

lowest credit rating; and on the third account, Saskatchewan 

has less than 4 per cent of Canada's total taxpayers.  In this 

fiscal year, Saskatchewan will have expended $230 per capita 

towards safety net programs while Ontario's contribution will 

be less than $5 per capita.  Does this sound fair? 

 

Her Majesty's Loyal Opposition would lead us to believe that 

our contribution should be more because we have more farmers 

per capita than any other province in 

Canada.  Can the Saskatchewan treasury compete with the 

European Common Market and U.S. treasuries?  Let's get real 

and stop day-dreaming. 

 

Ottawa has the major responsibility, and the major role, to pay 

in adequately funding a permanent and predictable disaster 

assistance program and a long-term income safety net program.  

I implore and beseech the members opposite to join with us in 

lobbying Ottawa to live up to its moral obligation to farmers 

and farm families.  Let's join hands and raise our voices in 

unison in support of our farm neighbours and friends. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wormsbecker: -- The need is great; the cause is just; the 

time is now.  Let's do it together -- now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to speak briefly on the subject of jobs.  Not 

only are my constituents concerned about the deficit, they are 

equally concerned about jobs. 

 

Jobs are important to sustain individuals, families, and 

communities. Work, in its broadest context, is needed to 

sustain the dignity and soul of an individual, the dignity and 

soul of a community or a nation.  Without work, without an 

opportunity to engage in meaningful employment, individuals, 

families, and communities yield to despondency and, 

ultimately, despair.  Jobs are needed for the economic, social, 

and spiritual health of our province. 

 

What is the role of government in job creation?  When our 

government assumed office we stated we would not support 

taxpayer-financed megaprojects.  The trickle-down economic 

theory of the previous administration did not work.  Feeding 

the frenzied capital demands of multinationals with taxpayers' 

money did not result in many jobs being created. 

 

Where lies the biggest employment bang for the taxpayers' 

buck is a legitimate question for the public to ask.  The public 

document entitled Partnership for Renewal, released by the 

Department of Economic Development in consultation with the 

public, provides the direction this government feels is the only 

direction for sustainable economic growth and job creation in 

this province. 

 

Governments, communities, working people, and business 

people are gradually coming to realize that any economic 

undertaking must be fair for all participants.  There must be a 

sound economic reason for any business venture to locate in 

Saskatchewan, or to locate in Weyburn, Saskatchewan. 

 

Financial incentives such as capital grants, loan guarantees, or 

municipal abatements are temporary fixes and soon lose their 

lustre to the grim reality of necessity for sound economic 

planning and strategies for long-term viability. 

 

Our government is prepared to work with communities in 

developing community or regional districts for economic 

development.  Saskatchewan people have a history of 

innovation and inventiveness.  Communities know best 



March 5, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 149 

what may or may not work in their areas.  Accordingly the 

concept of economic regional development districts is the 

fundamental key in fostering community cooperation and in 

attracting new businesses and employment opportunities to our 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to give 

specific examples of some of the encouraging economic 

developments in the constituency of Weyburn which I am very 

proud to represent. 

 

Many community spirit-minded Weyburn residents have 

worked diligently and arduously to locate Advanced Test 

Technologies Inc. in our midst.  This technology, the first of its 

kind in the world, has the ability to test unpopulated circuit 

boards without making direct physical contact with the circuits 

themselves.  This technology will reduce the number of circuit 

boards damaged in the present bed-of-nails testing procedure 

which requires direct physical contact with each circuit.  This 

new technology is very welcome in Weyburn and has the 

potential for the development of new product lines, adding 

further employment opportunities for Weyburn-and-area 

residents. 

 

In addition, Alcatel, formerly Canada Wire & Cable, has over 

the past year rationalized its wire and cable manufacturing 

operations in Canada, and its Weyburn plant has received a $10 

million-plus plant upgrading and expansion to service markets 

in western Canada and the western United States.  This is good 

news for Weyburn and Saskatchewan.  Saskatchewan business 

and Saskatchewan workers can compete globally. 

 

Also the former Weyburn Distillery, which has been in 

mothballs since the early 1980s, appears to be getting a new 

lease on life.  On February 4 of this year, Plains Food Fibre 

Inc., representing a consortium of Alberta and Colorado 

investors, announced its intention to reopen the Weyburn 

Distillery for ethanol and food fibre production.  Not only will 

this business provide employment, but it will also provide a 

market for grain required in the production process.  This is an 

example of an agricultural added-value industry that has 

promise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1115) 

 

Mr. Wormsbecker: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to focus my 

attention briefly on health care, and particularly as it relates to 

my constituency.  On June 21, 1992, Weyburn and District 

Special Care Home Corp. celebrated its 25th anniversary.  I 

was pleased to be present and participate in the celebration 

ceremonies together with some of the founding board 

members. 
 

Health care services have expanded significantly since the 

province pioneered medicare in 1962.  Saskatchewan set the 

national standard for compassionate health care, and the federal 

government followed our lead in establishing a federal health 

Act which provided financial assistance to all provinces for 

health care services. 
 

For many years we focused on training people and treating 

people only for their illness.  We cured people. 

 We extended life expectancy.  We now need to do more in the 

area of preventative health care. 

 

There's also a direct correlation between good health and 

socio-economic well-being.  Accordingly, our approach to 

health care must change by encouraging healthier lifestyles, 

working to prevent disease and disability, reducing poverty and 

illiteracy, ensuring people have meaningful work, helping 

seniors live more independently, and encouraging people to 

take more responsibility for their health. 

 

This new approach to health care, the wellness model, is a 

community approach, empowering communities, through 

larger health care districts, to take charge of health care 

delivery. 

 

My constituency has been actively involved in discussions to 

form larger health care districts.  There is some apprehension 

concerning the future delivery of health care services and how 

each community's present health care facility shall fit into the 

larger picture. 

 

Most of my constituents realize that the previous four decades 

of delivering health care services from hospital centres every 

30 miles apart is no longer valid.  Health care is more than 

acute care but acute care is still vital to our overall health care 

system. 

 

Communities must be prepared to consider an expanded role 

for some of our acute care facilities, which presently are 

centres of "patch me up and send me on" facilities.  This is a 

very costly service in need of fundamental structural change. 

 

My constituency and my constituents will adapt to larger health 

care districts.  My constituents will accept the challenge of 

managing change during these turbulent times. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is another area where change is occurring, 

not only in Saskatchewan but across the country, both federally 

and provincially.  And that is in the area of human rights 

legislation and in particular sexual orientation.  This is an issue 

on which everyone has an opinion.  It is one of those 

black-and-white issues.  You're either for it or you're against it. 

 

What the legislation does or doesn't state isn't of any 

consequence because the vast majority of people have already 

made up their mind.  They have prejudged whether it is good or 

whether it is bad prior to seeing the text of the legislation.  

Perhaps the reaction of the public to this legislation prior to the 

amending Bill being introduced to the legislature is indicative 

of the need for this legislation. 

 

Many of my constituents see this legislation as sanctioning a 

lifestyle that is contrary to their moral Christian beliefs.  Many 

also fear that this legislation shall open the door for future 

changes such as same-sex marriages, redefinition of traditional 

Christian family values, adoption by homosexual couples, and 

homosexual education in our schools. 

 

Even though I do not regard the homosexual lifestyle as an 



150 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 1993 

acceptable alternate lifestyle, and even though I share some of 

the same concerns as my constituents regarding future 

challenges by homosexuals to change traditional Christian 

values, I also recognize a common bond of brotherhood among 

all people deserving of respect and dignity whether we agree or 

disagree with each other on any particular issue, including the 

issue of sexual orientation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wormsbecker: -- Mr. Speaker, it is my deep and abiding 

personal conviction, based upon my moral Christian values, 

that of all of us, whether black or white, Christian or 

non-Christian, heterosexual or homosexual, have a right to 

engage in employment to feed ourselves or obtain 

accommodation to shelter ourselves. 

 

These rights should be protected by law so those who disagree 

with what we are or what we do cannot deny us employment, 

accommodation, or access to public services.  These basic 

needs should be protected under the Human Rights Code for all 

of us, including homosexuals.  I support these limited basic 

rights for everyone. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I support the throne speech.  I also 

give my undertaking to journey with my caucus colleagues and 

my constituents on the path of renewal to revitalize our 

beautiful province.  And while we journey, Mr. Speaker, let us 

dream and plan together for a brighter future.  And with 

guidance from above we will accomplish great things together.  

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to start off 

by commending yourself, Mr. Speaker, for the decorum you 

keep in the House.  I know it's not an easy job you have and 

you're doing an excellent job.  And I would just like to say I'm 

sure you've got the support of everybody else because I know 

I'm impressed, and I'd like all the members to . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: -- Mr. Speaker, it is a privilege and a great 

pleasure to be able to participate in the throne speech debate.  I 

want to make a quote of Tommy Douglas's speech to the 

federal convention, the 1983 convention of the federal party, 

and it says:  what our ancestors began, we will continue.  We 

will continue, not with old ideas because times change and 

people change; we need new ideas to meet new situations.  But 

the principle of organizing our society for the benefit of all the 

people and not for the privileged few, that is still here, and that 

is the principle to which we adhere. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, today we certainly have a new situation and 

Tommy was right when he said that we would need new ideas.  

The financial crisis that our province faces today is one of 

unprecedented size and urgency.  We are not able to rely 

exclusively on the traditional solutions that served our province 

well in the past however, in order for us to look ahead and 

reflect on 

the past so we may build on our historic strengths. 

 

Perhaps our greatest strength as a province is the people.  They 

developed out of the dust in the Depression of the '30s a spirit 

of cooperation in the Saskatchewan people that is still with us 

today.  The idea of helping a neighbour out in his or her time of 

need has not diminished with the passage of time but rather has 

grown and nurtured over the years.  It is our spirit that will 

allow our province to rise out of the current dilemma and once 

again shine as the jewel that it truly is. 

 

Another strength that we still possess is our agriculture sector.  

The people who farm the land are perhaps the strongest-willed 

people in our country.  They continue persevering in the face of 

uncertainty long after even the most stout-hearted would have 

thrown in the towel.  The government will not allow their 

dedication and way of life to go for naught.  We will continue 

to work, just as our farming friends and neighbours have 

continued to work, towards a solution to the crisis that so 

plagues our farming community. 

 

The citizens of this province are well-known for their 

innovative solutions to the difficult problems.  Examples in the 

farming sector have shown that when we are facing our 

problem, we don't back down and say, well I guess there's 

nothing we can do.  We are the people who face those 

challenges, look them in the eye, and say we will get through 

this, and I know we will. 

 

Saskatchewan has always built and promoted buffers to protect 

our citizens from the international pressures that threaten our 

very way of life.  When lending institutions failed to address 

the concerns of people, we developed a large network of credit 

unions.  When line grain companies were abusing our farmers, 

we started the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool.  And when the 

international grain trade were stealing our grain, we worked 

very hard to promote and sell the idea of the Canadian Wheat 

Board so that when grain sales were made, they were made in 

the best interests of farmers and not simply with volume and 

profit margin as the driving factor. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: -- These are just a few examples of what people 

have done to protect ourselves in this province.  Other 

examples are the development of co-ops, restrictions on foreign 

ownership of land, the Crow rate, SaskTel, SaskPower, 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance, and many, many others. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, in the past in this province and in this 

country, workers have come together to form unions so they 

could accomplish objectives together that individually they 

could only dream about.  Although some would argue that 

these institutions have hampered our ability to compete 

internationally, in reality, Mr. Speaker, it has been the reverse.  

It has allowed us to compete, and in fact it has allowed our 

parents and our grandparents to survive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we talk about working together, 

cooperation, partnership, we're not talking about something 

new.  We're talking about revitalizing and 



March 5, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 151 

expanding some of those Saskatchewan strengths that has got 

us through in the past.  The very idea that growth, stability, 

security, are possible only by working together as one are not 

new ideas, but a philosophy that has worked well in the past 

and will still work today. 

 

But there are always attacks, Mr. Speaker.  There are always 

attacks against the people.  On Monday, Canadian National 

announced that they are going to be laying off this year 3,000 

jobs in the country and 3,500 jobs in each of the next two 

years.  It will be a total job loss in Saskatchewan of 91, and in 

the constituency of Melville, in the town of Melville, 15 jobs 

will be abolished by mid-June. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this point in time, the workers in Melville are 

working overtime.  They're working overtime to get the job 

done because they haven't got enough workers, and they're 

cutting back more.  And safety is going to be one thing that is 

going to be curbed.  And we've seen wrecks, and wrecks are 

not cheap, and we've had a couple major wrecks in the last 

year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that the CN (Canadian National) should 

look very strongly at safety before they look at the almighty 

dollar.  And I call on the federal government to ask CN to look 

at safety when they're making economic decisions because 

lives of people are more important than dollars.  And jobs are 

also very hard to create, and when you lose 15 jobs in one 

crack, it takes a long time to rebuild them up because jobs don't 

come easy in these days and age, and it's a long, long process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the first step in charting our own course in 

gaining financial freedom, as I mentioned before, because the 

government is saddled with such a large debt, the question is 

now of how to get from beneath this financial dilemma.  Do we 

shut government down altogether, or do we use government as 

a tool to achieve growth, stability, and security? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that we must use government as we have 

in the past.  Our survival and success depends on it.  Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, it is only through the use of government, the 

instituting of programs, policies, and the enhancing of 

cooperation that we'll free ourselves of these financial shackles. 

 

The vision of Partnership for Renewal paper sets challenging 

but realistic goals for our government.  The size of our 

provincial debt combined with the global market competition, 

the trade-dependent nature of our economy, and numerous 

other economic challenges will be overcome by the new ideas. 

 

We have many strengths to build on.  You have, I'm sure, heard 

of our well-developed base of public infrastructure, productive 

labour force, financial resources.  It is the people of 

Saskatchewan who will lift us out of this crisis. 

 

(1130) 

 

Within our plan to attain financial freedom, the throne speech 

touched upon regional economic development authorities.  The 

government will empower communities through the economic 

development boards to realize and 

deal directly with development opportunities.  Within Melville 

constituency, for example, we have economic development 

boards that are working extremely hard to attract new and 

promote existing businesses. 

 

This is just one example of the many new and exciting ideas 

that are being instituted.  The government's comprehensive 

energy strategy covering all forms of energy production -- be it 

hydro, solar, co-gen -- will identify economic opportunities and 

will find ways to reduce our energy consumption. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a farmer I recognize our government's 

commitment to rebuilding the farm economy.  As this is the 

case with the economy in general, the farming sector has 

challenges to overcome and strength to build upon. 

 

I'm sure that many people have heard the saying: give a farmer 

some seed, some fuel, a little fertilizer, and he or she will find a 

way to put the crop in.  Well this is a true testimonial to the 

strength and dedication of the province's farmers, but 

patchwork solutions such as this are no longer acceptable in 

today's economic climate. 

 

From the Great Depression to this day there has been a single 

underlying trend in the farming sector -- the move away from 

the land.  Each year, Mr. Speaker, an average of 1,400 farmers 

leave the land.  And as the number of farmers goes down the 

average farm size has gone up, doubling in the past 30 years.  

We have all heard of the recent attempts to assemble large 

tracts of land, especially in the Eston area.  And as announced 

in the throne speech, we will amend The Farm Land Security 

Act to broaden the investigative powers and to strengthen 

enforcement provisions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: -- I believe that community-based land trust can 

be a vehicle for land transfer and on ownership for the future.  

And something like a community-based land trust must be 

established.  And if it was in place the land grab near Eston, or 

the possible land grab near Eston, would never have come 

close to materialization. 

 

There are a few proposals on community land-based trusts that 

have been developed by various groups in the province.  Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, it is an important concept if farming is going 

to survive as we know it.  The alternative is to move towards 

corporate farms.  And that, I believe, would kill rural 

Saskatchewan within years. 

 

The community-based land trust proposals are similar in that 

they all have local control but also provincial ties to ensure 

stability.  Each shows promise in assisting with the problem of 

intergenerational transfer of land.  Mr. Speaker, there are 

examples out there and even within my own family where land 

has been bought and sold two and three and four times, and in 

that process the land has gone from grandfather to grandson.  

And I know one sector that really benefits from that and that's 

the banks.  They make a good profit buying and selling land . . 

. (inaudible) . . . interest rate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what farmers are facing today is not just a severe 

economic crisis.  Farmers are facing a crisis that 



152 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 1993 

jeopardizes the make-up of our communities and families.  

Family stress is high.  People feel trapped and double-crossed.  

They blame themselves.  Suicide rates are high and family 

breakups are rising.  It is not their fault.  Farm families in order 

to survive must first realize and believe that it is not their fault.  

Because it is only then that they can come together to help one 

another out. 

 

But what they need most now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a cash 

injection.  We need a third line of defence.  My government 

stands firm that farmers need the federal government to come 

through on its promised third line of defence. 

 

When we farmers signed up for GRIP in 1991, we were told 

that second line of defence would not be the answer without 

third line of defence to help us through disaster situations.  

Where has the federal government been, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  

I can tell you where they've been.  They've been signing 

cheques for billions of dollars for helicopters.  And I say, 

shame. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: -- Clearly government programs fail to address 

the challenges that today's farmers face.  We need solutions -- 

solutions like agriculture diversification to reduce our 

dependence on cereal crops, solutions like national farm 

income program to ensure that farm income fairly reflects the 

cost of farming, and solutions like targeting of the financial 

assistance to those who need it most rather than universal farm 

aid programs which drain the public treasury, yet fail to keep 

the farmers on the land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as mentioned in the throne speech, currently 

being tested are systems that will use the school as the base to 

meet all the needs of the students that affect their ability to 

learn.  I believe that such a system will move schools to 

become economic centres for a broad range of services for 

students and families.  I believe that education is a right and not 

a privilege.  This is predicated on the assumption that there is 

an inherent benefit to providing post-secondary education 

rather than simply meeting labour market demands. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the rising costs of post-secondary 

education, combined with increasing enrolment quotas and 

poor student-to-professor ratios, show us the need to develop 

some of the new ideas that Tommy spoke of. 

 

I believe that education can be expanded through our regional 

community college.  Distance in outreach education, with the 

advantages in satellite . . . advances in satellite and satellite 

technology, are bringing post-secondary education to rural 

Saskatchewan.  Right now it is possible to take the first two 

years of university in Yorkton, only 25 miles away from 

Melville. 

 

Such methods of educating the people must continue and 

expand in the future.  The technology is there and it is being 

used.  It will help prevent the depopulation of rural 

Saskatchewan and will educate the public for changing times 

ahead. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to quote Tommy again with respect to health 

care delivery.  He said: when we begin to plan medicare, we 

pointed out that it would be in two phases.  The first phase 

would be to remove the financial barrier between those giving 

the service and those receiving it.  The second phase would be 

to reorganize and revamp the delivery system. 

 

And of course, that's the big item.  Today our health care 

system faces new challenges, and some of them include an 

ageing population requiring new and more extensive . . . 

expensive and extensive kinds of care, increasing, complex, 

and costly medical technology with the added problem of 

distributing and making it available in a large province such as 

a Saskatchewan, with a relatively spread-out population.  

Changes in the kinds of illness and diseases that we all face are 

also a factor. 

 

Well the times have changed.  Like Tommy said, it is time for 

some of those new ideas.  The Minister of Health along with 

the department have developed a new vision for health.  Health 

care in the past has been based on using the system.  If people 

were not sick, the system would have fallen apart.  Doctors 

would not get paid, hospitals would lose their funding, and so 

on.  The initiatives to get people healthy and keep them healthy 

were simply not there. 

 

People in the past have been using the system in such a way 

that it has been unnecessarily more expensive.  I myself, as an 

example, a few years ago when I needed to see a doctor, I felt it 

much easier for myself to go to the emergency room at the 

hospital rather than see my doctor in the office.  And I didn't 

know at the time that that choice that I had made for my 

personal health care cost the system much more than it could 

have. 

 

The wellness system will provide the government with the 

means to educate the public on the costs, both economic and 

social, of our current health care system.  The wellness model 

will reduce duplication of service, will result in a healthier 

populace, and will create a more efficient health care delivery 

system. 

 

Communities are working towards the development of a 

delivery system that will serve the needs of the residents.  I can 

envision in the future, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with health clinics 

as the centre of our communities, being a core of health care 

deliveries and with a wide range of wellness initiatives that 

would have home delivery health care.  People's health delivery 

would be home based rather than institutionalized. 

 

I can also envision doctors joining together to form rural health 

care practices, with admitting privileges to more and more 

facilities, and the ability to cover off for colleagues vacationing 

and on weekends, thus eliminating the fear of small 

communities that they will not have a reasonable access to a 

doctor. 

 

Perhaps the most important thing that the wellness model will 

do for the people of Saskatchewan is that it will ensure 

medicare is here for the future generations.  And that I believe 

is important. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 5, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 153 

Mr. Carlson: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to close by thanking 

our Premier and our cabinet for making partnerships for 

people. 

 

The Partnership for Renewal is a comprehensive strategy to 

rebuild the devastated economy left to us by the previous 

government. 

 

The Saskatchewan vision for health will get us working 

together towards wellness.  Families and individuals can make 

personal choices that contribute to good health.  Communities 

can work toward wellness by tailoring health services to meet 

local needs.  And the province can work towards wellness by 

developing policies that contribute to better health and to 

reduce the likelihood of illness. 

 

The discussion paper "Forging Partnerships in Agriculture" 

will increase discussion of the challenges and opportunities 

relating to Saskatchewan agriculture and food industry. 

 

And for a guiding principle in the agriculture sector is to foster 

a self-reliant, sustainable agriculture and food industry, and 

viable communities in rural Saskatchewan, we must ensure the 

maximum opportunity for the highest number of families and 

individuals to earn a livelihood from agriculture. 

 

To accomplish that goal we are going to need new ideas to 

meet the new situations that today's farmers face.  The 

"Forging Partnerships" paper will facilitate the creation of 

those ideas. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as the throne speech concluded, we have 

reason to be optimistic.  True, we face new and difficult 

challenges.  But the government is dedicated to searching out, 

through our partnership with the people, new ideas to meet new 

situations.  Together we will continue to organize our society 

for the benefit of all, not for the privileged few.  For that is the 

principle to which we adhere. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the Speech from the Throne.  

I will not be supporting the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it's been with interest that I've been listening to the 

speeches being presented by members on the government side 

of the House, many of the members who have at times raised 

certainly a lot of . . . at least they're trying to raise the hopes of 

Saskatchewan people in light of the fact that the throne speech 

that was delivered by Her Honour recently in this Assembly, I 

would suggest, really didn't offer any hope -- really didn't offer 

a lot that the people of Saskatchewan could hang their hats on, 

that they could look forward to tomorrow with a lot of hope 

and optimism, believing that this province has so much to 

offer. 

 

And I'm certainly pleased to stand up in this Assembly today 

and to speak in support of the amendment, but also to offer 

some observations regarding the Speech from the Throne. 

Ordinarily, we find that a Speech from the Throne is used . . . 

or it's a government's means, or way, of relaying to the people 

of the province its plan for the future -- its plan -- and to set out 

some goals.  And when I look at the Speech from the Throne, I 

wonder what kind of goals the government really has in mind, 

as it seems to me it was very vague, and in a lot of cases was 

just filled with platitudes and fluff. 

 

And I want to quote from an article in the Leader-Post, Friday, 

February 26.  The article headline says, "Throne speech dulled 

by lack of clear direction."  In fact it goes on: 

 

 It had contained a soothing "Comfort ye, my people" 

message.  The new address is prelude to a Lenten budget that 

will signal taxpayer pain and suffering. 

 

And certainly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we saw today in this 

Assembly where some of my colleagues raised questions about 

the taxpayer pain and suffering that people across this province 

are now facing because of the lack of direction that this 

government has taken. 

 

And watching the news last night it was interesting to note 

what has taken place in other parts of this country regarding 

NDP philosophy and NDP policy and direction by NDP 

governments.  I'm sure that the NDP Government of Ontario 

wasn't all that happy to see the united auto workers of Canada 

pass a motion to disassociate themselves with the NDP 

Government of Ontario. 

 

(1145) 

 

And it would indicate to me that there is a certain 

dissatisfaction that is beginning to grow across this nation 

regarding NDP policy in light of the fact that over the past 

number of years, while in opposition, the NDP Party, then 

opposition members, took the viewpoint that while 

governments were trying to get a control of deficits, were 

trying to set some guidelines, were trying to project into the 

future and lay out ways and means of addressing not only 

deficit financing but how to balance the budget and how to be 

open and honest with the people, the NDP Party here in 

Saskatchewan and in other parts of this country and in Ottawa 

continue to reprimand the governments of the day for not 

spending enough, not putting enough into health care, not 

putting enough into education, not looking after people under 

social services. 

 

And now we find today when they formed government, where 

are they?  What have they done to help people?  What have 

they done to help people in need?  Most people, I find, in fact a 

lot of people, are quietly in some cases accepting, or have 

accepted.  However, Mr. Speaker, I think more people are 

beginning to speak out, because the pain and suffering has just 

become unbearable.  For many people the bottom line has 

disappeared, and for many people . . . And that is the reason we 

see members of the Saskatchewan Government Employees 

Union walking in front and picketing in front of the legislature, 

even today, Mr. Speaker.  Because the bottom line has 

disappeared for them.  Since the election of a government that 

they 



154 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 1993 

thought was going to do so much more for them, their 

take-home has disappeared.  They don't have that extra 

funding. 

 

So what I say, Mr. Speaker, this throne speech has no plan and 

no concrete evidence of direction.  Nothing in the throne 

speech to encourage people.  And many of the government 

members were commending their cabinet colleagues for the 

direction and they were saying that the people of Saskatchewan 

were going to accept this throne speech as something to hang 

their hats on, to look forward to in the future. 

 

And yet I want to read from a letter to the editor that appeared 

in one of our local papers and it says: "Which side are you on?"  

And I just want to read a bit of this letter to the editor, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, just for the sake of government members as I 

note the name of the individual and where it came from and I 

know this individual quite well and I know that he certainly 

hasn't worked for the party that I represent -- in fact he's 

worked very diligently for government members over the 

years. 

 

And he says: 

 

 Dear editor: 

 

 Working people and farmers are dropping support for and 

membership in the NDP because they felt they were putting a 

government in place to implemented solutions which met the 

needs of themselves and people like them, and they know 

that the solution being implemented meets the needs of the 

system, and of the rich. 

 

 Party supporters feel betrayed, and no less than a reversal of 

that betrayal can win their involvement and support. 

 

And coming from an individual of this nature, Mr. Speaker, I 

take note of a comment like that.  And he says: 

 

 NDP supporters are primarily working people, farmers, or 

self-employed. 

 

 They are asking this question of the party leaders and 

governments: 

 

 Which side are you on? 

 

I could go on to quote many other points from that article, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, where there are many NDP supporters across 

this province really don't know where to turn or who they are to 

turn to. 

 

In fact let me take a quick look at the throne speech just for a 

moment.  The beginning of the throne speech, we see, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the government said that they were going: 

 

 . . . to restore common sense and competence to the 

management of the public treasury; 

 

Common sense, I wonder where the common sense really is. 

. . . to restore public faith in the ability of politicians to serve 

the public interest; 

 

And every time I turn around we seem to find a greater lack of 

faith from the public on behalf of the politicians to serve them 

openly, to serve them honestly, to be forthright with direction, 

and to let them know the direction that they are planning for 

this province, and the direction they are planning as they lead 

us into the year 2000. 

 

It says that they are going: 

 

 . . . to give new hope to the less fortunate; and to bring people 

together. 

 

Another section of the throne speech, Mr. Minister, talked 

about open and accountable government.  And yet while the 

government is talking about being open and accountable, we 

find that the local media certainly don't find them to be that 

way.  In fact one headline said: freedom of information 

commitment questioned.  And another article from the Leader-

Post indicated that it was actually . . . this freedom of 

information legislation was passed by the Tories when they left 

office in 1991.  And at that time I'm sure the media felt that if 

the NDP changed . . . if the government of the day changed and 

the NDP formed government of the province, that certainly this 

freedom of information Bill would be followed to the letter. 

 

And yet they find: 

 

 For instance, two omnibus polls conducted for the NDP in 

September and October of 1992 revealed the government had 

been a major disappointment in job creation, economic 

development and farm assistance. 

 

And when the media tried to find this information or gather this 

information, they were hindered in gaining access to the 

information.  In fact even today I wonder if the media were 

able to get any more information on recent polling. 

 

Another thing the media found out through freedom of 

information after diving into and being persistent and asking 

the government for their information, they found: 

 

 A memo last April from former finance minister Ed 

Tchorzewski -- ironically obtained through FOI (freedom of 

information) -- told cabinet colleagues to make disclosure of 

budget-related information as difficult as possible. 

 

And that's a quote from the Leader-Post article, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, does that talk of a government that's 

being open and accountable?  Or does that talk of a group of 

ministers or individuals who really want to be open with the 

public? 

 

I find it interesting that this media group would find it difficult 

to obtain this information when their feeling was, change the 

government and we'll have all the access we need.  Well lo and 

behold, the access and accountability isn't there. 



March 5, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 155 

Another point, and I find it interesting in view of today's 

happenings.  The media said: 

 

 After years of criticizing the Tories of governing by polls, it 

would be gauche to release documentation that confirms you 

are doing the same. 

 

And then there's one comment that I just wanted to bring out by 

this individual.  This columnist says: 

 

 But one wonders (in light of the recent scandal taking place 

down at the White Bear Reserve, one wonders) how it can 

chastise the White Bear Reserve for flouting one law of the 

land when it is doing the same with another. 

 

 And one really wonders about its true commitment to 

accountability and openness. 

 

And another article, Mr. Deputy Speaker, basically says the 

same thing, "Government balks at FOI (freedom of 

information) request": 

 

 For the second year in a row, the NDP government is 

withholding the results of its pre-budget polling. 

 

 But this year (the editorial says) the government hasn't even 

cited the loophole it's used to deny a freedom of information 

request. 

 

I wonder what that really means, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  If this 

government is going to be as open and accountable as they say 

they are, then how come the media are all of a sudden finding 

that the openness isn't exactly there?  Maybe we need to ask the 

Minister of Justice.  Maybe he can respond on another 

occasion. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we look at the throne speech we 

find that, as I've indicated, a lack -- it's very vague -- there's a 

lack of vision.  And as we've heard over the last number of 

days, when it comes to responding to questions, on many 

occasions the Premier has stood up and the Minister of Finance 

has stood up and other cabinet ministers, and talked of the 

doom and gloom that is in this province. 

 

And one wonders why there is a lack of interest in investment 

in the province of Saskatchewan.  One has to ask: where is all 

the investment?  Where are all of the 700 companies that were 

going to come to the province of Saskatchewan?  Where are 

they today, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

 

Well it would seem to me that many of these companies are 

basically sitting on the outside, may have thought of coming to 

Saskatchewan, but there isn't anything even in this throne 

speech that would give them a reason to even move or even 

look towards coming to Saskatchewan.  In fact if we look at the 

province today and we look at the number of activities and 

economic activity that has taken place over the last year and a 

half, most of that economic activity and job creation has come 

about as a result of the policies of the former government prior 

to the 1991 election -- government making decisions to invest 

and to 

build in this province. 

 

And I wonder.  Certainly the member from Churchill Downs 

would like to question . . . I probably shouldn't repeat what he 

had said, Mr. Speaker.  But one should be aware of what is 

really coming from the members opposite and the fact that any 

time you raise questions, Mr. Speaker, all of a sudden the 

members find it difficult to sit back and just listen to reason, to 

sound reason. 

 

What we want to put forward and what we will attempt to put 

forward over the next period of this session, Mr. Speaker, is a 

format that would lay out a plan that could be followed by the . 

. . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Will the members please give the 

member from Moosomin the courtesy of speaking in this 

legislature? 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  What we will attempt 

to do, Mr. Speaker, is to lay out a format, and hopefully the 

government will do as they have on a number of occasions 

previously -- take a look at some of our ideas, some of the 

ideas that we feel could be used to generate economic activity, 

to really raise the expectations in this province, to raise the 

hopes of people, such as the Atomic Energy agreement.  

Shortly after the election, scrapped.  A few months later, 

reintroduced, a few minor changes, but reintroduced, and the 

people of Saskatoon and a lot of people in Saskatchewan said 

thank you. 

 

And I'm sure the people of Saskatchewan appreciated the fact 

that the government revisited that whole program of the 

Atomic Energy agreement because it can and has the potential 

of creating a real economic boom in this province.  And I think 

today, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Energy and Mines, 

federal minister, is now in China at this present time visiting 

with the Chinese regarding CANDU (Canadian deuterium 

uranium) nuclear technology to be used in energy involvement 

in that country. 

 

And certainly Saskatchewan has a potential, Mr. Speaker, of 

really becoming a major player in atomic energy, in the 

fuelling and power generation and creation, not only in 

Saskatchewan, not only in Canada, but in the rest of the world, 

in many areas of the world where they just lack the ability, Mr. 

Speaker, or lack the resources of generating power electricity 

from natural sources such as water or even wind. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we have also seen in the lack of vision, is 

the fact that again the government not only complains about 

what the former government did, but they continually look at 

the present government in Ottawa and complain about the 

offloading that the federal government has done on the 

provinces. 

 

And certainly the member from Melville, in his speech today, 

talked about the fact that this government today is going to 

hold the federal government responsible for third line of 

defence because of the lack of support the province gave to the 

agricultural industry by destroying a farm program. 



156 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 1993 

Mr. Speaker, we're not saying it was the best program 

available.  But, Mr. Speaker, it was a sound program that could 

have been designed and developed over the years to provide a 

reasonable and a guaranteed base for farmers to work with and 

to operate within, which if built upon, could have eventually 

been fiscally responsible so that the province of Saskatchewan 

and the people of Canada and the Government of Canada could 

be assured that the agricultural economy would be renewed, 

revitalized, and strengthened so that our small communities 

would be able to live and survive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I look at the Speech from the Throne, it 

talks about promising renewal.  And I'm quoting from the Star-

Phoenix.  It says, Mr. Speaker:  Premier Roy Romanow calls 

his government's agenda a journey of renewal that will 

eventually . . . Saskatchewan undergo a transformation that he 

likens to the quiet revolution which shook Quebec in the 1960s. 

 

And yet at the same time when the Premier was talking about 

renewal, there were members of the government employees' 

union marching on the steps, speaking out against this 

government's so-called plan of renewal. 

 

In fact when I look at the plan of renewal all I see is old faces 

reincarnate.  It's interesting to note the number of people that 

have been brought back into this government, back from the 

'70s.  And I'm not sure whether renewal is really looking ahead 

into the future or looking back into the past. 

 

(1200) 

 

And then again, not only did the Premier talk about renewal, 

but then he got into his doom and gloom setting again.  And he 

warned Saskatchewan taxpayers, basically saying that there 

was going to have to be more cuts; more amputation of 

programs; cuts to middle and upper management in 

government; cuts in the number of departments, agencies, 

boards, and commissions, in this budget -- in the budget 

coming up.  I believe it's coming up on March 18. 

 

One has to wonder what kind of real hope the people of 

Saskatchewan are going to see.  Certainly there wasn't a lot of 

hope offered in the throne speech.  And the budget debate, even 

today, Mr. Speaker, we can sit back and guess as to what it 

might contain. 

 

And just from a letter that appeared in the Whitewood Herald 

on March 1, 1993, and I'm going to read this letter into the 

record, Mr. Speaker, regarding the observations of an 

individual in this province who basically is saying: 

 

 Dear Editor: History Repeats.  Glenn Hagel's letter on 

January 6th, 1993 about promises kept, got me thinking back.  

So I am writing my first letter to the editor. 

 

 In the 1944 election campaign TOMMY said "the 2% E&H 

nuisance tax will be eliminated."  He did; raised it from 2% 

to 3%.  In 1946 and 1947 we paid tax on all food except 

butter, bread and sugar. 

 

 In the 1991 election campaign Roy said: 

 1. At midnight, if elected the 7% P.S.T. would be gone.  It is 

and now we have an 8% P.S.T.  DONE. 

 

He said: 

 

 2. He could run this province with $4.5 billion; he set the 

budget at $5.17 billion.  I read in the paper it could reach $6 

billion.  WHOOPS!  UNDER ESTIMATED a little, the shoe 

is on the other foot now, way to go Eddy.  So Eddy had to 

quit. 

 

 3. He would open the books.  Spent $300,000 and Gas and 

Garf still haven't figured out where the money's going.  

UNDERWAY.  Better open them again but don't spend 

another $300,000. 

 

 4. He would start a prairie fire.  There was one at Grand 

Coulee without pollution, and it burnt the chemicals that Roy 

and Al put there in the 1970's.  DONE. 

 

 5. Would help farmers.  Raised GRIP and Crop Insurance and 

lowered coverage, changed legislation.  DONE. 

 

And then he goes on to say, and what did this province . . . this 

NDP Party, what they did not promise.  They: 

 

 DID NOT PROMISE: 

 

 6. To raise farm fuel .08¢ per litre so it costs more in bulk 

than at the Co-Op pumps.  DONE. 

 

 7. To raise farm power $5.00 per month and only $2.50 for 

urban, two raises in one year.  DONE. 

 

 8. Install casino gambling machines for Regina Agribition to 

get farmers' money first, then, move them to the country to 

get more money.  Thanks for the help Roy.  DONE. 

 

 9. In Melville, fired the Mayor from Crop Insurance and eight 

others and then hired back double; and dismantled Trinitel.  

DONE. 

 

 10. Dismantled the Saskatchewan Pension Plan.  DONE. 

 

 11. Spend how much on advertising Above and Beyond?  

UNDERWAY. 

 

 12. Raised the prescription drug plan to $380.00 a year.  

DONE. 

 

 13. Charging for eye exams, chiropractors and diabetic 

treatments.  Give us wellness by closing rural hospitals and 

more beds in large hospitals, nice shot Louise.  

UNDERWAY. 

 

 You can see why the N.D.P. promise card was only 4 by 8 

inches in size.  If it had included all real promises it could 

have been 24 by 48.  If this should continue for 3 more years, 

we will all be DONE. 



March 5, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 157 

 Except perhaps Glenn Hagel and friends. 

 

That would indicate to me, Mr. Speaker, that there are many 

people across this province who have become not only 

disillusioned, but dissatisfied and very cynical of government 

and what it is doing. 

 

The government talks about its job creation.  What have we 

seen in job creation?  What have we seen in the province of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Headline Leader-Post: Saskatchewan jobless rate hits high, no 

longer the lowest.  Saskatchewan's unemployment rate has hit 

double digits for the first time since the province began 

keeping records in 1966.  The jobless rate reached 10 per cent 

in January.  Saskatchewan turned over the title for the lowest 

rate in the country to Manitoba.  And yet the Minister of 

Economic Development talks about the fine unemployment 

rate in this province.  Yet we see since October of 1991 that 

that unemployment rate, despite the decrease in jobs in this 

province, substantial decrease in jobs, substantial number of 

people employed in this province, continues to edge even 

higher. 

 

And one wonders by the time the budget is delivered in a 

couple short weeks, by the time this session winds down, how 

many more people will have left the province; how many fewer 

jobs we will see in this province; and how many more people 

will be looking towards and finding out that it would be a lot 

simpler to go on social assistance than to try and work because 

they'll have more money at the end of the day in their pocket? 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, another article I want to read, a letter.  

And this talks about . . . we look at the government's portrayal 

of where the budget was and the deficit at the time, going back 

to 1991.  And they like to build this big picture of how the 

former government mismanaged, as their term is, mismanaged 

the finances of this province. 

 

And yet you will find, Mr. Speaker, there were through the 

1980s, there were a very difficult decade in time, Mr. Speaker, 

a time when we saw -- in the agricultural sector -- we saw frost, 

we saw drought, we saw hail, we saw . . . And in many cases, 

Mr. Speaker, there were a lot of cases where the employment 

situation wasn't that great.  And yet what did the former 

government do? 

 

The former government tried to . . . felt compassion for people 

and tried to reach out and help individuals.  They put a . . . 

made money available to home-owners.  They made money 

available to the farm community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you talk about that funny . . . and the 

money into the hands of farmers, let's remember, just 

remember one thing, Mr. Speaker:  money in the hands of a 

producer in rural Saskatchewan works its way right up into the 

major centres of this province.  And many people today are 

beginning to see that agriculture is a very important part of this 

province. 
 

And when the government talks today about the deficit, they 

forget about the unfunded pension liability.  They forget about 

the deficit in the Crowns.  They forget about the money that 

they used to purchase land and where the 

land values have gone from when they purchased that land.  

They forget about what happened with the money they used to 

buy holes in the ground, rather than, if they wanted to get into 

potash, why didn't they build their own potash company rather 

than buying mines or holes in the ground that were already 

employing people, that were already paying their taxes and 

paying their royalties?  What about oil companies? 

 

Mr. Speaker, what did the government do?  They said they're 

going to open the books and they appointed a man, Donald 

Gass, to review the finances of this province.  They also 

appointed one Garf Stevenson, and I'm going to tie both 

Finance and Agriculture into this a little bit. 

 

First of all I'd like to read another letter to the editor into the 

record.  It was printed in the Whitewood Herald, March 1, 

1993.  Dear Editor: 

 

 I am an active member of a local Saskatchewan Wheat Pool 

committee, having marketed grains, livestock, and purchased 

inputs through . . . (Sask Wheat Pool) facilities since the late 

60's.  I am proud to claim ownership in so successful and 

supposedly democratic an organization.  However, I am 

increasingly concerned about the involvement of . . . (Sask 

Wheat Pool) officers and officials in political issues which 

are not part of the mandate of . . . (the Saskatchewan Wheat 

Pool) board of directors. 

 

And he says: 

 

 To name a few, I think Garf Stevenson was out of line in his 

opposition to the idea of decentralizing the provincial 

agriculture department.  He was willing to work on the Gass 

commission on "Pool" time and was closely involved in the 

changes to the 1992 GRIP.  He now finds himself in a 

position where he cannot communicate effectively with the 

Federal Gov't, particularly on the third line of defence, to the 

disadvantage of the farmer owners of . . . (the Saskatchewan 

Wheat Pool).  He has followed his own political agenda and 

his belligerent attitude has filtered down through the 

organization to some of the district representatives.  They 

ensure that the grassroots disenchantment with company 

policy is filtered out at source.  Delegates are encouraged 

who do not "rock the boat" or steer away from the left. 

 

 With delegate elections in progress, all members should ask 

themselves if it is more than coincidence that year after year 

so many partisan NDP supporters, nominated as delegates, 

have moved on as directors and even become president. 

 

 With Stevenson's upcoming departure, the time has come to 

move the organization back to an apolitical state.  (And I 

agree with that.)  Let us hope that the board ensures we 

become an organization which can communicate effectively 

and without bias with any Government and with any and all 

members!  Farmer owners must be afforded 



158 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 1993 

respect and consideration in place of disregard. 

 

There again, Mr. Speaker, is a very strong indication that 

people across rural Saskatchewan are very dissatisfied, not only 

with this government, but are finding that it's time to speak out 

in support of some of the organizations that they hold so dearly 

if they want them to see . . . be able to function apolitically so 

they can represent the best interests of their membership. 

 

And when I look at the Gass Commission, Mr. Speaker, I 

would have to ask, isn't it time you gave us some of the real 

facts?  This is out of the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, an ad that 

was placed in the Star-Phoenix.  It says: dear Mr. Premier -- 

fact: The Gass Commission, using accounting procedures not 

used by any other province, added almost two billion to 

Saskatchewan's debt. 

 

Fact: Contrary to your horror stories, our real debt is 40 per 

cent of the gross domestic product, only slightly higher than 

Nova Scotia and lower than Quebec and Newfoundland. 

 

Fact: Saskatchewan's debt servicing costs have actually 

declined from 21.6 of provincial spending in '86-87 to 16.2 in 

'90 and '91. 

 

Fact: Our current deficit at 2 per cent of GDP is lower than it is 

in Alberta, Ontario, New Brunswick, or Newfoundland.  Only 

Manitoba and Prince Edward Island have lower deficits relative 

to the size of their provincial economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many people are questioning the accounting 

practices of this government -- even the auditor of this 

province.  Mr. Speaker, when we were recently in Crown 

Corporations, the auditor of this province raised a number of 

questions regarding the accounting practices of this 

government.  And in the last budget presented by the then 

Finance minister, the member from Regina North East, Mr. 

Speaker, the auditor indicated to the Crown Corporations that 

he would be following very diligently the ability of the 

government to take long-term amortized debt with a known 

interest rate that was an affordable interest rate, to bulk it all 

together, to lump it together, and to pay it off out of the 

Consolidated Fund, transferring it from the Crown to the 

Consolidated Fund then to wipe out the debt. 

 

In many cases, Mr. Speaker, the auditor said, what I'm going to 

ask down the road is -- in many cases this debt was being paid 

off; it was being paid off over a period of years -- why would 

you take and transfer it to the Consolidated Fund to build up 

last year's deficit by some $750 million and then at the same 

time the payments and the money flowing in, such as the 

Riverhurst irrigation project, is still going to generate revenue 

into the Crown Water Corporation?  Where is that money 

going to go?  Mind you, that would have been used to pay off 

the loan given to the Riverhurst irrigation project. 

 

So there are many questions, Mr. Speaker, that we as an 

opposition over the next number of weeks will be raising in this 

Assembly, so that the people of Saskatchewan will really know 

where this government is going. 

What about its wellness program?  They talk about a wellness 

plan, Mr. Speaker.  I'm really interested to know what that 

wellness plan really means.  The Minister of Health indicated 

that she had consulted with groups across this province about 

their wellness plan. 

 

And yet, Mr. Speaker, when I talked to people, when I talked to 

administrators, rural hospital administrators, when I talked to 

rural board members who have gone to some of these meetings, 

many of the meetings that people I've talked to attended, the 

Minister of Health wasn't there, Mr. Speaker.  Certainly some 

of the Health officials were there.  And what did I find out 

when I asked, well what were you . . . what kind of questions 

were asked, or what were you asked to do; or were you given 

an opportunity to voice some of your concerns or to lay out 

some objections or some suggestions? 

 

And what they said to me, Mr. Speaker, was that basically once 

they got to the meeting they were, in their opinion, basically 

informed that in the long run there was a plan already in place; 

that there was a map already drawn up with regards to regional 

health boards.  And as we see with the legislation presently . . . 

or just recently introduced, I believe we're going to find that 

indeed the government has basically taken the point that the 

regional health boards are in place, the districts are in place, 

and if the public and the communities and the municipalities 

out . . . the municipalities in rural Saskatchewan could not 

come up and reach a consensus, they were going to impose it. 

 

(1215) 

 

And that's what most people believed was taking place.  And I 

think the present legislation is giving us a strong indication that 

is actually what is taking place.  There really wasn't a real 

consultation process out there.  In fact I would have to wonder 

about consultation.  Just observing the news last evening, the 

Minister of Agriculture being in Swift Current and looking -- I 

believe it's one of the group of meetings that are taking place 

across this province in the next few weeks to in one way I 

guess try to develop an agricultural strategy -- I look over that 

group of individuals and one has to wonder, how consultative, 

and who really is there. 

 

Was it by invitation only?  Or was it really an open, public 

format whereby people from all walks of life, all political 

persuasions, could come and sit down and discuss the problems 

in agriculture. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, that we may find that at the end of the day 

that really it wasn't as open as the government has talked about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just coming back to jobs for a minute, I can see 

why members across the way are not interested in letting the 

media or the public know what is in store regarding jobs in the 

future.  Because I don't believe they really know what is in 

store; I don't believe, as I've indicated, they really have a plan.  

They're afraid. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP are not going to the public with anything 

to do with how they plan to create jobs in this province because 

they are afraid there will in fact be no 



March 5, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 159 

jobs. 

 

The throne speech certainly announced that the NDP want to 

maintain or create 8,000 jobs this year.  And I guess, Mr. 

Speaker, the key word here is maintain, because the NDP 

government has made so many destructive choices, 

Saskatchewan will be lucky to maintain the jobs that are 

already here. 

 

For evidence all we have to do is consider last year's throne 

speech and recent statistics on employment in our province.  

And as I indicated, remember the 700 businesses and thousands 

of jobs that last year's throne speech promised.  The official 

opposition, the media, and many people asked the members 

opposite of documentation of those 700 businesses, but to no 

avail.  Recently my colleague, the member from Kindersley, 

asked the government to provide a list; today we are still 

waiting for that list.  Now we know why. 

 

The Economic Development minister probably stood up in 

question period recently and gave the opposition a partial look 

at the secret list of 700 businesses.  The only trouble is, most of 

them had nothing to do with the minister's doing, or any of his 

colleagues, for that matter. 

 

Let's examine the so-called 700 businesses for a moment, of 

which the public was given a glimpse.  Let me just take a look 

at a few of the businesses that were thrown out by the 

Economic Development minister. 

 

Hitachi. Most people, I believe, remember the former 

government bringing Hitachi to Saskatchewan, but I guess the 

NDP are now taking credit for this initiative.  What about 

Norquay Alfalfa Processors, another economic initiative by the 

former administration in the Pelly constituency.  Next on the 

list is Babcock & Wilcox, once again a company that had 

nothing to do whatsoever with the members opposite.  Babcock 

set up shop in Melville in 1989, a good two years before the 

NDP formed government. 

 

As they say, Mr. Speaker, the list goes on.  Add other deals like 

Atomic Energy, community bonds, Saskferco, Farm Credit 

Corporation, and Crown Life to this list, and there we have the 

entire NDP economic plan, a plan that could be entitled, play it 

again, Grant; or maybe, a shirt-tail plan.  Both would be 

appropriate, Mr. Speaker, since any way you look at it this 

government is void of any new ideas of their own. 

 

It seems, Mr. Speaker, the point is that the only way the 

members across the way know how to create jobs is to play as 

the member from Riversdale.  One has to wonder if he is not 

playing Alice in Wonderland and their make-believe world of 

just looking at what somebody else has done and taking it as 

theirs. 

 

And I dare say that the NDP talking of creating 8,000 jobs this 

year is something that the people of Saskatchewan are very 

leery about as we've just . . . We haven't seen job creation.  

We've seen jobs disappear; the only job creation. 

 

And the Minister of Finance in his economic review statement 

of December of 1991 indicated the economic 

activity that was taking place was due to Saskferco.  He didn't 

say that it was initiatives of the former government.  He said it 

was Saskferco, Weyerhaeuser, and the upgrader, and once 

those projects were built up and running, there really wasn't a 

lot more to offer. 

 

And what do we have today, a year and a half later?  The same 

thing -- no more, nothing really to offer the people of 

Saskatchewan, even though there are many communities and 

rural development corporations around this province have 

ideas, have some excellent ideas, have some plans in the 

making, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They've contacted individuals.  People are willing to put some 

money up front, but nobody's willing to step out and take a 

chance because they don't know what this government will do.  

They don't know what this government's economic agenda 

really is, what its plans are. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one has to wonder as we look back prior to the 

1991 election regarding the announcement by my colleague, 

the member from Thunder Creek, about ethanol and its use in 

fuels across this province.  Now the media brings it up almost 

to indicate that the member from Saskatoon Greystone initiated 

the question of bringing in legislation that would implement 

ethanol as being part of our fuel. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many organizations across this province 

who are looking at ethanol production in small and large 

processing plants.  Yet, Mr. Speaker, no one knows where to 

go and how far to go with these ideas because the government 

hasn't given them an idea of where they're going and what their 

plans are for economic development. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to mention a couple of 

things.  The question we'll be asking is, on one hand we phone 

the government asking about the Saskatchewan growth fund 

and we're told that there are millions of dollars sitting in that 

fund that are accessible and available to manufacturing and 

processing and job creation in this province, and yet on the 

other hand when you apply or when you do a little more 

research, you can't find how you access those funds. 

 

In fact, we don't really know if there actually is that money in 

that growth fund.  And I'm going to be asking the Minister of 

Economic Development, where is the funding for the 

Saskatchewan growth fund?  Is there actually a growth fund 

available?  Is there money in that fund?  Is it there, available to 

small communities for this economic development that they've 

talked about, the economic development that the Lieutenant 

Governor talked about, the government talked about in the 

throne speech, being created in rural communities? 

 

And we see a lot of businesses across this province in small 

communities that are thriving today because they were created 

and initiated when a government was in place that set out a 

plan that people could follow and knew exactly where they 

stood. 

 

What about SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic Development 

Corporation)?  Where is SEDCO today? 



160 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 1993 

People are wondering, where does SEDCO stand on economic 

development?  The really don't know.  And it's not my position 

as an MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) to want to 

be involved to the point that I'm really pressing the SEDCO to 

give a loan to this individual or to that individual.  All I'm 

interested in and all the groups that I have talked to, Mr. 

Speaker, are interested in is being able to go to SEDCO, lay out 

their proposal, and have SEDCO respond in an appropriate 

time and giving them some clear direction as to what they can 

expect from SEDCO. 

 

The members opposite like to talk about the deficit.  Let's talk 

about the job deficit that the NDP are creating in this province.  

Unemployment up to 10 per cent -- a full per cent up from last 

year.  And during the first year of NDP choices, Saskatchewan 

lost 10,000 jobs -- jobs that are gone. 

 

Now I think that the government would like to expect and like 

to see the people of Saskatchewan forget what they promised 

last year in the throne speech.  Remember the promise?  They'd 

like to forget about the 16,000 jobs that were supposed to come 

to this province because of NDP choices, and now believe that 

even though they have cut the number in half for 1993, that 

8,000 jobs will suddenly appear.  Well I don't believe, Mr. 

Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan really believe, in 

light of what had transpired since the last budget, that even 

8,000 jobs will appear in this province. 

 

Add the numbers together and right now the jobs deficit in this 

province is about 34,000 jobs since October 1991 -- 34,000 

jobs in the hole, Mr. Speaker.  That's what NDP choices mean 

for Saskatchewan families and Saskatchewan families who are 

trying to survive in this economy. 

 

And this is a disturbing number, Mr. Speaker.  And as the 

opposition member responsible for families and seniors, I am 

especially disheartened by these numbers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I receive phone calls and letters every day 

requesting help in fighting the decision of the present 

government.  Families who are barely able to make ends meet 

are now paying more for their telephones, all their utilities  

_- telephone, power, natural gas, vehicle insurance.  More for 

necessities, Mr. Speaker, which is taking more out of their 

pockets, more of what they need to survive and to provide for 

themselves. 

 

Families who are on the brink of having to apply for social 

assistance but who want nothing more than to provide for their 

families without the government having to hand them a cheque 

every month.  They are real people, people who the members 

opposite are hurting.  Many of the families who contact my 

office are already on social assistance.  Many families are 

phoning for help.  They don't know where to turn to or who to 

turn to and therefore they're calling myself and my colleagues, 

wondering what they should do and who they turn to. 

 

And we find seniors as well are doing their best to cope, but 

with the choices made by the NDP it is not so easy.  The 

circumstances may be different but there is one common 

message.  People feel betrayed, completely 

misled by the members opposite.  And the members opposite 

know very well this fact because we are all receiving calls.  

And I'm sure that even members on the government side of the 

House are receiving calls from people who have been hurt by 

the actions of their colleagues and their cabinet. 

 

People are hurting and the NDP keep making them dig deeper 

and deeper into pockets that are almost empty.  Many families' 

pockets are already empty, Mr. Speaker, but through it all the 

NDP claim to care.  They claim to care while they are forcing 

families into bankruptcy.  They claim to care while they 

embark on imposing the biggest tax grab in the history of this 

province.  They claim to care and to be the friends of 

Saskatchewan families. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, with friends like the NDP, who really needs 

enemies?  The members opposite think floating fluff and 

platitudes in the direction of families will make the pain go 

away.  Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm afraid that all the fluff and the 

platitudes that the government would like to throw out will not 

make the pain go away that is hurting families and seniors 

across this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we think about the hurt, we just have to reflect 

back a few weeks ago to that rally in Saskatoon.  As one farm 

wife put it when she had a chance to address the floor, she said 

to the Premier, you can't keep milking the cow without feeding 

it.  One has to wonder when the government is finally going to 

stand up and be accountable for its actions rather than 

continually blaming somebody else. 

 

Maybe you can't keep raising taxes without creating jobs is 

more applicable to the NDP government.  Unfortunately the 

members opposite would rather play politics than be honest 

with people.  They would rather watch $180 million disappear 

through the cancellation of harmonization instead of helping 

small businesses, low income, and farm families. 

 

It seems, Mr. Speaker, this is the rationale that the NDP 

eliminated harmonization for -- politics, not the reality of what 

it could have done for people across this province.  They said 

the harmonization was unfair, that it would put thousands of 

people out of work and hurt the poor.  Harmonization, Mr. 

Speaker, was to be paid on things like restaurant meals, stereos, 

and other goods.  It was a fair tax. 

 

And I find people every day coming up to me and saying, 

harmonization, as we begin to understand it, yes, was a fair tax.  

Because those parents able to afford taking their children out 

for dinner or the families who can afford to purchase a new 

television, those were the people that were going to pay the tax. 

 

It was going to be paid only by those who could afford to pay.  

And, Mr. Speaker, for businesses it meant a refund as they get 

the refund on their GST (goods and services tax).  Further, 

lower income people were to receive supplements to their 

incomes through harmonization.  And the NDP members 

opposite will say, well families on social assistance are being 

taken care of. 

 

First, I don't believe this is really true.  I believe, Mr. 



March 5, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 161 

Speaker, as people take a deeper look at the harmonization 

proposals, they began to understand what kind of a benefit it 

would have been not only to individuals but to families across 

this province and even to businesses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I've been speaking I've talked about a number 

of areas where the government have not been as open and 

honest and truthful with the people of Saskatchewan.  I've 

talked about the rate increases and the continuance of rate 

increases, not only once, but two and three times since October 

of 1991 -- rate increases, utility rate increases that have hurt 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

I've talked about the lack of support and lack of direction this 

government has given to agriculture and to small communities 

across this province.  And I've also raised the question about 

the type of support this government is going to give to health 

care in this province and to education.  Health care and 

education, lack of support thereof which is going to hurt rural 

communities in my constituency and constituencies all across 

this province. 

 

(1230) 

 

Mr. Speaker, we could go on and on about the arguments that 

were presented by the former government -- arguments as to 

how to address the deficit and how to bring it under control and 

how to bring in balanced budgets.  And it'll be interesting to see 

what kind of number fudging will take place over the next three 

years, what kind of money all of a sudden we're going to find 

in two years time when the election rolls around, that this 

government has in its back pocket.  It'll be interesting to see. 

 

Because with the rate increases that have taken place and with 

the money that the Crown corporations were making, there's 

bound to be a surplus some place.  At least I think there should 

be.  We'll follow; we're going to follow that.  We're going to 

track that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think what the people of Saskatchewan are 

looking for, not only from the government but from opposition 

members, is individuals who will be open, will be honest, will 

lay out the facts, will let people make decisions, will ask them 

for their involvement. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I'm looking forward to the involvement of 

many people as they have already in phoning me or sending me 

letters, to their involvement and their input into some of the 

decisions that I will be asked to make, some of the decisions 

my colleagues will be asked to make, the questions we will be 

asked to deliver to this House in bringing to task the 

government on a number of the issues and the decisions they 

have made. 

 

I'm looking forward to hearing from people across this 

province in giving us ideas, not only how we build this 

province to the point where it's a better place to live in, but also 

as to how we address the debt.  Because people are not only . . . 

they're concerned about the debt.  They're concerned about 

deficit financing.  They have some sound ideas, and we want to 

hear from them.  And we are looking forward to suggestions 

that are going to come from people across this province. 

Mr. Speaker, I will have to say today that I find this throne 

speech to have been very void of anything real, anything 

realistic, or a very sound plan that the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan could really put their teeth into or could really 

look at and say yes, that's a solid plan that we can build for this 

future. 

 

And as I've indicated, many people have already said that they 

are finding the party that they supported and elected to form the 

government of this province has already disappointed them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, therefore I must say that I really cannot support 

the throne speech, but I will be supporting the amendment 

placed by my colleague from Kindersley.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 

delighted today to rise in this House and Assembly and enter 

into the debate on the throne speech. 

 

Firstly I want to congratulate my colleague from Cut 

Knife-Lloydminster on the superb job of moving the Speech 

from the Throne. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Also, I want to take this opportunity to 

congratulate also the colleague from Kelsey-Tisdale on his 

adequate seconding of the speech. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to give a thank you to the 

people of Last Mountain-Touchwood also for allowing me the 

opportunity to represent them.  It is rewarding work being a 

member of this Assembly, serving a larger good of the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm grateful by the strengthening that is shown in 

this throne speech for the journey of renewal that we had 

started on last year.  As the speech says, this is a journey to 

right the wrongs of the past and rebuild our economy and our 

society together.  This will not be an easy journey, but it is a 

journey that is being done in consultation with the 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

I believe that step one of this process is to begin to live within 

our means.  And we have taken that first step, Mr. Speaker.  

This year, we in the province of Saskatchewan are the only 

province to reduce our annual operating expenditures.  Both the 

annual deficit and the borrowing requirements were also 

sharply reduced. 

 

In fact we would have had a surplus budget last year had it not 

been for the horrendous amount of interest that we have to pay 

on the accumulated debt every year that was accumulated by 

the former administration. 

 

In order to bring in that type of a budget, Mr. Speaker, tough 

decisions were made.  And I want to compliment the Premier 

and the cabinet for having the strength to make and to hold to 

those decisions. 



162 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 1993 

Mr. Speaker, the numbers are there for everyone to see, and 

they're frightening numbers.  Saskatchewan now has the 

highest per capita debt in any province in Canada -- some 

$15,000 for every man, woman, and child in our province. 

 

That is in nine and a half years of the former administration has 

ran that . . . (inaudible) . . . $15 billion deficit.  And that 

followed 11 straight balanced budgets by the former New 

Democratic administration. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition said in this Chamber 

the other day that we should be telling the people what the net 

debt is, not the gross debt.  Well, Mr. Speaker, in order to get 

the net, you have to take what is owing on something or what it 

would cost and subtract the worth of that commodity.  Then 

you get the net worth. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we know what Rafferty dam cost, but we're 

having a little difficulty putting a value on a dam on a river that 

has no water in it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Mr. Speaker, we know what GigaText cost the 

people of Saskatchewan, but we're also having a little problem 

putting a worth on a room full of computers that won't do the 

job they were purchased for.  What is it really worth?  I think 

when you're talking about the debt built up by the previous 

administration, you might say it is net debt because they never 

built anything that was worth any value. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan will not forget 

that administration.  They have left a legacy that people will 

remember year after year.  Every year when we have to pay out 

some 7 to $800 million of our tax money on interest charges on 

that enormous debt they left, we will remember them.  And that 

money, Mr. Speaker, those interest payments leave this 

province.  They're paid to bond companies in Zürich, Tokyo, 

London, New York, and Toronto -- wasted money. 

 

We have made a major change to that method of borrowing. 

 

Last year this government offered its first issue of 

Saskatchewan savings bonds to the people of Saskatchewan 

thus allowing the people of Saskatchewan an opportunity to 

help in rebuilding our financial stability of Saskatchewan.  

And, Mr. Speaker, they responded; 37,000 Saskatchewan 

people purchased over $550 million worth of those bonds.  And 

the the interest from those bonds stays in the province of 

Saskatchewan for the betterment of the people of 

Saskatchewan and is not lost to some foreign investors. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Mr. Speaker, we must restore financial stability 

in Saskatchewan, not as an end in itself but to gain our freedom 

to choose a better future for ourselves and for our children. 

 

As we struggle to get a handle on the fiscal situation in our  

province, we believe that one of the major ways of generating 

revenue for the government is to put people to work, to create 

jobs for people, jobs that give stability to a family so they can 

plan their futures, build homes, purchase fridges, stoves, TV 

sets, clothing.  All this stimulates the economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we understand the necessity of people to work at 

productive jobs where they can make a decent and secure 

living.  I believe it was the small-business people, the 

independent clothing stores, hardware stores, drug stores, and 

so on that built the province into the financial powerhouse it 

was in the '50s, '60s, '70s, and the early '80s, in fact right up 

until the previous administration believed that megaprojects 

that cost billions upon billions of dollars was what would save 

Saskatchewan.  Well, Mr. Speaker, we know those 

megaprojects didn't work. 

 

And the former speaker just talked about a make-believe world.  

They had one for nine years where they thought the more the 

billions of dollars they borrowed, megaprojects they built, that 

the province of Saskatchewan would just flourish.  Talk about 

being in a make-believe world, they were for nine and a half 

years.  And now we have to pay for it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe it will be the small enterprises that will 

go a long ways to bringing jobs and financial stability back to 

Saskatchewan.  We have hundreds of new, expanding, and 

potential business projects in or coming to Saskatchewan now.  

More than half of those are outside the two major cities of 

Regina and Saskatoon.  Those outside the two largest cities 

have the potential to create or maintain almost 8,000 jobs. 

 

Some of the positive initiatives that have been put forward to 

build on the already developing momentum is the Partnership 

for Renewal -- A Strategy for the Saskatchewan Economy.  

Mr. Speaker, this strategy that was designed in partnership with 

a broad spectrum of Saskatchewan people, sets out to create a 

positive environment for economic renewal, to build on 

existing economic strengths, and to seek full employment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government, under the guidance of the 

Minister of Economic Development, has put forth a strong, 

secure, and workable strategy to develop the economy and to 

create jobs in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in agriculture today we have a crisis, a crisis that 

Saskatchewan cannot fight alone.  We simply do not have the 

finances to put into the agricultural sector that is needed.  But 

we should not be alone in this crisis.  Agriculture, the growing 

of food, and according to the federal government the cheap 

food for our people and food for export is a national 

responsibility, a responsibility that the federal government is 

failing to keep. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the former premier stood in this House last week 

and said that we shouldn't blame Ottawa because they put 

billions upon billions of dollars into agriculture in 

Saskatchewan.  They have put money into agriculture in 

Saskatchewan.  In fact I'm sure everyone will remember the $1 

billion injection of cash.  Remember that phone 



March 5, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 163 

call of 1986 election campaign by the previous premier to the 

Prime Minister?  Remember thanks a billion, Brian? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they don't seem to understand in Ottawa 

that we can't shut the tractors off and leave the land sit idle 

between elections.  We can't tell people not to stop eating 

between elections.  It is time the federal government lived up to 

its responsibilities of paying a third line of defence to the 

farmers of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- And not because it's an election year but because 

it is a responsibility and because it is needed; not because some 

Tory premier needs it to get re-elected.  Mr. Speaker, the 

serious flaws in the second line of defence programs have not 

given the level of help and stability that they were designed to 

do. 

 

On the TV program W5 which was aired on Sunday night, it 

showed the tough measures that have had to be taken in New 

Zealand because they were on the verge of bankruptcy.  It was 

interesting to hear a sheep producer state that he didn't care if 

lambs weren't worth anything or not, he was getting paid to 

raise them and that's what he was doing.  Mr. Speaker, they're 

self-destructed, and those systems in New Zealand and their 

economy has self-destructed. 

 

The 1991 GRIP program, which was a program designed by a 

professor of agricultural economics -- and at the time the 

premier -- did the very same thing.  Farmers were saying, I 

don't care how much I grow, I'll get paid the same amount; I'll 

get paid the same amount per acre whether I use fertilizer or 

spray.  Doesn't matter what the markets are, they'll get paid 

anyway.  And as we see in Alberta and Manitoba, their GRIP 

programs are self-destructing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say, from the member yesterday that 

quoted in the House.  He said, ask Alberta.  Ask Alberta 

farmers what they think about 1991 GRIP in Alberta and 1992 

GRIP in Alberta.  Ask the farmers of Alberta what they think.  

They're in it.  They're happy with the program out there. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I wonder, if they're so happy with the 

program, why were they at the rally in Saskatoon?  And why 

were they telling us that it wasn't so rosy in Alberta?  Why 

were they telling us that Saskatchewan didn't have it that bad?  

They were there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- They were there.  They were there from Alberta.  

They were there from Manitoba. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the changes that we made to the GRIP 

encouraged the farmers to look at the markets, to see where 

they could get the best returns, to farm the land to grow the 

best yields.  What it did was encouraged farmers to do what 

they do best and that is to farm the land, not the support 

programs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

(1245) 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- But, Mr. Speaker, we found out that the 

programs fell so far short of meeting the real needs of the 

farmers that it could not even be modified to do so. 

 

Therefore this government has appointed a new farm support 

review committee to help develop a safety net that will work; a 

safety net to assist farmers in need in Saskatchewan, in rural 

Saskatchewan today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to assist farm families in financial difficulties, we 

also introduced the farm land leaseback program.  Many banks 

and credit unions have become involved in the programs by 

providing six-year leasebacks. 

 

But the federal government through its agency, the Farm Credit 

Corporation, says no.  Says they will not participate in a 

program that will help farmers in financial difficulty in 

Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, this government will do what it 

can within the tough fiscal restraints that we are in.  We'll do 

what we can to help the farmers out of this crisis, but we can 

only do so much.  We will continue to remind the federal 

government that it has the finances, it has made the 

commitment, and it has the responsibility to help the farmers 

through the low prices created by the world trade wars. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the speaker yesterday from the opposition also hit 

us on 1992 GRIP, the changes we've made to 1992 GRIP.  And 

he said, Mr. Speaker, that: 

 

 I predict, Mr. Speaker, in the next election you won't win one 

rural seat -- not one rural seat. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I predict that in the next provincial election 

we will win more rural seats than they will. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Mr. Speaker, after nine and a half years of 

government, they finally brought a GRIP program in in the last 

year -- a hurried-up program in the spring of an election year.  

And the farmers were so enthused by it that they turfed them 

right out of office.  After they had seen what 1991 GRIP would 

do for them, they turfed you out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the same member from the opposition yesterday: 

 

 I recall the place practically coming down in boos (speaking 

of the rally in Saskatoon) . . . coming down in boos for your 

Premier.  That's what they were doing.  They roundly booed 

him from start to finish . . . 

 

I think that speaker from the opposition yesterday is slightly 

confused.  He has the right building, but I think he has the 

wrong time.  I think he's remembering when his former premier 

stood on that ice there, on centre ice, and they booed him 

continually.  He's in the right building but he's at the wrong 

time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



164 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 1993 

Mr. Flavel: -- He goes on to say, Mr. Speaker, that he says 

we'll be a one-term government.  But I'm not so sure.  We may 

be a one-term government, but if things keep going the way 

they are for the opposition, they won't even make this one term 

as an official opposition.  It was 50 years from the first time 

you administered this province to the next, and it'll be 50 years 

before you're even back in the opposition side.  And it will be 

50 times 50 before you ever administer this province again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Mr. Speaker, in health care this government has 

set upon what is called the second phase of the medicare 

program.  That is the reorganizing and the revamping of the 

health care delivery system, the development of health care 

districts, and this giving increased community control over the 

health system.  It will be encouraging the adoption of a 

wellness approach to health which emphasizes disease 

prevention, positive lifestyles, and community-based health 

programs.  And it promotes the coordination and integration of 

health services to provide a more responsive and efficient 

health system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing, I want to point out that during the 

election campaign of 1991, people were telling me -- and I'm 

sure that they told others -- they wanted a government that told 

them the truth.  And that's why they hired 55 NDP members in 

this House and only 10 Conservatives. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Mr. Speaker, they told us they wanted a 

government that would make the tough decisions, but do it with 

compassion and caring, protecting those that needed protection.  

And again, that's why there's 55 NDP seated in this House and 

only 10 PCs (Progressive Conservative). 

 

Mr. Speaker, they wanted the truth and we told them the truth.  

They wanted the books open, and we did that.  They wanted us 

to make the decisions that had to be made to gain fiscal control 

of this province again, and we have done that.  And as we have 

done it, we have tried to do it with fairness, with compassion, 

and yet protecting the people that need it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe this government is on the right track.  It 

has set the right agenda.  I will not be supporting the 

amendment.  And, Mr. Speaker, I will support the direction of 

this government and I will support the throne speech.  Thank 

you, sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 

very honoured today to speak on the throne speech that was 

presented last week by the Lieutenant Governor, a speech that 

deals with the question of vision, direction, where we want to 

go, not just next year or the year after that, but where we want 

to go in the 21st century.  And that's clearly what we've 

outlined in that throne speech. 

 

My time is limited today in what I can speak about, but 

that throne speech outlined three specific documents that have 

been put forward by this government:  the area of economic 

development, the question of partnership and communications 

with the people out there and discussing what they want in 

terms of economic development.  The other one is the wellness 

model, discussion on where we want to go in terms of health 

care.  We now see the desire of people out there who quickly 

want to get involved in terms of establishment of these district 

boards.  They know change is coming and they want to 

participate in that and have the community involvement to 

create the kind of health care system that we want. 

 

The other document that I want to talk about briefly is in the 

area of agriculture.  "Forging Partnerships in Agriculture -- An 

outline for discussion.".  Something that hasn't been done in 

this province for a long, long time.  Going out and talking to 

the people and determining the direction that we want to go 10 

years, 15 years down the road in terms of agriculture.  Building 

upon our strengths that we have.  Our vision. 

 

And I would like to quote a couple of statements that outline 

the kind of positive things we see in agriculture.  It is not all 

gloom and doom, as the members opposite would let us know: 

 

 Saskatchewan potential is strong. 

 

 There is great potential for Saskatchewan agriculture and 

rural communities. 

 

 We have a strong production and transportation infrastructure 

in place in this province, the envy of many of our 

competitors. 

 

 We have a population of skilled and resourceful farm 

families who consistently out-produce most other regions. 

 

 We build on our strengths.  Saskatchewan people are 

resourceful, innovative and co-operative.  Collectively, in 

small groups and in larger communities, they will develop the 

new ways to make the principles of co-operation work on 

behalf of long-term stability of our rural way of life. 

 

Interesting words.  Words that have been lacking for the last 

nine and a half years.  Particularly the word of cooperation. 

 

In my short time that I have left, I want to briefly review the 

nine and a half years that the members opposite had in terms of 

agriculture.  We heard great platitudes in terms of offloading 

by the member of Estevan the other day. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You're going to tell us how to get a 

Senate seat. 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- That's right.  As my member opposite has 

said, we heard great platitudes from the member from 

Kindersley talking about, you know, how wonderful it was 

under the previous administration.  I want to quote out some of 

the record.  I want to correct the record. 



March 5, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 165 

Crop insurance.  You want to talk about offloading in terms of 

the area of crop insurance.  At one time it was funded equally 

by the federal and provincial governments.  What did the 

previous government do?  They agreed with the federal 

government to offload and pick up a share of 25 per cent by the 

taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Tough negotiations. 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Exactly right.  My member opposite says, 

tough negotiations.  They didn't even bother to cut a better deal 

for producers by saying, why don't we share it one-third, 

one-third, one-third and at least give a break in premiums to the 

producers of Saskatchewan.  They were afraid to say that to 

Ottawa.  They didn't do that.  And they stand up and say they 

cut a better deal. 

 

Farm support programs.  Western grain stabilization may not 

have been perfect but the maximum contribution a producer 

made to that was $2,400.  What came along?  GRIP.  What are 

the premiums?  Higher.  Is that delivering a fair system to the 

producers of Saskatchewan?  Is that the way, Mr. Speaker, to 

produce a fair deal?  I say no.  Negotiations again. 

 

1988, the drought program.  Clearly federal responsibility.  The 

province of Saskatchewan is now faced with a bill that we must 

pay back to the federal government of $15 million a year -- $15 

million -- because we got tied into offloading by the federal 

government.  And the previous administration sat by and let it 

happen.  They simply said yes, here's our cheque-book; how 

much do you want? 

 

The production loan program, something farmers who now 

have it, wish they had never seen.  But the $25 an acre was 

given out.  And what has happened since then through this 

administration, through ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation 

of Saskatchewan) is that at the same time when we face 

financial difficulties, we then saw the heavy hand of trying to 

collect this money which was very difficult to collect.  And we 

are trying to deal with that problem that should have been 

solved five, six years ago that has accumulated.  We are trying 

to solve that now as a government.  And that is their record in 

terms of agriculture. 

 

GRIP '91.  I heard the member from Kindersley yesterday talk 

about how wonderful GRIP '91 was.  I know he comes from an 

area where durum is produced.  He should go talk to his durum 

producers and how pleased they are with an overpayment they 

received.  How wonderful a bill.  Silence on the durum 

overpayment.  Not a word from the opposition and we now 

have to deal with that problem.  That was '91 GRIP. 

 

We tried to correct '92 but it showed sometimes when you 

build a house on a poor foundation it has difficulty standing up 

anyhow. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- If there was a failure that we made as a 

government, the failure was that we should have kicked it out 

entirely and started with a new program now. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- But we had a federal government that would 

not react.  It simply shut the door because, quote:  it wasn't an 

election time.  And they were simply hanging out the producers 

of Saskatchewan to dry because they were being totally 

uncooperative. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Being political. 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Being political, as my member says.  Let's 

talk about the question of bank land.  Under the previous 

administration, look at the number of acres that have been 

turned over to financial institutions.  We have tried to deal with 

that except for one little case.  And my member opposite talked 

about the federal government politics.  The six-year leaseback 

was at least providing hope for people to continue to farm. 

 

And what is the word from Ottawa?  My representative in 

Ottawa, being the previous minister of Agriculture said, no 

way.  No way we will help the producers of Saskatchewan.  

We don't care how good the deal is.  We will not help it.  

Politics -- politics comes into it again. 

 

That is the advantage of a vision, Mr. Speaker.  A vision 

outlines where we want to go in 10 years and puts the 

guidelines out there and allows people to participate in that and 

say where they want to go rather than dealing with the question 

of what's going to happen this year or next year with no vision, 

no light.  And that's how they treated agriculture, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  It now being 1 o'clock, this House 

stands adjourned until 2 p.m. on Monday. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 

 

 


