


















































Hansard: May 27, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1971 

 May 27, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order, the following petitions have been 

reviewed and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 

received: 

 

 Of citizens of the province humbly praying that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to order 

SaskPower to facilitate the production of non-utility 

generated power in areas of increased demand. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my pleasure this 

afternoon to introduce to you and through you to my colleagues 

in the Assembly 27 grade 8 students from St. Angela School in 

the constituency of Regina North West. They are seated in the 

west gallery, Mr. Speaker. They are accompanied by their 

teachers Dolores Wagner-Owens and Nat Diiorio. 

 

It's with a great deal of pleasure that I welcome them here this 

afternoon and I look forward to meeting with them after 

question period to discuss various questions and concerns they 

may have with respect to the Assembly and to the government 

in general. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in welcoming 

this terrific group of students from my constituency. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my 

honour and privilege on behalf of my colleague, the member 

from Elphinstone, to introduce to you and through you to the 

Assembly 26 students seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, in 

grade 6 and 7 from Herchmer community school in Regina. 

 

They are accompanied by their teachers Cindy Moore, Elaine 

Nystrom, and Rick Cardinal; and their chaperon is one of the 

parents, Yvette Stonechild. And I'd like the members to join me 

in welcoming them to the gallery today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 

the Assembly, 46 grade 4 students from the Wadena 

Elementary School. For many years the grade 4 class from 

Wadena has been coming to see the proceedings here in the 

legislature and I'm glad they're back here today. 

 

After question period I will be meeting with them. They are 

accompanied by teachers, Mr. Desmond 

Stone, Mrs. Denise Nelson, and chaperons Brian Stasuik, Earl 

Christianson, Bonny Vellacott, Patti Flanders, and Kathy 

Hrynchyshyn. The bus driver is Robert Hilbig. And I would ask 

all members of the Assembly to greet them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Electoral Boundaries Legislation 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Premier today. Mr. Premier, my question is 

about the response which I received from your Minister of 

Justice to the electoral boundaries proposal put forward by my 

caucus. And I must say, Mr. Premier, that I was extremely 

disappointed with the response that I received from your 

government yesterday. 

 

I think, Mr. Premier, this proved to one and all that the 

invitations to the opposition for cooperation with you are 

simply that, they are talk and nothing else. In fact, Mr. Premier, 

our caucus is very reluctant to be cooperative these days given 

what you intend on doing to cooperatives in the province of 

Saskatchewan tomorrow. 

 

Mr. Premier, the letter your minister sent me failed to respond 

to the basic request we were making of you. We were not 

asking you to accept our proposal. We were simply asking that 

you give the commission the freedom to evaluate our proposal 

and any others that may come forward. 

 

Mr. Premier, why would you and your Minister of Justice be 

afraid to do that? If the proposal you are putting forward really 

is the best one available, why are you afraid to let an 

independent commission make that determination? Why is that, 

sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much. The response 

of which the member complains deals with the problem which 

your proposal has. Basically the Minister of Justice pointed out 

that there is no cost saving and there may be some very real 

concerns about whether or not at the end of the day we preserve 

the principle of one person, one vote. 

 

The proposal which you put forward does not solve any 

problems and it seems to create some new ones. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Premier. Mr. Premier, despite the talk of 

cooperation, your entire letter was dedicated to condemning the 

proposal put forward by my caucus. Mr. Premier, I'm confident 

that I could find just as much fault with the proposal that your 

government has put forward in the Bill. 

 

The point is, Mr. Premier, is that you and I, two people with 

political self-interest in this province and in this 



1972 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1993 

process, should not be the ones making the decisions. That 

decision should be left to an independent, politically neutral 

body if this process is to have the integrity that we all want. 

 

And that is why I've suggested to you two possible actions, Mr. 

Premier. Number one, to amend the Bill to remove all 

constraints and preconditions from the commission; or, number 

two, refer the Bill to the Standing Committee on Privileges and 

Elections which I'm sure Mr. Speaker, if no one else, is familiar 

with. 

 

Mr. Premier, since the minister failed to respond to either one 

of these requests in his letter, I'm forced to ask you again today: 

will you remove all political influence from this process by 

taking one of these two options? Would you do that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- For anyone who has spent any time in 

this province, to hear members opposite talk about removing 

political influence from the process of drawing boundaries is a 

very, very strange thing. 

 

Members opposite, when they were in office -- the member 

from Estevan as premier, the member from Thunder Creek as a 

member of the treasury benches -- you participated in a process 

which was rank with politics. 

 

This process that we have suggested removes politics from the 

process of drawing the boundaries. That is . . . and that is the 

whole reason behind the way it's been structured. I can't believe 

members have any other interest in having this referred to a 

legislative committee but to inject politics back into the 

process. What other earthly reason could there be to refer this 

to the committee except that you want political considerations 

once again to govern. 

 

We say to members opposite, politics and self-interest are 

being set aside and we are trying to draw this in a fashion 

which is as fair as possible. All of that was pointed out fully in 

the response which you got. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, those 

obviously aren't the facts, and that's why the Premier should 

take a personal interest in this agenda item. Mr. Premier, in the 

letter your minister states: we are reluctant to formally tie the 

hands of the commission in the way in which you have 

suggested. 

 

Mr. Premier, we are not the ones trying to tie the hands of the 

commission. We are not even suggesting that you impose our 

proposal on the commission. All we are saying is give the 

commission the right to decide. Let them evaluate our proposal. 

Let them evaluate your proposal. If the Liberal leader can find 

enough original thought to come up with a proposal of her own, 

let them evaluate that proposal. 

Mr. Premier, let them decide. I'm asking you, as you suggested 

in your own letter, to untie the hands of the commission. Mr. 

Premier, would you do that? Would you untie their hands? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- What I think is patently obvious to all 

fair-minded people is what the official opposition fears is a 

fair-minded, impartial review of the constituency boundaries, 

because you have been the benefactors in the past of a highly 

abusive system. That's what you fear, is fairness, because this 

province hasn't seen it over the last decade. That's what we've 

introduced. I can't help it if you don't want a fair system, but 

that's what you got. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

minister talks about fairness. This is a government which today 

has a difficulty between telling . . . between cooperation and 

coercion. This is a government that unilaterally took away 

60,000 farm families' contracts. This is a government that says, 

now cooperate, with 240,000 co-op members, as they proceed 

to break a legal contract and tax their dividends. 

 

And now you cooperate with the opposition, Mr. Premier, by 

saying that your boundary legislation is the only way to go. 

Why don't you learn the meaning of cooperation, Mr. Premier, 

and let the Electoral Boundaries Commission decide which 

proposal best serves the needs of Saskatchewan voters. Why 

don't you do that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Members opposite, whether in 

opposition or in government, have never been able to tell the 

difference between their own self-interest and public interest. 

And that's what you've confused in this case. You have 

confused your own self-interest and the public interest. The 

public are interested in a fair and impartial system. And that's 

what you have. 

 

If members opposite wish to raise these kinds of questions, 

there'll be ample opportunity to do it in Committee of the 

Whole. The referral of this matter to a committee can only 

serve one of two purposes, probably the both: (a) it stalls the 

day when we have fair and impartial boundaries -- something 

you don't want to see; or (b) it gives you additional opportunity 

to inject your own self-interest and partisan politics in an area 

which deserves neither. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

minister's words ring absolutely hollow. I say that you want to 

tie the hands of the commission, Mr. Premier, because it 

appears from the evidence that there is a political exercise on 

your behalf. In fact according to the member from Moose Jaw 

Palliser, the map is already drawn -- your House Leader . . . or 



May 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1973 

your caucus chairman, Mr. Premier. 

 

In Saturday's Moose Jaw paper, in a column entitled: Moose 

Jaw will have at least two seats, that member said, and I quote: 

". . . it's certain Moose Jaw will continue with at least two 

seats." It's certain, Mr. Premier. 

 

The member knows how the boundaries are going to be drawn 

and the commission hasn't even been appointed yet, Mr. 

Premier. Will you admit that the real reason you won't allow a 

truly independent commission is because it will interfere with 

your political agenda, Mr. Premier, not the voters of this 

province. 

 

Will you admit, as the member from Moose Jaw Palliser has 

done in the newspaper, that your restrictive legislation means 

that the map has already been drawn in the Premier of 

Saskatchewan's office. Will you do that sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The member from Moose Jaw 

Palliser was using a little logic -- something I'd highly 

recommend to the Leader of the Opposition -- on this matter. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I say to the Leader of the Opposition, 

those comments are scurrilous and full well you know it. No 

map has been drawn, and you do the eventual members of this 

commission a great disservice by suggesting that's happening. 

Your comments are scurrilous, and they really don't deserve a 

dignified comment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if the 

minister's words did not ring hollow, then the two suggestions 

made to amend the Bill to remove all constraints and 

preconditions would be acceptable, or to refer the Bill to the 

standing committee of this House, made up of all members, Mr. 

Speaker, neither of which should scare the Premier or his 

minister. But evidently those two things scare the daylights out 

of them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think it's incumbent upon the Premier of Saskatchewan, 

before his majority rams this Bill through this legislature, that 

the public be given a say in this and that you truly do have a 

commission with no preconceived instructions, Mr. Premier. 

And then the voter will trust you. Will you do that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, this government took 

office under the most adverse conditions bequeathed to us by 

your government. We are prepared at the end of the day to put 

our mandate to a fair test on boundaries impartially drawn, 

something the government opposite always refused to 

do. We are prepared to do that. 

 

Apparently you aren't even prepared now to accept boundaries 

impartially drawn; you insist on injecting self-interest and 

partisan politics into the area. The member opposite well 

knows that if you want to . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. Order. Order. I'm not interfering 

with the minister's answer, but I do like to hear it and I think all 

other members should give him the opportunity to answer the 

question, not carry on debates across the floor while the 

minister is trying to answer. So I ask the minister to wrap up 

his answer, and please give him an opportunity. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The member opposite well knows 

that you have full opportunity in Committee of the Whole, the 

broadest possible opportunity to ask questions, raise points. 

The only motivation you might have to refer it to yet another 

committee is to avoid the evil day of a fair and impartially 

drawn set of boundaries. That's what you're trying to avoid. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Co-op Upgrader Review 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Premier. Mr. Premier, yesterday you said you 

couldn't negotiate with FCL (Federated Co-operatives Ltd.) 

because they wouldn't call you. You waited by the phone all 

day and nobody called me. 

 

Mr. Premier, if you were in grade 9 and having a fight with 

your girlfriend, maybe that would be acceptable, but I don't 

think it's acceptable for the Premier of the province. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you pick up the phone, call FCL, remove the 

threats, tell them you're not going to legislate, tell them you're 

not going to expropriate, you're going to negotiate. Set aside 

your tax and take-over agenda and get to work negotiating a 

settlement. Will you do that for us today, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have in the 

past and we will again today and will again in the future, if this 

question is asked, give the commitment that we are ready to 

negotiate with Federated Co-op any time, anywhere, as soon as 

they're ready to sit down and negotiate with us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, that's 

awful strange. The Premier says that they won't call you. You 

won't call them. We're at some kind of a deadlock here. 

 

Why don't you and your government take the initiative, call 

FCL, sit down and negotiate with them? Work out a settlement 

that's acceptable to all of Saskatchewan. Mr. Minister, will you 

give that 



1974 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1993 

commitment to us today that you will at least take the time to 

call them and try and set up negotiations? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It may be of 

interest to the members opposite to know that the three 

meetings that we have had with Federated Co-op, with FCL, 

have all been initiated by me -- every one of those meetings. 

FCL has not initiated one meeting. 

 

We have had two meetings in Saskatoon in their offices and 

we've had one meeting in my office. They were all initiated by 

us. FCL has taken absolutely no initiative to negotiate any of 

these issues. 

 

I will repeat again for the member opposite: we are willing to 

sit down and negotiate with them on the basis of the Estey 

report any time they are ready. I will go there this afternoon. 

We'll have them over here this afternoon if they're ready to go. 

We'll negotiate through the night, through the weekend if 

necessary. But it has to be on the basis of the Estey 

Commission report and they will have to initiate the 

negotiations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, what you 

have here is a political agenda because FCL didn't support you 

in the '86 election. That's what the problem is here. You people 

have a political agenda to fulfil. You, the Premier of this 

province, and Mr. Ching have a political agenda; they want 

revenge on FCL. That's the question that I think is holding up 

the negotiations. 

 

If you are so sincere in your claim that you're willing to 

negotiate, will you remove the threat of legislation? Will you 

do that, Mr. Minister? Remove the threat of legislation rather 

than holding that over the negotiations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Speaker, the member asks me if we 

will remove the threat of legislation. It is no threat at all. What 

we are trying to do here is to rectify a very bad deal made by 

the previous government. Some of the members are sitting in 

opposition right now. That's what we're trying to do, is to 

change the deal so that it is going to be beneficial to the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 

 

The way the deal was structured by the members opposite and 

by the member of Estevan as premier was detrimental to every 

taxpayer in this province. Judge Estey has reported that this 

deal is on the verge of a breakdown; it's on the edge; it's in 

financial trouble. If that happens, every taxpayer in 

Saskatchewan is going to have to cough up $360 of the 360 

million. And only you, only the members opposite, could make 

a deal like that which would force the Saskatchewan taxpayers 

to kick in money and in the end own nothing. 

Mr. Speaker, we're willing to talk to those people. I don't see 

any willingness on their part, except in the media they say that 

they're willing to talk to us. Let them give us a call, and we'll be 

at either in their office or in my office negotiating in a matter of 

hours. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I just 

want to point out for you your government's blatant hypocrisy 

on the handling of this matter. Do you remember last year 

when your partners were wanting to renegotiate the Husky 

upgrader agreement? You said no, you can't do that; a deal's a 

deal. You yourself, Mr. Minister, said and I quote: not only are 

we under no obligation to put any further money in, but there 

are no grounds for penalizing Saskatchewan. Our position is 

secure; we have lived up to our obligation. 

 

So in your own words, if it's a deal that you people like, it's 

fine. If it's a deal that you don't like, you'll change it. 

 

Mr. Minister, you are holding a threat over FCL in these 

negotiations and you and everybody else in this province 

knows that that's correct. Mr. Minister, the only way you're 

going to settle this agreement is remove the threat from FCL 

and sit down and negotiate. We're asking you, Mr. Minister: do 

that for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

correct the member opposite on one of the statements that he 

made regarding the Bi-Provincial. He was correct in one 

instance, and that is that we honoured every commitment that 

was made by this government, and even by the previous 

government, to Bi-Provincial. 

 

We made no effort to try and break a deal. We simply said the 

commitment was honoured. We did that. We said we would not 

contribute to the cost overruns and that was not part of the 

original deal, Mr. Speaker. So we met our commitment to 

Bi-Provincial. 

 

And we've also met our commitments with Federated Co-op. 

But we're also going to meet our commitments to the taxpayers 

of Saskatchewan. And the commitment to the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan is that we are going to protect their interests, 

which is quite contrary to what the members opposite believe. 

 

The members opposite believe that we should expose the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan to greater liability. We don't believe 

that. We think that we should protect their interests in order so 

that we can continue to have a decent province to live in. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you are 

prepared to break contracts when it suits you. You've broken 

them before. You broke them with the 



May 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1975 

farmers of Saskatchewan. Now you're prepared to break them 

with 240,000 co-op members in this province. 

 

You're prepared to tax members' dividends if necessary. You're 

prepared to bring in legislation to confiscate the upgrader from 

FCL, if that's what you feel is necessary. Are there any things 

in this agreement that you feel you won't do if necessary? 

 

The people of Saskatchewan I think believe that this 

government should be sitting down and negotiating with FCL. I 

think the people of Saskatchewan want you to remove the 

threat of legislation, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, I think the agenda is set. You want to confiscate 

this upgrader from FCL and you're going to go about it in any 

way possible. Mr. Minister, will you confirm for us today that 

your political agenda is at risk here; the real reason you want to 

attack FCL is because of that political agenda. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I gather from 

the member opposite's question is that we should do nothing -- 

that we should simply leave it alone, let it go into bankruptcy, 

and then write the cheque for $360 million. And also ask the 

federal government to write a cheque for $275 million, which 

also falls partially on the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 

 

I take it that the member opposite says: do nothing, just leave it 

alone and it will die on its own, and we'll simply write the 

cheque and Federated is going to have an upgrader that we've 

paid for. 

 

If that's what the member opposite is saying, then we don't 

agree. We disagree. We think that we have an obligation to do 

something to rectify a situation that you created, the members 

opposite created. You knew that this was a bad deal right from 

the beginning. You knew that it was not beneficial to the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan. You made statements to the people 

of Saskatchewan that were not accurate as to the amount of oil 

that would be used, the amount of royalties that would come to 

this province. You're making statements in this House now that 

are not accurate regarding dividends about the Co-op. 

 

These are all things that have to be changed and have to be 

rectified. This government is determined to protect the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan. We're not like you were. We're not 

going to expose them to greater risk. We're going to protect 

them and we're going to build a better province as a result of it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Premier. Mr. Premier, the only reason you are 

pursuing this vindictive tax and take-over agenda is to hide the 

fact that you have no plan for the economy of Saskatchewan; 

no plan for job creation; no plan for economic development; no 

plan to lower the record number of people on social 

assistance; no plan to help farmers or small businessmen or 

business people all over this province. And you're making the 

situation worse by scaring off businesses by breaking contracts 

all over this province. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you listen to the people at FCL? Will you 

listen to the business community? Will you listen to the 

thousands of Saskatchewan people who are looking to you for 

help? Mr. Premier, will you put an end to your tax and 

take-over policies that your government has? Will you do that, 

Mr. Premier? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 

opposite continues to talk about economic development at the 

same time as he talks about FCL and the upgrader. My 

colleague, the Minister of Economic Diversification, has laid 

out very clearly the economic plans for Saskatchewan. These 

plans have been accepted by all people in Saskatchewan. The 

news reports and the business people are telling us that we are 

right on on these plans and we should continue with these 

plans. If only we could get the members opposite to stop 

preaching their message of gloom and doom and join with us in 

rebuilding Saskatchewan. Like for instance . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. There's just too much 

interference with the minister's answers and I think that's 

unacceptable. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- I would say to the members opposite, Mr. 

Speaker, that maybe they should take a look at what their 

federal counterparts in Ottawa are saying about Saskatchewan's 

legislation to rectify the problem with NewGrade. 

 

The minister responsible for NewGrade, Mr. McKnight, is 

quoted as saying that this is exactly what Saskatchewan should 

be doing, that we should rectify the problem, that we should fix 

this up. And he says that we're perfectly within our rights to do 

this and that he supports the fact that we are cleaning up a mess 

that you people left for the New Democratic government in 

1991. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you know 

that that's not correct. What Mr. McKnight said was that it was 

within your jurisdiction to do this. That's what he said. He 

didn't say it was right. He didn't say it was okay to break 

contracts in this province. He didn't say it was all right to 

rewrite the history of this province. He didn't say anything 

about you having the moral authority to go ahead with this kind 

of negotiating strategy and threatening FCL. 

 

What he said was it was within your jurisdiction. He didn't say 

anything about any of the stuff you talk about. Mr. Minister, 

the Husky upgrader deal was good enough for you because it 

suited you. Now the FCL agreement isn't good enough for you 

because it doesn't suit you and your political agenda. And you 

know that that's the case, Mr. Minister. 



1976 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1993 

Mr. Minister, the people of this province and FCL, all they're 

asking is remove the threat of legislation, cut that out, stop that 

threatening FCL. Sit down with them and negotiate. Pick up the 

phone and give them a call. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order . . . was the question? Order. We have 

about a half a dozen members who want to answer. Let the 

minister answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Speaker, I detect that there was no 

question, but if there was a question I did answer it earlier, 

saying that we are willing to sit down and negotiate with FCL 

any time, anywhere; we're prepared to sit down and do that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave I would like 

to introduce a guest. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to 

you and to members of the Assembly, a guest seated in your 

gallery, Mr. Gerry Kristianson, who is attending the House 

today representing the brewers' association of western Canada, 

I believe, and I believe Gerry's the executive director. He was 

here in the province doing work for his association. I 

understand a number of the members met with him last night. 

And I want all members to welcome him here today, and hope 

you enjoy your trip to Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 87 -- An Act to amend The Mental Health Services 

Act 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the Associate Minister of Health to 

please introduce the officials who have joined us this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With us today 

are Lorraine Hill to my right, deputy minister of Health. To my 

left, Mr. John Labatt, executive director, mental health services 

branch. And just seated behind me, Mr. Gerald Tegart from the 

Department of Justice. 

 

And we look forward to Mr. John Elias, who is the executive 

director of the Saskatoon mental health region and a special 

adviser on this legislation, to be joining us a little later. 

 

Clause 1 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. We 

have a few questions that we want to ask in relation to this Act. 

And I will say at the outset that we do have some concerns. In 

fact, Mr. Chairman, we have some fairly basic concerns about 

this Act. 

 

I know that the minister is fond of saying that The Mental 

Health Act of years gone by has been a good Act, that it has 

served the residents of Saskatchewan well. And in fact I 

believe, Mr. Chairman, that the Associate Minister went so far 

as to say that this Act was a model that was used throughout 

Canada, certainly used by other provinces in Canada, as to how 

to treat and respond to mental illnesses in certain individuals. 

 

Mr. Minister, one of the gravest concerns I believe that we have 

is the implications that this Bill, this amendment, might have to 

something that seems to be very near and dear to the hearts of 

members opposite, and that is the individual rights and the 

individual freedoms that we supposedly enjoy in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Although, Mr. Chairman, I think that that statement is also in 

jeopardy by some of the Acts that the people of this province 

have witnessed over the last couple of weeks, and other Acts 

that are certainly not . . . could not be construed as being 

democratic at all. 

 

And so, Mr. Minister, we want to pursue those concerns today. 

And precisely I noticed that in one of the comments that you 

made on previous occasions, that you had in fact consulted 

rather thoroughly with many groups -- 35 or whatever groups 

and organizations -- as to the concerns and input that some of 

these organizations, and individuals I'm assuming, might have 

had about this Act. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I would appreciate it if you could have sent 

over to me a list of those organizations and the individuals with 

whom you have met, or the minister have met, or your officials 

have met with. And also, Mr. Minister, in addition to that, I 

would appreciate if you could outline for us not just those 

organizations that agreed with the ultimate form that this Bill is 

taking, but those organizations that disagreed and the reasons 

why they disagreed. Could you do that for me, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm more than happy to 

provide to the member the total list of organizations and 

individuals who were consulted and with whom discussions 

were held surrounding this important piece of legislation. 

 

By my count I think they are 35 in number representing health 

groups, consumers, departments of government, and so on. I'll 

ask one of the pages if they would bring the list over to you. 

And in some ways remarkably, I would say, a general 

consensus was achieved with all of the above listed on the sheet 

that you're now receiving. 



May 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1977 

If there was some concern, it came perhaps from the 

Schizophrenia Society who would have preferred, I think, if my 

understanding is correct, would have preferred that in fact the 

community treatment orders which are described in the 

legislation might have been a little more broadly based or in 

fact have gone further. 

 

But what I think is remarkable is that there has been general 

consensus among all of those, this long list of individuals and 

groups who were consulted and discussions were held with. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, could you square that statement 

away with the statement that you made in your second-reading 

speech when you simply say, while there was not unanimous 

agreement, there was unanimous agreement in most matters. 

And you just finished saying now, twice, that there was 

agreement in all matters. Now there's a discrepancy here. Could 

you clarify that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, in fact I think I tried to 

describe that here in my brief comment regarding the 

Schizophrenia Society, who, my understanding is, would have 

seen the community treatment order which is part of this 

legislation as having been broader in scope or having gone a 

little further. That is the area of lack of consensus, if I may say 

that. But even at that, the Schizophrenia Society is supportive 

of the legislation. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- So there's no one of these groups involved that 

has any pre-concern at all about the Act, other than what you're 

telling me right now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, my understanding is that 

certainly there was debate in the process of the formation of 

this Bill. Certainly there were concerns, concerns over 

individual rights and so on as opposed to the broader rights of 

the community. 

 

It's not suggested here that this Bill would meet everyone's 

perfect wish for a mental health Act, but it is the -- broadly 

accepted of all of these on the sheet -- the consensus that this is 

the appropriate way to move at this time. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I think you would agree 

that there are some elements within this Bill that are abhorrent 

to the democratic process. We have individuals here that you 

are claiming that in the best interests of that individual you are 

willing to restrict -- not only restrict, you are willing to take 

away the rights and the freedoms of choice of that individual 

because you know better. It's that Big Brother mentality that 

I'm concerned about. 

 

That is a concern: when you have to equate that delicate 

balance between the rights and freedoms of the individuals and 

the rights and the freedoms of the larger society. 

 

Now you're telling me that because we have professionals that 

say this individual is in danger of himself or is endangering 

others, therefore even 

though he has done no wrong, he has committed no crime, he 

may be to whatever degree functional in our society, and yet 

the time has come, you are saying, that this individual is now 

going to become an involuntary patient. We're going to strip 

him of his rights because we know what's better for him. And 

so therefore we are prepared to inject him with needles and 

whatever medicating drugs he may object to because that in the 

long run is going to be in his best interests. Is that what you're 

saying, Mr. Minister, and is that what you're prepared to do? 

 

(1445) 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, I think if we're going to 

have a profitable discussion this afternoon around this piece of 

legislation, I would like the member to clarify which portion of 

the legislation he is directing his comments to. Are his 

comments directed primarily to the issue of community 

treatment orders, or are they directed primarily to those who are 

now being held under Criminal Code provisions but because of 

the capping of the provisions under the Criminal Code, there 

will be a change. If the member could clarify that, I think then 

we could engage in a little more productive discussion. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'm talking about both, but 

since you want to take them separately at the time, let's talk 

about the elimination from the Criminal Code of the rights of 

these individuals to be incarcerated for an indefinite period of 

time. Is that what you're referring to? So let's take that issue 

first and explain that for me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I think the member 

is aware there has been a change to the Criminal Code of 

Canada, where people who are being . . . where people are 

being held now indefinitely under the grounds of being unfit to 

stand trial because of mental disorder. 

 

Now the fact of the matter is the Criminal Code has . . . those 

provisions have been changed so that the indefinite period has 

been capped. That now would permit a situation where those 

individuals would be free. It is our view that some of those -- a 

very, very small number of those -- may yet present a danger to 

either themselves or the community, and therefore this 

legislation is being enacted to provide a mechanism where they 

may continue to be held. 

 

I'm not sure if it's the member's position that those -- and again 

I say it's a very small number of individuals -- is it the 

member's position that they should then be freed to return to 

the community? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- What I'm concerned about, Mr. Minister, and I 

think what the people of this province are concerned about: 

number one, the safety of the individual; the safety of the 

community. That is not in question. But what I want to know is 

how far are you prepared to go? What stringent standards are 

you going to follow? What are the safeguards for the right of 

the individual to ensure that none of those rights are 



1978 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1993 

going to be trodden upon, whether it is by some overly zealous 

professional or by some family members or whatever the case 

may happen to be. That is the concern that we're expressing and 

we want you to address that. 

 

Now I know that you've got some fancy words in your 

second-reading speech where you say that we recognize that as 

being a problem. But I'm asking you, Mr. Minister: what are 

the safeguards to make sure that there is no way that a system 

where . . . And you have to admit, Mr. Minister, it's quite a 

thing for you to say that you're going to be able to give some 

individual the right and the authority to constrain another 

individual and inject him with a needle, inject him with drugs 

against his personal will. 

 

That is what we're concerned about here, and I think that is a 

very legitimate concern. And I want to know, and I'm sure that 

the people want to know the process that you have put in place 

that is going to ensure that that system will not be abused by 

anyone. That's the assurances that I'm looking for. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, I think the member's point 

is well taken, and obviously all members -- and I'm sure all 

citizens -- will be concerned about the issue that he raises, and 

that is why in the legislation is very carefully prescribed the 

criteria. And here I want to again remind the member that we're 

talking in this case of those who could be placed under 

long-term detention as a result of the change in the Criminal 

Code. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, for a person to be placed under long-term 

detention there are five criteria, and all of the five must be met. 

And so I'm going to just read for the member's information the 

five criteria, again underlining that all five must be met before 

a long-term detention order is in place. 

 

Number one, the person must be suffering from a mental 

disorder for which he or she needs treatment or care and 

supervision which can only be provided in a psychiatric 

in-patient facility. Point number two, as a result of the mental 

disorder, be unable to fully understand and to make an 

informed decision regarding treatment or care and supervision. 

Point number three, as a result of the mental disorder be likely 

to cause bodily harm to self or to others. Point number four, 

have been detained for 60 or more consecutive days 

immediately prior to an application. And point number five, 

suffer from a severely disabling, continuing mental disorder 

that is likely to persist for more than 21 days. 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, we feel that these five criteria, all of which 

must be met, in fact are very stringent criteria. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, could you outline for me who 

will be making those assessments, what individuals. Not only 

in terms of the professionals involved, but what would the role 

of family members be involved? 

 

I'll give you an example. There may be an individual 

who in the estimation of the professionals -- and I'll let you 

address that part -- are saying yes, he needs some special kind 

of drugs or special kind of treatment. And then on the other 

hand, members of the family may be saying, well that's our 

brother or that's our son or that's my daughter; no way are you 

going to do that to them. 

 

Could you illustrate for me, if there is that contentious . . . if it 

becomes a contentious issue, what recourse, what pattern, what 

program, or what outline of procedures have you got to address 

those particular kinds of situations that I'm describing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Now again, Mr. Chairman, I want to be 

clear with the member. We're here talking, not about the 

situation of a community treatment order, but the situation of 

long-term detention. So point number one, we are talking here 

about individuals who have already been detained for a period 

of more than 60 days. 

 

For that to have happened under the current circumstance, that 

individual will already have been assessed by, not one, but two 

psychiatrists for the original detention to have happened. For 

that original detention to have happened there would have been 

an appeal to the review panel. 

 

Now given then the five criteria which I outlined, an 

application then can be made for the longer-term detention. 

That application will be made by the officer in charge of the 

in-patient facility. It will list the criteria along with any of the 

pertinent medical evidence. That then is delivered to the Court 

of Queen's Bench, and the Court of Queen's Bench then 

conducts the hearing, considers the medical and other evidence, 

and ultimately would make its order. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, I want to ask you two questions 

dealing with numbers. How many of these so-called 

involuntary patients are there in institutions in Saskatchewan 

now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

member's question, about 12 per cent of all admissions to 

in-patient facilities will be involuntary admissions. They're 

under detention orders. About 12 per cent. 

 

On any given day in the course of a year across the province 

there may be approximately 425 patients in facilities. So if we 

take 12 per cent of the 425, we're looking at between 40 and 45 

people will be detained in our facilities. 

 

But again to focus on the issue addressed by the legislation, of 

that 40 to 45, currently there are about 25 individuals in the 

province who are now being detained under Criminal Code 

provisions. About half of those are being housed in North 

Battleford. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well thank you. That was very helpful 

because you answered a lot of my subsequent questions. So to 

make sure that I understand what you're saying, is that the 425 

patients, 12 per cent of 



May 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1979 

those are involuntary, but they're not all involuntary in the 

sense that they are because of the changes in the Criminal 

Code. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Yes, that's correct. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- All right. Now where are those that are being 

involuntarily restrained? In what facilities? Because they are 

under the Criminal Code, they are potentially dangerous to 

themselves and/or society. Where would those people be kept? 

 

You mentioned that a lot of them were in the North Battleford 

facility. Are you saying now that all of the . . . I don't know; I'm 

not quite sure. Correct me if I'm wrong. Are we talking about 

the criminally insane in this case? Is that a terminology that 

would be appropriate? And if so, are those the ones that are 

being contained in North Battleford? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, the information that I 

have: of the 25, approximately half of that number will be held 

in North Battleford, the Saskatchewan Hospital; seven held in 

the Regional Psychiatric Centre in Saskatoon, the federal 

facility in Saskatoon; there may be one or two in the Valley 

View Centre in Moose Jaw; and there may be one to three in 

the penitentiary in Prince Albert. 

 

I think it is worthy of note though that of this number, only 

three or four of this number might be affected by the change in 

the Criminal Code, the capping provision of the Criminal Code. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, I notice that some of these 

individuals are in the Valley View in Moose Jaw, and some are 

in the penitentiary in Prince Albert. Now that's a vast, vast 

spectrum I would suggest to you, of mentally problemed 

people. Could you illustrate for me what type of people would 

be in Moose Jaw as opposed to those that would be housed in 

Prince Albert penitentiary? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- There are two fundamental categories 

here by which these individuals will be defined. There are those 

who will be declared unfit to stand trial because of inability to 

comprehend the charges and select counsel and that sort of 

thing. There will be the other criteria of people who will be 

described as not criminally responsible for their actions 

because of mental disorder. 

 

Their placement in various facilities will depend primarily on 

their status and the risk that they might present to themselves or 

others. And so there will be an assessment done on the 

individual; obviously the higher risk individual in the more 

secure institution, the lower risk individual in the less secure. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- What I gathered from that answer is that 

you're either in Valley View or you're in P.A. (Prince Albert) 

depending on the risk. I don't think that's completely what you 

mean, Mr. Minister. Is that right? 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the member for Pelly on his feet? 

Mr. Harper: -- I would ask leave for the introduction of a 

guest, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

(1500) 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Harper: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, it 

gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to you and 

through you to all the members of the House here a long-time 

friend of mine and a constituent from the city of Yorkton, who 

is seated up in the west gallery right now, Mr. Speaker, and 

who is down here to Regina today on some business and has 

taken some time out of his busy schedule to take in the 

proceedings of the House. I would like the whole Assembly to 

offer a very warm welcome to Mr. Nick Kozmeniuk. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 87 

(continued) 

 

Clause 1 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, the member is correct. 

There are two sides to the equation. One would be the risk that 

individual presents either to him or herself or to others in the 

community. On the other side of the equation is what will be 

the appropriate treatment for that individual. 

 

And so it's both sides of the coin and assessments will be made 

where the most appropriate treatment might be available, or on 

the other hand, where the best protection is available. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, are there are any of these types 

of individuals in Weyburn? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- To our knowledge the answer is no, not 

in Weyburn. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- So far, Mr. Minister, we've been talking 

almost exclusively -- although the inference has been made that 

we're not talking only about criminal court cases here -- but 

we've been talking about the institutionalized individuals. I 

want to turn a little bit of my attention now to patients . . . well, 

let me ask you this: are there any involuntary patients in the 

community right now as opposed to in institutions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- The answer, Mr. Chairman, is no, there is 

no provision currently in legislation. The only provision that 

exists will be to detain people in registered psychiatric 

in-patient facilities. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well I guess that surprises me a little bit, that 

answer, Mr. Minister. Maybe it's because some may not fully 

comprehend what we're talking about here, but I do know that 

-- and I know that 



1980 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1993 

we're not supposed to talk about sections -- but there is a 

section right at the beginning of the Bill that is talking about 

the definition is broadened to include a psychiatrist who issues 

a community treatment order. 

 

Now it would seem to me that if you're going to have -- and I'm 

switching gears a little bit and getting into the community 

aspect of it -- it would seem to me that if there are going to be 

community treatment orders being given, an order is an order; 

it's not something that . . . And so I'm assuming from that that 

we are talking about involuntary patients. 

 

But your telling me that there are, in other words, no 

community treatment orders that have been given. Because if 

there are, then obviously your first answer to me was not 

correct. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, the legislation before us 

proposes to provide a system called community treatment 

orders. This would not provide for detention within the 

community, but would provide for the application of 

medication . . . insistence on medication within the community. 

It's not specifically detention as we know detention commonly 

in an institution. That provision does not exist. That is the 

provision that is before us in this legislation. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well then obviously 

if you have put this provision into the Bill, there must be a 

reason for having done that. So you must have identified a need 

for such a provision. And having said that, then I want you to 

give me your estimation of the numbers of people that will be 

affected through this new provision within the coming year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, I think what experience in 

the field has shown is that there are a small group of people 

who will suffer from long-term mental disorders and who will 

require medication to successfully live in the community. Their 

ability to maintain their life in the community has been shown 

to fail because of their failure to take those required 

medications. And experience again has shown that they will 

end up therefore suffering needlessly; it very often causes 

suffering and distress for their own families and care-givers. 

 

Very often they will come into contact with the law, and very 

often we will find these individuals being detained in the 

in-patient facility to get their medication regularized and under 

control and so on before they're back living in the community. 

And what happens is sort of what's described as a kind of a 

revolving door as this process has gone on and on. 

 

We believe that the community treatment order will make it 

possible then to identify these individuals and therefore 

administer the medication in the community and therefore 

allow them to maintain life in the community. 

 

When we're talking about the numbers -- and again there are 

some very strict criteria surrounding the 

community treatment orders -- our best estimate that across the 

province there might be about 40 people, 40 people in total, 

who would be subject to . . . or meet the criteria for the 

community treatment order. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, as an example, where would the 

Regina Mental Health Clinic fall into the scheme of things of 

what we're talking about so far? Is that a facility or is that a 

community base? What is that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, the member raised the 

example of the Regina Mental Health Clinic, and this will be 

like other mental health clinics across the province. And it is 

our view they will have an important role to play, have an 

important role to play, and will continue to have perhaps a 

more important role to play. 

 

I want to be clear with the member that the Regina health clinic 

is not an in-patient treatment facility; it is an out-patient 

treatment facility. 

 

There are psychiatrists who work through the centre. And those 

individuals, those psychiatrists, would be very likely involved 

in doing assessments and so on that could eventually see the 

order of a community treatment order, just as today they're 

involved in doing assessments that might lead to detention. 

 

Also through the community health clinics, we anticipate there 

certainly will be caseworkers who will be working with the 

clients. If it's leading to a community treatment order, it will be 

through that clinic where much of their service may be 

provided. 

 

What we see happening here, therefore, is that it will provide 

more ability, be less intrusive in fact on the client, where now 

the situation usually gets to the point where it requires 

in-patient detention -- the issuance of an order and then 

in-patient detention. 

 

What we're hoping is to move that process back a little so that 

when the need exists, the caseworker can be there, a 

psychiatrist can be there, medications can be prescribed, and 

the individual may continue to live within the community. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, could you indicate to the House 

how the Regina Mental Health Clinic is funded, where they get 

their funding from. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- The Regina Mental Health Clinic is 

funded by the province. It's funded through the Department of 

Health, through the mental health division, and the employees 

there will be employees of the Department of Health. But the 

clinic itself also links with other community-based 

organizations and other professionals located in the 

community. 

 

But I think in specific answer to your question, it's funded by 

government, by the department through mental health funding. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister. And obviously, I'm 

glad to see that you have a number of 



May 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1981 

officials with you that can supply you with the answers because 

what I'm getting at now is what kind of cost implications is this 

Bill going to have to the taxpayers of the province. 

 

And we may as well, since we've started on the Regina health 

. . . mental health clinic, take that as an example. Could you 

give me the amounts of money that the Regina Mental Health 

Clinic would receive from the province, from the Department 

of Health, in a given year? And also the case-load? And if 

possible, would you break it down for me so that we have a 

number per case-load what it would cost on the average then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, the member asks about 

increased costs that may result from the legislation. First of all 

in terms of the long-term detention, there will be no change in 

cost in there, given that these individuals are now being 

detained in the long term if they were to continue to be 

detained. So the cost is just straight, no change. 

 

In terms of community treatment orders, in fact we may see 

some reduction in actual costs because we're hoping that a 

community treatment order will allow individuals to remain in 

the community to receive their medication, and therefore not 

get into the revolving door of entry into the in-patient facility, 

which is of course more expensive. 

 

Because we have set some pretty strict criteria on the 

community treatment order and so on, there may be additional 

services required in that regard. Our best estimate there would 

be something between 13 and $15,000 on an annual basis, to 

meet those costs. 

 

I do have the budgeted figure for the Regina Mental Health 

Clinic and Regina Child and Youth Services. For the Regina 

Clinic, the budgeted amount for this year is $2,203,420; and for 

Regina Child and Youth, $1,358,810. And I'm sorry, we don't 

have the case-load numbers here but we can certainly provide 

those for you. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I'd appreciate that if you could send that to me 

at some later time then, Mr. Minister. How does that . . . that's 

what you budget for this year; now give me an indication of 

where we're going by giving me what the budget was last year. 

Could you do that? 

 

Mr. Minister, while you're doing that, check up on that cost that 

you gave me. You said 13 to $15,000 per year. Is that per case, 

or is that the total that we're talking about? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Let me try and clear that again for you. 

That 13 to $15,000 is the total cost we anticipate for all 

situations. And that would provide for new and additional 

services by the official representatives. There may be some 

increase because of the community treatment orders for the 

review panel hearings. There may be some financial assistance 

needed to be provided to people of limited income to . . . if they 

want to appeal to the Court of Queen's Bench. Our estimate is 

13 to $15,000 total 

for the year. 

 

In terms of the Regina services, you ask for the difference in 

funding. In '92-93, the budget for the Regina Clinic was 

2,296,750, so there is some decrease in this budget year. The 

budget for Regina Child and Youth in '92-93 was 1,333,640, so 

this year there's a small budget increase. Overall budgetary 

reductions to mental health services totally were 2 per cent this 

year. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- So, Mr. Minister, going down from 200 . . . 

2.296 million to 2.203 million is basically a $93,000 decrease 

to the Regina Mental Health Clinic. What impact are they 

indicating to you that that is going to have upon their ability to 

deliver the program as it was last year, never mind the 

anticipated increase because of the new amended Bill that we're 

talking about? How will they cope with that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- I think as the member is well aware, 

because of some . . . the financial situation of the province, 

we've been required to reduce expenditures in a variety of 

service areas. 

 

In regards to funding to mental health, I would want to note 

that reductions here have been kept . . . we have tried to keep 

them at an absolute minimum. Certainly other areas of 

government expenditure have had larger reductions in funding. 

We've tried to keep the reduction of mental health at a very, 

very minimal level. As minimal as we could. 

 

We have tried also -- and I think this is very important -- in the 

city of Regina and in other communities across the province, 

we have tried to stabilize and to hold the line on funding for the 

non-government organizations that are providing services to 

clients in the mental health field because of the important role 

they play. 

 

In terms of the broader 2 per cent reduction in funding, we're 

making every effort to find that in administrative savings rather 

than in the reduction of any programing. 

 

And finally, further to the funding question, we are working 

with MCIC (Medical Care Insurance Commission) to look at 

some alternate payment mechanisms to the psychiatrists who 

may be involved, that they may be funded through payments 

through MCIC rather than through direct grants from mental 

health. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well that was a nice answer, Mr. Minister, but 

you didn't really answer my question. And I'll just repeat that 

question and maybe we can hit the question head on this time. 

How is the Regina Mental Health Clinic coping with a 2 per 

cent decrease in their budget? And again we're just using this 

one as an example of the impact that it's going to have across 

the province. I'm not asking for a long litany of excuses why 

you're finding it fiscally tough. These folks now are going to 

have less money to 



1982 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1993 

spend. How are they going to cope? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- I hope what the member is getting at in 

his question is a concern about the ability to provide services, 

essentially. Now he will express concern about reductions in 

funding here, and that's his job, but I might say he might have 

considered some of this when he in government was spending 

the money at a rapid rate. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Don't get political or we could be here a 

long time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Well we can be here a long time, if the 

member wants to be here a long time. But he might have 

considered some of this when they were spending money at the 

rapid rate. Now we're forced to reduce. 

 

How are we going to then provide the services? That's the 

question. With more limited resources, how can we provide the 

best services we can provide and try and maintain the services. 

We're doing that through some of the things which I tried to 

describe. 

 

Because we want to see health services and mental services 

particularly in this case, holistically, within the community, we 

are looking at the partnerships which do exist. And so there are 

partnerships between for instance the Regina Mental Health 

Clinic and the various other institutions in Regina, the hospital 

sector and so on. There are clearly partnerships between the 

mental health clinic and the non-government organizations that 

are active and serving clients in Regina. 

 

And so again I say, what we're endeavouring to do is to 

stabilize funding to that non-governmental organization side, 

work closely with them, and in the broader funding reductions 

across the department, direct funded, we're endeavouring to 

find that money as best we can through administrative 

reductions rather than in service cut-backs and program 

delivery. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Mr. Minister, let's be very clear on one 

thing here. I don't need you getting up and lecturing me about 

the past. I asked you a very concerned question about how the 

people were going to cope with less funding. So don't you get 

up and start lecturing me about the past. You are the very same 

guys who ran and got . . . And the only reason you're sitting in 

that seat right now is because of falsehoods you were spreading 

during the election time. You knew very well what the financial 

situation in this province was. You knew. 

 

And the Premier said, there's $14.2 billion deficit. And in spite 

of that, you and your colleagues were out in the hustings, 

saying vote for us because we'll spend more on health; we'll 

spend more on education. And now this is what the people of 

the province are experiencing. 

 

Don't get up in a sanctimonious way and start lecturing me 

about money. The reason, the only reason you're sitting in that 

seat as a toy minister is 

because you hoodwinked the people and told them, elect us and 

you'll have a finer life. So don't ever get into that mode, or yes, 

Mr. Minister, you will be there for a long time. 

 

I was seriously doing my job as a critic and being as 

non-political as I could be about it until you started throwing 

darts. And that situation works both ways. Now if we want to 

get into political discourses, that's what we can do. But I do not 

think, Mr. Minister, in all seriousness, that that is going to give 

this Bill the send-off that it needs. 

 

I indicated at the outset that we did not have any particular 

objections to the intent of the Bill. We recognize that 

something must be done. But what I am trying to endeavour to 

do is first of all to find out if you know what you're doing. And 

if you do know what you're doing, are the interests . . . is that 

balance between the rights of the individual and the rights of 

society, is that being met in an honest and compassionate and 

an acceptable way? 

 

Now you've given me some assurance this afternoon already 

that indeed we may be heading in that direction. And so then 

the next section of my questioning was to find out how cost 

effective is it going to be. Are these new ventures that you're 

embarking upon going to have an impact on the budget? 

 

My next, which I consider to be a logical question, was, you 

said there was going to be a reduction of 2 per cent. All right. 

That's fair enough if that has to be the fiscal restraints under 

which you're operating. My question then was: how is the 

Regina Mental Health Clinic going to react and how will they 

be able to cope? That was my only question, because that is a 

sincere question on my part. Because from how you answer 

that, I will extrapolate and say, well what's going to happen to 

the Regina Mental Health Clinic will probably happen across 

the province. That's the direction where I'm heading. And I 

don't want to get off on these political binges, so don't initiate 

them. I did not initiate them. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Settle down, Bill. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I will try to settle down, Mr. Member from 

Humboldt, but not if I'm egged on. I can be easily persuaded to 

do otherwise. 

 

So to get back onto our narrow track, Mr. Minister, in one of 

your previous answers to me, in one of your previous answers 

you indicated to me that you had done a fair amount of research 

before you drafted this legislation, that you were together with 

35 organizations that agreed to most of the points, and that on 

some of the points you agreed to disagree. 

 

Part of the research that you had done indicated -- and I'm back 

on the second half of this Bill now -- that there was a need for 

some community-oriented services to be provided, that that's 

what your research indicated. 



May 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1983 

Would you indicate to me and to the House then, Mr. Minister, 

how many individuals were identified through that research as 

being in need of some community-based, community-oriented 

services? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, if the member is asking 

about those who may need some compulsion to take their 

medicine and therefore be subject to the community treatment 

order proposed in the legislation, again I repeat the number that 

I provided to him earlier in committee, the number . . . our best 

estimate would be, province-wide, about 40 people. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- These are new individuals then, Mr. Minister, 

that were not being given any kind of service before? These are 

the ones now that are going to . . . that may have been getting 

and taking periodic medication since they were not being 

forced to take the medication. 

 

So what is the implication now of the extra expense that would 

be incurred with this enforced medication? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- I want to be clear with the member, Mr. 

Chairman, that the 40 individuals we may be talking about, or 

thereabouts, are now certainly receiving services in the 

community. They will have caseworkers; they may be seeing 

psychiatrists; they may be involved in various programs. They 

are now receiving services. 

 

What this legislation would intend for them is that there could 

be for them a process of a community treatment order where 

their medication could be prescribed and ordered while they 

remain in the community, rather than going through the 

revolving door of coming back into the in-patient facility to be 

stabilized, having their medication reordered and so on, and 

then placed back in the community. 

 

So I want to be clear with the member that these individuals are 

now receiving treatment. We're hoping in fact to reduce the 

intensity of that treatment through the community treatment 

order, keeping those individuals in the community. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, are we talking about involuntary 

patients here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- I think some of this will be semantics, 

Mr. Chair, but I do want to try and be accurate. We would not 

use the word involuntary treatment. Involuntary will tend to 

indicate actual detention, actual detention in a physical facility, 

the actual loss of liberty. 

 

In terms of community treatment orders, they are more I think 

better described as a requirement -- a requirement, one, to 

submit to medication; number two, to attend to a physician, or 

in this case a psychiatrist. And so it is a requirement that would 

be placed on an individual, but the term involuntary is more 

traditionally or typically used for those who would be detained 

actually in a physical facility. 

 

(1530) 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well you're quite right, Mr. Minister. I view 

that entirely as semantics. I don't know if you're trying to 

gilt-edge it or sugar-coat it or whatever, but I would suggest to 

you that it amounts to the same thing. 

 

So what you're saying then is that you're expecting the 

individuals concerned to voluntarily submit to the 

requirements? Is that what you're saying, that it will be a 

voluntary, or will it still be an involuntary submission to a 

requirement? I mean what are we talking about here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- The member is somewhat correct. I mean 

in fact this is not a voluntary situation we're talking about here. 

These are community treatment orders that will require two 

things: that regimes of medication be adhered to and that the 

individual attend to a physician's, psychiatrist's . . . 

appointments with a psychiatrist. 

 

But what is not implied here are other restrictions to one's 

liberty -- employment, choice of place to live, activities, and so 

on. So it's a much narrower kind of order than the detention 

orders that we now know of where people are taken and placed 

in a facility. 

 

Now again I would remind the member, and he'll know this 

from reading the legislation, that there are very stringent 

criteria that must be met before a community treatment order 

can be placed on any individual. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, how does this happen? Do the 

white coats come into your home, or do you voluntarily go to a 

clinic to involuntarily meet the requirements that have been by 

court order imposed upon you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- I want to reassure the member that there 

are not going to be white coats running around the province 

entering peoples' homes and so on, the picture he's trying to 

paint here. 

 

The situation that is, is that most of these individuals will now 

be living at home with family or in group homes with 

care-givers. This will provide authority to the care-giver to 

administer the appropriate medications. There will be 

responsibility that we hope the individual understands and feels 

to receive the medication and, when required, to attend to the 

physician, the psychiatrist. 

 

Now in the situation where there is noncompliance, then the 

attending psychiatrist would then have the opportunity and 

option, as exists now, to have the individual detained through 

an order and brought back into an in-patient treatment. 

 

It is our hope that the community treatment order will be seen 

as something that will influence the individuals involved, to 

assist them in following their medication and the regime of that 

medication and will also give authority to care-givers to 

provide the medications. 



1984 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1993 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, let's -- and this is not just 

hypothetical -- let's take a situation where in the best interests 

of a patient, as far as the determination of the psychiatrists and 

whatever doctors you want to have making an assessment on 

that individual, it is determined that in order to suppress 

whatever undesirable characteristics and traits this person may 

have, that he should be medicated. 

 

Now what if -- and I think it's happening out there -- what if the 

individual himself and members of the family say no, we know 

this individual, he poses no threat, we've lived with him for 25 

years already, and now this legislation and this encumbrance is 

going to be placed upon him? What would happen in the case 

where there's a split of opinions along that line? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to reassure the 

member and all members, of some of the process here that 

would need to be followed. And I think he will understand that 

there are lots of options within the process for family and 

friends and others that he spoke of to raise concern. 

 

There are, as he will know, in the Act very explicit criteria 

before a community treatment order can be applied for or 

ordered. There are a number of quality assurance procedures. 

There is an obligatory visit by an official representative -- an 

official representative being someone independent -- to the 

family. This is usually, I think, my understanding is that an 

official representative is usually a member of the legal 

profession, independent, who would therefore be available to 

represent the individual. 

 

There are the appeal review panels and there are always 

appeals available to the review panels. And in that process of 

appeal, family members or others may be present and make 

their appeal. Even if there is not an appeal raised by an 

individual or family members or so on, there are mandatory and 

automatic review and appeal by the review panels. And 

ultimately any decision even of the review panel can then be 

appealed to the Court of Queen's Bench. 

 

And so we're confident there are lots of opportunities here, both 

for assurance of quality -- the criteria are clearly stated -- and 

there are lots of opportunities for appeal through the process. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I'll just give you an opportunity, Mr. Minister, 

to put your thoughts on the record here about . . . so far we've 

been talking in the abstract. We've been talking about some 

individual over there. And it was brought home to me a little bit 

more forcefully actually this week when we received a letter, 

and I have a copy of the letter here. It did not come to me; it 

came to the member from Estevan. But we received this letter 

from an 83-year-old gentleman from Debden. And I won't use 

his name here but I could send you a copy of the letter, if you 

want to review it. 

 

But this gentleman in his letter complains and claims that he is 

being forcibly subjected to monthly injections, and he asks us 

to see to it that these 

injections stop. And he wrote this letter himself, so I mean 

we're not talking about someone who is incapable of . . . well 

he has a knowledge of reading and writing and so on, so he's 

obviously fairly mentally astute. It would appear from his 

letter, Mr. Minister, that he is an involuntary patient living in 

the community. And the content of the letter would also reveal 

that he may have at the same time some mental difficulties. 

 

But I'd like you to just make a general comment on the practice 

of forcibly subjecting people to these mind-altering 

medications. In general, Mr. Minister, I'd like you to comment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, I will ask the member for 

a copy of that letter, if he would be so gracious as to provide it. 

Because it is something we will want to very thoroughly 

investigate. 

 

To my knowledge, Mr. Speaker . . . To our knowledge, there is 

not a process now where someone can be involuntarily 

subjected to any kind of medication or injection while in the 

community. 

 

Mr. Chairman, all I can say is that I would appreciate a copy of 

the letter. And I commit to the members that we will 

investigate the situation and the concern as raised by the 

individual. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Yes, I can do that, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, a little 

earlier on you mentioned . . . I think you gave a list of some of 

the treatment facilities across the province where patients can 

receive mental health treatment -- North Battleford, Weyburn. 

We've got a Regina community clinic. Are they any other 

clinics in the province? I don't remember if I heard all the list 

that you gave out. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, generally we have . . . 

The province is divided into eight regions -- mental health 

regions. Each of those regions will have its own mental health 

community, community-based clinic. Each will have a 

designated psychiatric in-patient facility. 

 

And then in addition, we have the Saskatchewan Hospital in 

North Battleford which serves as the provincial long-term care. 

 

If the member would like, we could provide the total list by 

name of each of the facilities. If the member would like that. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Minister, what I was coming to is I'm 

just recalling back, I think it's about five, six years ago there 

was . . . I believe in Yorkton there was a clinic opened. Is that 

original clinic a wing on the Yorkton hospital? 

 

Is there . . . Unless I'm mistaken on that, we opened a wing on 

the hospital. And I thought it had something to do with mental 

health services or treatment of patients at the time. And I'm just 

wondering if that's 



May 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1985 

one of the regional centres for . . . Is that in-patient or 

out-patient treatment of mental health? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Yes. My understanding is that there is a 

wing of the Yorkton hospital; it is designated as a mental health 

clinic. And there is in-patient services there and out-patient 

services offered to the community. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- How many patients would this wing 

accommodate? How many patients would be handled at any 

one time? And today, how many patients are there in the 

Yorkton wing of the mental health? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, the information I have is 

that it is a 24-bed facility, and the demand for those beds falls 

well within the . . . like the 24 beds adequately, certainly 

adequately meets the demand that we know is there in the 

Yorkton area. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, in light of the reductions that have 

been coming forward in funding to health care services, the 

facility in Yorkton, where do they sit today? Can you give us 

an indication of whether their services have been cut back due 

to funding cut-backs or restrictions, or are they basically 

maintaining their own, Mr. Minister? 

 

And I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, you mention there are 24 

beds and you indicate that the 24 beds accommodate the need 

up in that area. I wonder if, Mr. Minister, you could also 

indicate how many of those . . . how many patients are serviced 

through in the in-patient services and how many patients are 

serviced through out-patient services? 

 

(1545) 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, again we didn't bring with 

us, in anticipation of the legislation discussion, the utilization 

numbers, but we will get those for the member in response to 

his question. 

 

I can report that last year's budgeted amount for Yorkton was 

$3,028,610. This year the budged amount is 2,905,410, and so 

there is a reduction in this year's budget. I'll repeat the number: 

$2,905,410. So there is a reduction in this year's budget. The 

member will want to note however that monies, there has been 

a reduction in terms of the number of beds available. Again I 

repeat the beds available are adequate to the demand. And 

some of the monies that have been taken from this in-patient 

service have in fact been redirected to some community-based 

services. 

 

And so we're confident that in fact the broader range of 

programs and services are available if not enhanced through 

some of the movement of money. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, when you 

talk about community-based services, are we talking of access 

to mental health services in smaller communities in the inner 

regions and with, say, in a region like Yorkton or the Regina 

Mental 

Health Clinic area then being the in-patient? And do we have, 

if you will, psychiatrists going to communities outside of these 

major centres to indeed meet with patients? Or how does that 

program fall into place and how does it work? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- I thank the member for his question 

because I think he will recognize that in Saskatchewan in some 

ways we're leading in Canada in the provision of mental health 

services in rural parts of our province. 

 

We take, I think, some pride in Saskatchewan in saying that in 

terms of psychiatric services we have a generally broad 

distribution of psychiatric services geographically across the 

province -- a distribution of psychiatric services that to our 

knowledge just doesn't happen in other provincial jurisdictions 

across Canada. So we're very proud of that. 

 

And in the effort to provide mental health services for 

individuals who may be living in rural Saskatchewan, rather 

than always having the individual having to come to the more 

major centres for services, we're developing a process in trying 

to direct funding in that direction where we can in fact contract 

on behalf of an individual in rural Saskatchewan, contract with 

a care-giver in rural Saskatchewan to meet that specific need. 

So where we couldn't afford perhaps a permanent care-giver in 

an area, we're endeavouring to contract with care-givers to 

provide for the need of individuals as they exist in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So we feel we're coming some way. There's more way to go. 

But in some ways, I think, in Saskatchewan we can be very 

proud of the services that we're now being able to provide 

across Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, when you talk about care-givers, are 

we talking specifically about strictly just psychiatrists, or 

people who have that ability, or are there other individuals that 

are being trained to maybe administer some of the drugs, or 

even, say, do some of the counselling with individuals who 

come forward for mental health services with concerns and 

problems they're facing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- In response to the member's question, 

when it comes of course to the provision of medication and the 

administration of medication, that will be a medical person -- 

doctor or a nurse. And so it must be. But there are certainly 

other services and opportunities to provide care that exist. 

 

So, for instance, we may in fact be contracting with other 

individuals -- parents, and so on -- who have had some 

experience or have some ability. They may not have formal 

training, but have demonstrated certain ability and compassion 

and so on to act as care-givers in the community. 

 

As we move toward district formation and we look toward the 

formation of health and wellness centres in our communities, 

we can see the provision of more a broader range of services 

using a broader range of people in this kind of regard so that we 

can meet the 



1986 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1993 

needs of individuals more closely to where they live. 

 

We're also anxious to work with and assist the development of 

the kind of self-help and mutual-aid models that will assist and 

also to work with community-based groups who may be 

willing to assist and provide care for the mentally ill. 

 

So there's a broad range of things that are happening and we 

think some new and exciting things that will happen in the 

future. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, you 

indicated that some of the services are administered through the 

local physician, working with a local physician or a local 

doctor in a community. As you're aware, we have a recent 

announcement regarding facilities across this province and 

there were some 52 facilities affected across the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

When we're looking at providing services, would it be possible, 

Mr. Minister, for some of these facilities, these smaller 

hospitals that are going to be closed, of turning them into 

clinics whereby you could have access to your doctor? You 

could have access through, say, having your psychiatrist 

coming there and the local public health nurse. 

 

Is that an area that could be explored and looked at in order to 

continue to at least maintain an area of health services and 

support to these local communities? Is that something that is a 

possibility? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, the answer is absolutely. 

Absolutely. We fully expect that our health districts after 

they're formed, they'll be looking at just the kind of models that 

the member raises here this afternoon so we can have the 

provision, in a clinic format, in a wellness centre format, of that 

multi-disciplinary kind of approach, provision of services in the 

local community. So the answer is yes, absolutely, that's the 

very kind of thing we anticipate will be happening. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, I'm just wondering, over the past 

number of years and maybe even just in the last little while, I'm 

wondering have we seen a significant increase or decrease in 

the need for mental health services? It seems to me that the 

public in general . . . even the pressures of just getting on with 

life, the pressures that the public are facing when we look at the 

availability or lack of jobs in our communities or even in the 

province, or even in our health care districts right now with the 

jobs that are on the line -- and I believe SUN (Saskatchewan 

Union of Nurses) has indicated that they'll have some 

counselling available. 

 

But it would seem to me that there must be . . . And it's not just 

that. It's a business community and the whole environment of 

the lack of finances that are available -- the farming 

community. I'm just wondering what the possibilities are or 

where we are today -- whether we're seeing an increase in the 

demand for mental health services, or over the past number of 

years 

whether or not there's maybe been an increase at this time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, I think the member makes 

some very good points in his question. There's no doubt about 

it, we live in a time and an age when the stress on individuals, 

stress on households and so on, is high for a whole variety of 

reasons -- the pace of change, the economy, and so on. And it is 

clear that as a result of some of that stress and so on, there are 

new demands for services, mental health services and so on. 

 

Where I think we need to focus our efforts, while maintaining 

the good -- if I may describe it as acute care for mental health 

needs -- we also need to be striving, I think, as a community to 

be looking towards as much prevention and preventative 

measures as we can develop; and to be looking at, where we 

can, earlier intervention. 

 

And so to come back again to the legislation that we're 

reviewing, one of the goals through the community treatment 

order is an earlier intervention to assist those from getting into 

that revolving door of being institutionalized, but to have some 

of that earlier intervention. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, when we look at the need for mental 

health services, I'm sure there must be . . . and if you look at the 

breakdown, the age breakdown, where are we seeing the 

greatest need right now? Can you give me any numbers based 

on, say, would it be in the teen years? Are we seeing an 

increase in the teen years, and how many? And, say, your 

middle-agers and then your seniors, where's the greatest need? 

And if you would, I wonder if you could just give us an idea of 

where not only the greatest need is but the breakdown by age 

group regarding the need. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- It is, Mr. Chairman, not age specific. In 

fact it crosses all age groups. 

 

I had the very interesting experience this morning, I can share 

with the member, of visiting the seniors' education department 

here through the University of Regina, and met with a number 

of seniors there who described some of the stress on the seniors 

these days and how they're finding some real creative means to 

deal with some of that through educational opportunities. So it's 

certainly not one or other group in our society, but I think it 

crosses all age groups and I think all fashions of life in our 

province. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, some monetary questions. I'm 

wondering, what is the current cost of caring for involuntary 

patients; and I wonder if you could separate out the numbers of 

those in institutions and those in the community. 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, we didn't anticipate 

through the discussion of the legislation, sort of the detailed 

financial questions. We'll be more than happy to provide that 

detailed information that 



May 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1987 

the member asks for to him later if that's all right with him. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister. It would seem to us that 

it would be appropriate. We'd kind of like to know what the 

financial impact may be on communities because of some of 

the changes and what the Bill is doing as well. There's a 

number of different areas that the Bill covers and maybe if . . . 

certainly if you can raise them with us or bring them forward 

through a letter, we'd be certainly happy to receive them. 

 

What I'm wondering as well, and while we've got that question 

out there and some of these costs -- I believe my colleague 

raised a few too -- maybe we can give you a few other 

questions that you can take note of if you don't have the answer 

right handy. 

 

I'm wondering, is part of the intention of the Bill to reduce 

costs by shunting more people into the community for monthly 

visits rather than . . . or by individuals or care-givers, say, at the 

local level rather than through the institutions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- I want to be clear, Mr. Chairman, with 

the member and with all members that the goal here is not 

fundamentally a cost-cutting or money-saving operation. The 

goal here is to provide what we feel is more appropriate and 

better treatment. 

 

I think I indicated earlier to the member from Rosthern, there 

may be some anticipated savings if in fact someone is not being 

brought into an in-patient facility. But if that individual is able 

to maintain life in the community, there will be some cost 

savings there we anticipate. I'm not sure it's possible at this 

point to actually document that. 

 

We anticipate there will be a small increase, 13 to $15,000 on 

an annual basis, to provide for perhaps an increased role for 

official representatives or more frequent review panel hearings. 

But in essence that's a very small cost increase. 

 

But I want to emphasize again that the goal here is not 

primarily one to save money. The goal primarily here is to 

provide what we think will be better care. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister. As you indicated, Mr. 

Minister, you anticipate some, I think around $13,000 maybe, 

and a greater cost, and that seems minute or small in light of 

the broad picture of mental health services. But I'm not going to 

get into an argument whether that is enough or whether we're 

anticipating high enough. 

 

But it would seem to me, Mr. Minister, that there were some 

complexities to this Bill and I have to admit I don't understand 

it totally and fully as well. But there are a number of references 

to people who have committed criminal offences. 

 

And I'm wondering, does this Bill allow someone who has 

committed a serious criminal offence to be released into the 

community in any way, shape, or 

form? Is there anything in the Bill that addresses, say, people 

who . . . there's a treatment through penal institutions or 

individuals who may be in a federal penitentiary or the 

provincial correctional centre that would be, say, having some 

mental problems. And if there's a request by a psychiatrist that 

this patient continue . . . or person to stay their term -- they've 

served their sentence but a psychiatrist or a medical 

professional would feel that they could be of harm to society -- 

is there anything in the Bill that would allow for the continued 

institutionalization of, say, this individual? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, this is precisely what the 

Bill does allow. I will say again to the member that the 

Criminal Code of Canada has undergone a change, a change 

from the current situation where some individuals who may be 

detained because they were not criminally responsible for their 

actions because of mental disorder, a certain change now in the 

Criminal Code which caps the number of years that individuals 

can be held, would now permit some of those individuals to be 

released into the community. A very small number of them, 

and again I repeat it would be a very small number in our 

provincial context, we feel may yet present a danger to the 

society or to the community, to others or to themselves. 

 

Therefore this legislation will provide the ability for those 

individuals to continue to be detained in the long term. So what 

the member asks is, will this enable that? Yes, that is precisely 

what is being accomplished as part of this legislation. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So what you're saying then if a person in a penal 

institution is under treatment and, say, medical professionals 

would feel that possibly the person may be unstable, even if 

they would have served their sentence they could still give . . . I 

guess what they would do is sign a certificate that would 

suggest that they continue to receive treatment whether it's in 

the penal institution or whether they be transferred to a mental 

institution for further treatment. Is that how it would work? 

And I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, how that would affect the 

rights of that individual. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to be very clear 

that the only individuals that are being addressed by this 

legislation will be individuals who are now being held either 

. . . and most often in a psychiatric facility, an in-patient 

facility, not in the jail system, although there may be one or 

two held in the penitentiary. Primarily these will be individuals 

who are held in psychiatric institutions with long-term 

detention orders because they were described as unfit to stand 

trial or not criminally responsible for that which they were 

accused of because of a mental disorder. This Bill does not . . . 

this piece of legislation has nothing to do with others who may 

be detained by the Criminal Code provisions in other regards. 

It's only those affected by those two categories. 

 

What this legislation enables us to do therefore is, if because of 

the change now at the federal Criminal 



1988 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1993 

Code level that the long-term detention for these individuals 

can be capped, they may in fact then be released into the 

community, this then provides options that that long-term 

detention may be extended. But it's only for those who have 

been declared unfit to stand trial or not criminally responsible 

for their actions. It does not apply to others who may be 

described and affected or jailed or held by the Criminal Code. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So what you're saying then, that medical 

professionals have the ability, if someone's in an institution, 

what you're saying, a mental institution, to reassess a person's 

character or their abilities and request that they continue to be 

held in that institution. I guess the question comes up whether 

we're suggesting we're taking away their ability to have the 

freedom of choice. Like who's involved in that decision then? 

Is it just the medical profession? Is there communication with, 

let's say family or friends at all regarding a person continuing 

to receive treatment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I'll review, for the 

member from Moosomin as I did for the member for Rosthern, 

the various criteria that are described here. 

 

There are five criteria which must be met by the individual, and 

it's not a matter of meeting one of them -- you have to meet all 

five before there even can be an application for long-term 

detention. And they are, and I will read them again: the person 

must be suffering from a mental disorder for which he or she 

needs treatment or care and supervision which can only be 

provided in a psychiatric, in-patient facility. 

 

The person must, as a result of the mental disorder, be unable 

to fully understand and to make an informed decision regarding 

treatment or care and supervision. Number three, the person, as 

a result of the mental disorder, be likely to cause bodily harm to 

self or to others. Point number four, have been detained, the 

person must have been detained for 60 or more consecutive 

days immediately prior to an application for a long-term 

detention order. And point number five, must suffer from a 

severely disabling, continuing mental disorder that is likely to 

persist for more than 21 days. 

 

Now if an individual meets all five of those criteria, then the 

officer in charge of the facility where that person is now being 

held would then submit an application for a long-term detention 

order. With that application would have to come all the 

pertinent medical evidence, and that application would be made 

to the Court of Queen's Bench. 

 

The notice of that application is served on the person who is 

subject of the application. It is also provided to the person's 

nearest relative and that person's official representative, who is 

the advocate for that person, and that's usually a legal 

representative. The Court of Queen's Bench would then 

conduct a hearing. It would consider all the medical or other 

evidence before any application would be made. So that is the 

process. 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to have leave to 

introduce some guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker . . . or Mr. Chairman. 

I gave you an elevation there, sir. 

 

I'd like to introduce to the members of the Assembly, guests of 

mine. They're seated in the Speaker's gallery. They come from 

the school of Wymark. They're grade 8 students; there's 15 of 

them. They are here today together with their teacher, Mrs. 

Dawn Rogowski, and their chaperon, Bill Heinricks. And I'd 

like to have the members of the Assembly join with me in 

welcoming them here to the Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 87 

(continued) 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Getting back to some 

further questions, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, we have some 

concerns about the procedures for these community treatment 

orders. And the way we read it is a doctor fills out a certificate, 

and as long as he has another doctor backing him up, any 

citizen becomes subject to forcible treatment. 

 

Now while such provisions have always existed in one form or 

another, at least the old Lieutenant Governor's pleasure orders 

required cabinet itself to take responsibility for using force to 

subject someone to various psychiatric treatments. Has that 

changed in this Bill, or was cabinet involved before? Is this 

strictly a medical decision? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, I think the member . . . 

there is some confusion I think. The former Lieutenant 

Governor warrants that he talks about, they were a provision of 

the Criminal Code. They have been struck down I think by 

charter provisions. And there have now been other changes to 

the Criminal Code. But they were a Criminal Code provision. 

 

What we're talking about here would be provincially legislated 

and mandated through mental health community treatment 

orders. And simply the order would provide that individuals 

who have met all the various criteria and that have had the 

order applied by the courts, would then be required to take their 

medication in the community and on prescribed occasions visit 

their physician, the psychiatrist. 



May 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1989 

Mr. Toth: -- Does the doctor have the authority to enforce 

these provisions or make sure the patient is taking their 

medication? Or who has the authority at that time? I would 

think it probably is the doctor. But is the doctor then . . . this 

Bill giving the medical professional the ability to make sure 

and make certain that a patient is indeed taking their treatment? 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Yes, yes. It would be the medical person 

-- the psychiatrist, the doctor -- who would ultimately be 

knowledgeable and responsible. And ultimately, if the order 

was not being adhered to, ultimately a detention order could 

again be applied for and issued. 

 

The legislation will provide for care-givers the authority to 

provide the medication. But it would be the medical 

professional who would assess if the medication is being taken 

as it should be. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it would seem to me that 

there's a lot of onus being put on the care-giver or the physician 

in this case, doctor, whoever the care-giver is. 

 

I'm wondering if a family member or family members would 

feel that maybe their family member or the patient is receiving 

too much medication or not . . . might feel that maybe they 

shouldn't be on medication. I think this argument can arise 

where individuals may feel that part of the problems a person is 

facing is because of the type of medication they're on or the 

fact that they're on too much medication. What happens if 

family members would intervene and demand that the doctor 

cut back the medication? What process do family members 

have in the following through or appealing or demanding 

changes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member, we would 

hope, and I'm sure he would hope too, that families in that 

situation would have direct communication with the attending 

physician, the attending psychiatrist or doctor, and would 

discuss their concerns in that regard. 

 

If after those discussions and their best advice and so on, it was 

not . . . there wasn't some mutual agreement or so on, there is 

the process that I described earlier this afternoon of the review 

panels and appeals to the review panels. And failing that, there 

will be prescribed automatic mandatory reviews by the review 

panels for every individual. And failing that, if a family still is 

concerned, there is appeal of the review panel decisions all the 

way to the Court of Queen's Bench. So there are many 

opportunities and avenues for appeal. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- One thing, just for clarification, when we're 

talking about . . . I believe there's something in the Bill that 

talks about a three-month, an order for three months -- and I'm 

just taking from some notes I have here. Is there something that 

says that a person must undergo treatment for three months 

before . . . 

just what I'm trying to get at, is there a specific time that 

treatment is undertaken before anyone can question or maybe 

review a person's case to see whether or not they're receiving 

the appropriate treatment before anyone else can intervene and 

demand that a different form of treatment be given? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- The time frame for a community 

treatment order, the time frame for the validity of the 

community treatment is three months -- you'll find that section 

24.5 -- or whatever the order is specified, whichever is the 

lesser of the two. So three months would be the maximum. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- For a person who's receiving voluntary or 

involuntary treatment, or both? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- In the case of a community treatment 

order, it is the required treatment. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Now I understand, Mr. Minister, that there are 

provisions in this Bill to allow appeals of certain kinds of 

orders, specifically detentions. And is it not a similar balance 

possible for orders by doctors? For example, I understand there 

may be an emergency situation where a person poses an 

immediate danger to themselves or others, in which case the 

person must be subjected to treatment, which would be an 

unfortunate fact I think we face at times. 

 

But however, it's not clear that the appeal of someone subject to 

a doctor's order will have a hearing before the three months is 

up that the Bill imposes. Should not the law err on the side of 

the subject of such orders be requiring that a hearing must 

occur as soon as possible to determine the merits of the case 

and provide the person due process? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Just to reassure the member, if an appeal 

is launched against a community treatment order, that appeal 

must be heard within three days. So there's no situation where a 

person would have launched an appeal and would have to wait 

out the three-month community treatment order before it's 

heard. It must be heard within three days of its launching. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, in bringing forward the Bill and 

some of the discussions took place, I think you indicated you 

had talked to some 35 different groups or organizations across 

the province regarding the Bill. I'm wondering if you consulted 

with any bar associations regarding this legislation, or the legal 

community? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Yes, we consulted with the legal advice 

through the Department of Justice and also through 

constitutional law. And the advice that we received was that 

indeed we're on very safe legal ground here with the Bill. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Did you take the time to consult with any bar 

associations outside of government regarding their viewpoints 

on the Bill and the proposed amendments to the Bill? 



1990 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1993 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- No, Mr. Chairman, we did not pay for 

any outside legal opinions. We used the internal government 

legal services. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- It would seem to me, Mr. Minister, when we're 

looking at . . . And I'm sure, as I raised the other day when you 

brought forward second reading, one of the major concerns is 

the fact of individual freedoms and the threat to those 

freedoms. And certainly it may not be a lot of people that will 

be affected or will even question the Bill or be forced into a 

position where they're wondering whether or not their 

individual freedoms would have been infringed upon. 

 

And in light of the number of the discussions that have taken 

place to date on other issues and that have been before this 

Legislative Assembly, it seems to me that when you get into 

the legal community certainly the legal counsel and in the 

Department of Justice and right within government would have 

a viewpoint, and certainly their viewpoint is probably well 

represented. 

 

But any time something goes before the courts, there are a 

number of areas where viewpoints can be changed or we could 

have different interpretations. And so it would appear to me 

that it would have been probable or possible to at least check 

with someone on the outside just to see what's an individual 

law group body outside of the legislation or legislature would 

have commenting . . . would have made their comments on the 

Bill as well -- if it would fit within the rights and freedoms and 

the constitutionality of the legislation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, there will be I think 

occasions when government will seek outside legal opinion. 

But the process, I think as the member knows, is that if a 

department like the Department of Health will understandably 

refer its legislative proposals to the Department of Justice and 

for the good legal advice that exists within the Department of 

Justice, it would be I think the Department of Justice's mandate, 

looking at a piece of legislation, to determine whether broader 

legal consultation is necessary. 

 

Now legal consultation here, this is not like other interest 

groups. This is very specific information that you request and 

we request from the Department of Justice to look at this piece 

of legislation, as all pieces of legislation, to check its legal 

validity and constitutionality and so on. That was done and 

we're very satisfied with the advice that we received. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, did you 

consult with any patients' rights organizations? If so, who were 

they and when did the consultations happen? What was the 

substance of their representations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, I provided . . . I hope the 

member . . . maybe he didn't receive a copy. We can send a 

copy over. If one of the pages would provide a copy to the 

member. We provided a copy of all the various groups, and he 

will recognize some of them immediately as client groups and 

self-help 

groups -- the Crocus Co-op in Saskatoon, By Ourselves in 

Regina. The Canadian Mental Health Association, of course, 

involves consumers; the Schizophrenia Society will include 

consumers. 

 

Now what is not attached here are the dates. If the member 

wants dates, times, and places, I guess we could try and provide 

that. But here's the list that he asks for. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Minister, maybe you could just give us 

a framework of time in which these consultations took place 

regarding the discussion and putting forward the . . . rather than 

trying to put forward specific dates regarding meeting with 

every group, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- The member should note now that that 

the consultation process actually began in the month of 

September 1991. And there were general and broad 

consultations throughout the period September 1991 to 

September 1992. A major consultation took place with all of 

these groups invited in September, on the 22nd of September 

1992 -- a large, one-day event that brought together many of 

these players, all of whom were invited. Since that time there 

has been ongoing discussions with a variety of the self-help 

groups and others. 

 

And in addition to this process, as the member will know, there 

is a mental health advisory committee that advises the 

Department of Health. A subcommittee of that council has been 

working with this legislation and has been supportive of all the 

amendments being brought forward. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, in the explanatory notes you justify 

part of the Bill by saying it's required to facilitate health system 

reform, and I think you've raised that on two or three occasions 

this afternoon as well, and reorganization of the department. 

I'm wondering if you would just take a minute to explain both 

those things: first, how this Bill is, quote, required to facilitate 

health system reform; and secondly, how it is required to 

facilitate reorganization of the department. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- It's relatively . . . I think very specific to 

the member's question -- I know we've talked about how mental 

health services may be more broadly delivered in future and so 

on -- there are some amendments in the legislation that are 

much more specific. The current legislation is rather 

prescriptive in terms of its description of employees of the 

mental health division, the executive director, and regional 

director, and so on. 

 

As we evolve services and evolve our system of health care, 

there may in fact be some of these individuals who would be 

employed by district boards rather than directly by the 

Department of Health. And so this small administrative change 

-- essentially administrative change to the language of the 

legislation -- to allow that flexibility in the future. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 



May 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1991 

Minister, a couple of questions dealing with the appointments 

of the employees of the department to the regional 

directorships, etc. I'm just wondering: why is it left here to the 

minister to make those appointments? You're putting in place, 

under Bill 3, new district health boards. What effects will they 

have on these facilities and institutions? Will they be included 

as part of the district health boards once they come into place? 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure I'm clear 

precisely on the member's question. I believe he may be asking 

about the integration of mental health services with the district 

health model and is that going to happen. That indeed may be a 

longer-term goal. It will not happen immediately. We may 

evolve and devolve services to the district board provision. I 

know there is some discussion happening in Saskatoon right 

now. 

 

But it's certainly not something that will happen immediately 

on formation of the district boards before the 17th of August 

this year. It's something we may be well working towards. And 

therefore the legislation is here being amended to provide that 

flexibility that may be necessary in months and years to come. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well if that takes place, Mr. Minister, 

that the district health boards do have some powers over these 

facilities, will they also have the power to appoint the directors 

of those facilities . . . (inaudible) . . . care. It says: "The regional 

director may designate a person for each facility . . ." 

 

That regional director has been appointed by the minister. But 

if the district health boards are to have some responsibilities 

within this area, they should also have the responsibilities of 

appointing the people who are running these facilities. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to assure the 

member that if in the case that, which is the case now with 

some of our district boards where they are providing in-patient 

services, it is mandated that they are charged with hiring and 

providing administration and so on for those services -- and 

that would be the case in the situation of mental health services 

or a facility -- that would be the case. 

 

Now there still may be the case where the department, here 

represented by the minister, may designate a regional director. 

But with the district board model, yes, the district boards will 

be mandated and empowered to do their hiring. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, under this piece of 

legislation, from what I can read in it, that is not included as 

part of it, that the regional health boards will have the power to 

hire the administrators within those facilities that they will 

become responsible for under this Act. Will they be given that 

opportunity? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- I think, if the member notes, the 

operative word here is designate -- designate to any person. 

 

Now someone needs to be responsible to the legislation, 

whether it be through the district board model or through the 

current department model. There is responsibility to the 

legislation. The minister here is designating the responsibility. 

That may not be the matter of hiring individuals, but it's 

designating to an office the responsibility for the administration 

of the Act in that particular region. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So you're saying then, Mr. Minister, that 

this clause does not designate an individual to fulfil that duty, 

but rather that the minister shall designate an office, a position 

that will then be filled by someone to carry that out. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- It may well be the designation of a 

person, but the person may have been hired by the district 

board. So in essence you're correct. It's the designation of an 

office; a person may fill that office. But it's the designation of 

authority for the administration of the Act in the region. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it's somewhat 

confusing then the way it's written because when you think of 

the term "person", you think of as an individual. You could 

have written the Act then to designate an office or a position 

that would be put in place then by the minister and somebody 

else would appoint . . . or would put the individual into play. 

 

Perhaps that needs to be given some consideration, Mr. 

Minister, in making some changes to this to allow that to take 

place, that the regional health boards, once they come into play, 

once they have some authority over these facilities, that it's 

clear and designated that they can indeed appoint a person to 

that position rather than the minister appointing the person as is 

spelled out in the Bill. Would it be possible to do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- I want to assure the member there's really 

nothing new here in this regard. So currently, for instance -- 

here's a for instance that I'm given -- we may have a 

psychiatrist who is now employed by a large base hospital. 

That large base hospital will have done the hiring of that 

psychiatrist. That individual can be designated by the minister 

to fulfil responsibilities under the Act. So it's the designation of 

a person to fulfil the responsibilities. And that happens now and 

that will continue to happen. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well that seems to be the opposite of 

what you said here about two or three answers ago, that the 

regional health boards would be allowed to appoint that person 

and then the minister, under this legislation, would accept that 

appointment or make that designation. What I'm asking is: 

would it be possible for you to set out a position with the 

qualifications, the guidelines, the authorities, that that position 

would have, and then that the regional health board -- once they 

gain authority over the facility -- to make the appointments into 

there within those 



1992 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1993 

criteria? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- I think there's some confusion. We're not 

suggesting here that the minister is the person who would be 

doing the employment, who would be hiring, choosing the 

individuals. What the minister needs to have power to do is to 

designate individuals to have responsibility for the Act. 

 

And we have now the situation of cooperation between the 

Department of Health and third-party hospitals, for instance, 

who do their own hiring. We anticipate there will be that kind 

of cooperation between the department and the district boards 

in terms of their hiring and then, where necessary, the minister 

needs to designate an individual for responsibilities under 

legislation. So it'll be a process of cooperation, same as now. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well when you're dealing with 

third-party hospitals, do you appoint a position, say, that the 

director of the hospital is the person charged with administering 

the Act? Or do you say that person A is appointed to administer 

the Act for that third-party hospital? Which way does it work? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- The situation . . . There are sort of two 

levels of responsibility. The district board will have 

responsibility for the provision of services. Department of 

Health, represented through the minister, through the Crown, 

has responsibility for the province, standards, and legislation. 

Therefore for the minister to maintain that responsibility, it 

then is the minister's responsibility to designate within the 

district that person that will be responsible. 

 

And so up until now, and we anticipate this will continue, the 

designation is of a person, rather than a blanket description of a 

position. It is a designation of a person. And we anticipate that 

that would continue under the district model. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, that's not what you 

had said earlier. You said that the district health boards would 

be allowed to suggest a person and that you would appoint 

them for such. Now when you talk of the regional directors, 

that's your position to appoint those. But then you turn around 

and give those people the authority to turn around and appoint, 

as it reads right here: ". . . may designate a person for each 

facility that is located in the region . . ." 

 

So I'm asking you, when it comes to the regional health boards, 

as they may be brought into the regional health boards, why not 

allow them to designate that person within that facility rather 

than the minister taking that authority, which is different than 

what is happening when it comes to appointing, say, the CEOs 

(chief executive officer) of those regional health districts? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- I think the member's all confused about 

the difference between designation, appointments, or the hiring 

process. Now let's just take the current circumstance of an 

institution. A hospital may hire a psychiatrist, correct? Under a 

new 

district model, the district model may hire a psychiatrist. Now 

the minister's had nothing to do with the hiring process here. 

We're not choosing the person. The person is chosen. 

 

In the current circumstance, that psychiatrist may be named the 

chief psychiatrist in the institution. The minister currently 

under the existing legislation may, shall, designate a 

psychiatrist for each mental health centre. Now if the minister's 

confident that this particular individual is the right person for 

that then that person will be designated. Now the minister's had 

nothing to do with the hiring of that person; that person has 

been hired by the local hospital. 

 

Under the new model, under the district model, the district may 

be the body that does the interviewing and the hiring process, 

but at some point the minister needs to designate some person 

to serve the purposes of the legislation. Now is that clear to the 

member? Good. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Yes indeed, that is clear, Mr. Minister. 

But that's where the problem comes in in your statement, is 

that: if you believe he is the right person. The facility that hired 

him felt he was the right person, but now you have to make a 

determination whether you believe him to be the right person. 

 

And I'm suggesting that if the regional health board made a 

determination in hiring this person that he was the right person 

for the job, then it should be an automatic that the position 

holds the authority from your designation. And that's where the 

problem lies, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Now, and here again where I think the 

member needs to understand, there are two responsibilities. The 

district board has responsibility, will have responsibility for the 

provision of services. Correct? They will then make their 

choices of personnel, staffing, administration, and so on as best 

as they see fit for the provision of services in their district. 

 

The department, represented by the minister, has 

responsibilities. That will be for the responsibility of ensuring 

standard services across the province, quality services and so 

on, and responsibility for the various pieces of legislation that 

govern health care in our province. 

 

For the minister to maintain that responsibility, which I hope 

the member agrees is an appropriate responsibility, for the 

minister then to maintain that responsibility requires that the 

minister have this power to designate within the region. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, when your regional 

director appoints the designated person in each facility and you 

don't happen to agree with the person that's been chosen by the 

local facility or the regional health board as the person for that 

facility, and you appoint somebody else then because you 

haven't agreed with their appointment, their hiring practice, 

who becomes responsible for that person? 



May 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1993 

Who pays their salary? Who looks after that office? 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- I think the member is creating paper 

tigers here. This has never been a problem in the past, ever. 

There has been good cooperation and it's just never been a 

problem. And no one anticipates it being a problem in the 

future. I don't know if we're trying to fill time or what, but it is 

just a paper tiger that the member's creating here. 

 

So I'd be very confident in assuring him that the process of 

good cooperation and discussion that has gone on in the past 

will go on in the future under the new district model. And the 

districts and the Department of Health represented by the 

minister will make these appropriate designations, and no one 

anticipates a problem. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, if in your words 

these are just paper tigers, then perhaps you would be willing to 

change this legislation somewhat and allow the person hired by 

the facility to actually hold the position that you feel is the part 

that you should be designating. 

 

If you say that there has never been a problem, if there is no 

problem, then there should be no problem in accepting the 

person that this facility has hired. And you should be able to 

say so in the legislation then. If that isn't the case, then why 

does it have to be that you can say, we don't approve of this 

particular individual that you hired to fulfil this position? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Well I think the member needs to be I 

think clear with the House. Is it his position that the minister 

should abdicate this responsibility? Is it the position of the 

member that the Department of Health should not have this 

general, overall responsibility for the administration of the 

legislation? Because that's what I think he is arguing. He is 

saying that the minister should not have the power to designate 

or to appoint. If that power does not exist then obviously the 

minister is then abdicating the responsibility for the legislation. 

 

Now I guess if that's the member's position, then he ought to 

state it, and we could debate that. Our view is and the position 

of government is and has been -- this is for sure nothing new -- 

that the minister has responsibility for the administration of the 

legislation. To ensure that that responsibility is met, the 

minister has the power therefore to designate those individuals 

who will be responsible. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, that is what your 

piece of legislation, Bill 3, has done, according to the Minister 

of Health, not yourself as associate minister. That she is no 

longer responsible for health delivery within the regional health 

boards. That is the responsibility of the regional health boards, 

not of the minister, and so she can't answer any questions 

dealing with delivery within the regional health boards because 

it's no longer her responsibility. 

You're saying under this Act that regional health boards will be 

given some responsibilities for the facilities within their region 

but that you will continue to be responsible for the appointment 

of the person designated within that facility to administer this 

Act, which may indeed be the person that the facility hired to 

hold that position or it might be somebody else if you don't 

approve of that person. 

 

And you're saying, well it's never happened before. Well under 

Bill 3 you have given those regional health boards certain 

powers, or at least your minister is claiming that you have 

given them certain powers. Well why is it different in this Bill? 

What's the difference here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, for the information of the 

committee, we're here dealing with mental health Act 

amendments. Because we know we're in a reform process, we 

want these amendments to be applicable in a new process. But I 

want to point out to the committee that these are mental health 

statutes. And it has always been the case that mental health 

statutes are administered by individuals who have been 

designated by the minister. That, Mr. Chairman, continues in 

this legislation. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, then are you saying 

that you will be appointing the person to that facility regardless 

of the choices that facility has made? If that is the case, will 

you be funding that person directly from the department? Or 

will those funds come from that facility? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, I'll say it again. The 

member can't seem to get this clear. We will designate. The 

department, through the minister, will designate someone in the 

region to serve the responsibilities called forward by the 

legislation. That's what happens now. That's what will happen 

then, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The funding of that position now may be funded through the 

budget of a hospital. The funding of that position will likely be 

funded through the district board. 

 

This is not a matter of hiring, employing. This is a matter of 

designating -- designating for the purposes of responsibility 

under the Act. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well is it your position then, Mr. 

Minister, that the department should not be delegating its 

authority to some other person for the administration of this 

Act? Is that what your position is? Because that's what it seems 

to be, that you wish to retain the authority within your own 

hands for the administration of this Act. So you are opposed to 

having it designated or delegated to some other person -- is that 

it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman. Yes, it is the 

responsibility of the minister in our democratic system in 

Saskatchewan to be responsible for the provincial legislation. 

Surely to goodness the member doesn't suggest we change that. 

Yes, the minister shall remain 



1994 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1993 

responsible. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well I'm glad to hear that, Mr. Minister. 

So when we ask you questions dealing with any portion of 

health delivery in this province, you are responsible and you 

will respond. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, the member, I think, is 

trying to play games with what is important legislation. The 

fact of the matter is this. Ministers of the Crown will be 

responsible for the legislation in this province. Ministers of the 

Crown are responsible for legislation. That's just what I said 

and that's what will continue. And I don't think the member 

would want it any other way. 

 

Now in the provision of services in our province, those services 

are provided by a wide variety of groups, organizations, and 

people. Currently some services are provided by 

non-government organizations -- social services, health 

services, educational services. Some services are provided by 

globally funded school boards. Some services are provided by 

directly funded institutions. Some services are provided by 

institutions like universities. The member knows that. 

 

When it comes to legislation in this province, ministers are and 

shall and should be responsible for that legislation and 

accountable in this House. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So, Mr. Minister, then you're only 

responsible for the pieces of paper, the legislation before the 

House. You abdicate any other responsibility for the delivery of 

health within the system. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, this is absolutely 

ludicrous. The member knows better and I don't know why he's 

filibustering like this with this kind of line of questioning. For 

goodness' sakes, he knows better. Why is he taking the time of 

the House up in this regard? Of course I'm not saying that 

ministers are only responsible for the legislative pieces of 

paper. And he should know that. 

 

Now the fact of the matter is that under this government and 

under his government formerly and under any government in 

our democratic tradition, ministers of the Crown are 

responsible for legislation. And if he suggests a change in that 

pattern, then he ought to explain that to the House. Ministers 

will also be responsible for the budgets of their respective 

departments and the funding of programs. Ministers will be 

responsible for directly funded programs. Ministers will be 

responsible for the activities in their departments, and that will 

continue just as it has always been. 

 

And so I would really ask, Mr. Chairman, that the member 

would get to a more focused question on the intent and purpose 

and description of the Bill. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I am sorry to say that 

you're getting a little frustrated with this, but that's your 

problem and not mine. It's very important, 

Mr. Minister, that you make it clear, because you seem to be 

trying to avoid accepting some of the responsibility for this, 

that you do clearly outline where your authority lies and where 

it doesn't lie. 

 

The other Minister for Health, the senior Minister for Health 

was trying to avoid answering some of the health questions 

under Bill 3 as it being some other area, not her responsibility 

because that was the area of responsibility of the regional 

health districts. 

 

And now you're saying, well I'm responsible for legislation, in 

one answer. Then you answer in the next one that I'm 

responsible for more than legislation, but that there are other 

people who are responsible also. So is it, Mr. Minister, that you 

and the senior Minister for Health are responsible for all health 

in this province, the ultimate authority? Or does somebody else 

carry a portion of that responsibility, and therefore you don't 

have to answer for those other portions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, the member giggles. I'm 

giggling too. Mr. Chairman, I have some personal 

responsibility for my own health, just as he does, just as each 

one of us does. We have responsibility for our families' health. 

 

People involved in the health care professions have 

responsibilities that they undertake in the provision of those 

services and in their careers. Boards of institutions today, 

hospital boards, health care institutions of various sorts, have 

responsibilities in the health care system. The Department of 

Health has a range of responsibilities in health care. The duly 

elected government of the day and the ministers of the Crown 

have responsibilities in health care. 

 

Now I think that's not news to the member opposite, and I am 

bewildered by this line of questioning and how in the world it 

ever pertains to the mental health Act. I would appreciate it if 

the member opposite would . . . I think there's lots to discuss 

about the Act and I'd appreciate it if we came somewhere near 

the Act, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, we got off on this 

track because of some concern over the appointment of people 

to these facilities. Now you were suggesting that you would 

accept the appointment of the person, or as it says here: "The 

regional director may designate a person for each facility . . ." 

Now when you appoint this designated person for the facility, 

you started off in suggesting that perhaps you would accept the 

person that the facility chose, the psychiatrist that they hired, if 

you felt he or she was the right person. 

 

So I'm wondering, when it comes down to the acceptance or 

rejection of this individual, who is responsible then? And that's 

when we got off on the track of responsibility. You said it's 

never happened that they haven't been accepted by your 

department. Well if it's never happened, Mr. Minister, in your 

case the description as a paper tiger, then why can't you simply 

include in the legislation that you will accept 



May 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1995 

the person that they have hired to fulfil that position. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- I think, Mr. Chairman, for the benefit of 

the member and the benefit of the committee, I will review for 

the member the responsibilities that are the minister's under this 

piece of legislation, The Mental Health Services Act. 

 

And I would point out to the member that these responsibilities 

were placed here in 1985. I'm going to read them for the 

member. He wants to pursue this; well we will pursue it. 

 

Quote the Act: 

 

 3. Unless specifically dealt with in another Act, the minister 

may do anything pursuant to this Act that he (or she) 

considers advisable for preventing circumstances that lead to 

mental disorder and distress and for promoting and restoring 

the mental health and well-being of the people of 

Saskatchewan and, without limiting the generality of the 

foregoing, the minister may: 

 

 (a) make available mental health services including 

psychiatric in-patient services, clinical services in the 

community, residential services, rehabilitation services, 

consultation, public education, research and prevention in 

various centres throughout Saskatchewan to the end that 

those services may be available to all persons requiring them 

in Saskatchewan; 

 

 (b) enter into agreements with persons whose objectives 

include the promotion, preservation or restoration of mental 

health to obtain prescribed mental health services in return 

for fees paid to those persons; 

 

 (c) provide loans, grants or other funding to assist persons 

whose objectives include the promotion, preservation or 

restoration of mental health; 

 

 (d) conduct research for the purpose of ascertaining more 

effective methods of providing mental health services or 

carrying out the . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order. It being 5 o'clock, the committee stands 

recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 


