




















































Hansard: April 06, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 867 

 April 6, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 

some citizens in the province of Saskatchewan, regarding a 

proposed 230,000 volt power line from Condie, near Regina, to 

the Queen Elizabeth power station in Saskatoon, which they 

deem unnecessary: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that the Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to do the 

following: 

 

 1. Order SaskPower to facilitate the production of non-utility 

generated power in areas of increased demand, namely 

Lloydminster and Meadow Lake. Several companies in this 

area have applied to generate power. Allowing non-utility 

generation of power in this area will make the construction of 

the power line and its attendant 42 million dollar expenditure 

unnecessary. 

 

 2. Order the Minister of the Environment to undertake a 

complete environmental assessment including public 

hearings. 

 

 3. Order SaskPower to ensure that there is a full and complete 

compensation package for all affected land-owners, with 

increased emphasis on compensation for the loss of property 

value experienced by owners of small holdings on or near the 

proposed route; 

 

 4. Order SaskPower to table, in the Legislature, a complete 

economic analysis by an independent auditor that proves the 

economic benefits of the proposed line exceed the economic 

benefits of non-utility generated power or conservation. 

 

 5. Order SaskPower to table, in the Legislature, a review of 

all national and international studies on the effects of electric 

and magnetic fields on humans. 

 

 6. Further, order SaskPower to cease and desist all planning, 

surveying, or preparation for construction of the Condie to 

Queen Elizabeth 230,000 volt power line on any of the 

proposed routes until all other points of this petition are 

honored. 

 

 And, as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are signatures here from Saskatoon, from 

Ontario, from Insinger, from Loon Lake, from Allan, 

Saskatchewan 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that 

I shall on Tuesday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

 Regarding the planning committees and district health boards 

set up in response to the government's wellness initiative: (1) 

how many persons have resigned in the last year from such 

committees; (2) how many of those resigning offered reasons 

for their resignations and; (3) how many of those resigning 

cited philosophical differences with the approach taken by 

the minister as a reason for resigning? 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Will the member from Regina 

Rosemont please come to order. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my great pleasure 

today to introduce the Member of Parliament for 

Regina-Lumsden seated in the back of the legislature, Les 

Benjamin. He's in Regina doing some constituency work. In 

fact I picked him up at his constituency . . . or riding office and 

brought him down here that I might introduce him to you and 

all members. 

 

This past weekend we had a retirement gala for Mr. Benjamin 

who's been the MP (Member of Parliament) for 25 years, and 

we treated him so good on Saturday that we just can't seem to 

get him to leave Regina and head back to Ottawa. But I can 

assure everyone he's been doing diligent work in his time here. 

I ask all members to join me in welcoming Les to the 

legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to 

introduce to you and through you to the Assembly Vonda 

Kosloski and a group of people in your gallery wearing white 

ribbons. They're here to observe the procedures of the House 

and the white ribbons are to express their concerns with Bill 

38. I'd ask the House to welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm pleased to 

introduce to you today and through you to the members of the 

Assembly the Hon. Howard Hampton, the Minister of Natural 

Resources for the province of Ontario who's seated behind the 

bar in the Chamber. 

 

I have known Howie for a number of years — 15 years or more 

— going back to associations we had in the province of 

Saskatchewan many years ago. Howie was first elected to the 

Ontario provincial legislature for the riding of Kenora Rainy 

River in 1987 and he became the first New Democrat attorney 

general for the province of Ontario in the fall of 1990 and 

served 



868 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1993 

in that capacity until he recently assumed the responsibility for 

Natural Resources ministry earlier this year, a ministry that 

parallels many of the duties that I have here in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Instead of boring you with further stories of Howie's feats 

outside of politics that he and I would both be familiar with, I'd 

simply ask him to stand so that we can tell who Les Benjamin 

and who Howard is behind the bar, and that members of the 

Assembly should welcome the minister from Ontario to be here 

this afternoon. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kluz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to introduce to 

you and through you to all members of the Assembly 21 grade 

12 students from Kelliher High School which is located in the 

south end of the constituency of Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

They're accompanied by a teacher, Cameron Mitchell, and a 

bus driver, Lorne Harman. I will be meeting with the students 

after question period and I ask all members to welcome them 

here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 

extend my wishes to Mr. Mitchell and his class today. Mr. 

Mitchell comes from a community a little bit to the south of me 

and we had the opportunity to join in the celebration of the 

80th birthday of his uncle last summer, who was a member of 

this Legislative Assembly for two or three terms, Mr. Alex 

Mitchell. And I'd just like to say welcome, Cameron. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Invoking Closure on Bill No. 3 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Minister of Health. Madam Minister, thanks 

to you, rural health care in this province is a very, very sick 

patient. And today you give notice that you will be cutting off 

its life-support systems once and for all, that you will be 

cutting off debate on Bill No. 3, that you will be using the 

heavy hand of government to ram this Bill through this 

legislature without the opportunity for proper debate. 

 

Madam Minister, you are aware of the ground swell in rural 

Saskatchewan against your wellness model. People all over 

Saskatchewan are asking for more time, more information, 

more input. And how do you respond? You shut down debate 

by asking for the most brutal tactic you can find — closure. 

Madam Minister, how can you justify this hypocrisy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, there are people 

across this province who are asking us to move with the district 

Act legislation. We have received correspondence from 

organizations that represent 400 to 500 agencies throughout the 

province . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Before we begin the same thing 

as yesterday, I ask members, please, there was no interruption 

when the question was asked, not to interrupt when the minister 

is answering her question. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

the members opposite are trying to portray a situation in 

Saskatchewan that simply is not there. There was a meeting at 

Brock last night and from that meeting one individual for 

example said, there's a lot of rumour and a lot of 

fearmongering, and we know where it's coming from, Mr. 

Speaker. And this was said by a farmer's wife and a casual 

nurse in the Kindersley Union Hospital. She says, I'm resigned 

to the fact that there are going to be cut-backs. 

 

The fact is, Mr. Speaker, is that there is health reform taking 

place throughout the province. We do need to get communities 

into districts so that we can provide a higher-quality health care 

services, and change the role of some of our facilities and 

protect these small communities with enhanced 

community-based services and enhanced therapies and other 

preventative and health promotion services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, if 

people aren't concerned as you say, then how come we find 

hospital workers questioning your wellness plan? Why are 

people asking to meet with you? Why are you introducing 

closure into this Assembly? And let me remind you of the 

position you took regarding closure in the debate on August 7, 

1989. Madam Minister, you said this about closure: 

 

 . . . (closure) is about muzzling the opposition . . . something 

that this government is not reluctant to do because we've seen 

repeated examples of how they've muzzled other people who 

have effectively spoken out against their policies, their 

cut-backs, and their harsh and cruel tactics . . . 

 

Those were your words, Madam Minister, and they couldn't be 

more appropriate today. People all over Saskatchewan are 

starting to speak out against your policies, your cut-backs, and 

your harsh and cruel tactics. So you had to muzzle the debate. 

Madam Minister, isn't that what your introduction of closure is 

really about? Muzzling those who object to your government's 

systematic destruction of health care in this province? Isn't that 

so? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, the fact is that something 

like 52.3 per cent of the population that were surveyed in an 

omnibus poll support the establishment of health districts. That 

is, those people 



April 6, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 869 

who are aware of what is occurring. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have one single intent. The 

district Act legislation, they know is essential for communities 

to get organized on districts. In fact their own commission, the 

Murray Commission, recommended that, Mr. Speaker. They 

recommended the role change of health care facilities as well. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have one intent. The 

member from Kindersley said at the meeting in Eatonia: we 

cannot allow this Bill to go through. We will hold it up as long 

as possible. It simply must be stopped. 

 

Their intent, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — The intent of the members opposite is to 

prevent the establishment of health districts in the province 

which health care stakeholders and communities throughout 

this province recognize is necessary. 

 

There are also budgetary decisions that have been made by the 

government and will result in funding reductions to . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Next question. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, the people of Saskatchewan are 

seeing through your hypocrisy. They don't really believe that 

poll. Why don't you conduct a poll today? 

 

I would like to ask the Associate Minister of Health to own up 

to his part in this betrayal as well. Mr. Minister, I'd like to 

remind you of your comments about closure, the question 

we've been trying to get an answer from the minister from, 

your comments from August 7, 1989. And you stood in this 

House and said: 

 

 I'll put my name on record against this limiting of free speech 

in the Saskatchewan legislature. And when that day comes 

and I no longer have a right to sit in this legislature and to 

speak here, when that day comes, I will at least not go away 

with the shame of knowing that I was part of a group of men 

and women who sought to limit those rights in this House. 

 

Are you feeling that shame today, Mr. Minister? Are you 

feeling that shame or were your words of August 7, 1989, as 

hollow as your party's commitment to protect health care in this 

province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite do 

not want health reform to work. Why don't they want it to 

work? Because they want to destroy medicare in this province. 

Why did they support the federal government when they 

offloaded 

to the tune of $540 million this year? Why? Because they want 

to destroy medicare and health care programs in our province. 

 

Why did they support Brian Mulroney and his drug patent 

legislation that is increasing health care costs by $10 million? 

Because they want to destroy medicare in this province. 

 

Why do they want to remove the hospital revenue tax when 

there's no other alternate funding in place? Because they want 

to cut the institutions off . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Before we proceed to the 

next question, there's a chorus of interruption when the minister 

is answering the question. That has simply got to stop. Next 

question. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if the 

minister really wants to see health reform and allow it to work, 

why introduce closure? Why introduce closure into this 

Assembly? Why be so hypocritical? Why stand up and defend 

the Associate Minister of Health? Is she going to stand up and 

defend the Premier today, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Even your leader, the Premier, as the former leader on August 

4, '89, said this about closure, you said that closure was 

heavy-handed, undemocratic, unprecedented, and unwarranted. 

Your words, Mr. Premier. But now that you're sitting in the 

Premier's chair you seem to have changed your tune. You say 

that it doesn't matter that people are concerned and fearful of 

your plan to close rural hospitals because, in your words, the 

train has left the station. 

 

So, Mr. Premier, now that you're driving the train you're not 

quite so concerned about who you will run over, are you? Mr. 

Premier, how can you justify your hypocrisy after everything 

you've said? How can you lead a government that runs 

roughshod over democratic principles and freedom of speech? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — I think the members opposite should 

justify their hypocrisy, Mr. Speaker — their hypocrisy of 

saddling this province with a $15 billion debt, destroying . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Will the member from 

Arm River please come to order. Member from Arm River, 

please come to order. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wonder how 

the members opposite, as I was saying, including the member 

from Arm River, can justify their hypocrisy in creating a $15 

billion debt in this province that makes it almost impossible for 

us to continue health care programs and other social programs. 

How can they justify their hypocrisy on sitting on their hands 

for 10 years and doing nothing, nothing to move the health care 

system in a direction that will preserve medicare for future 

generations? Instead they implemented a scorched earth policy, 

a scorched earth . . . the member from Souris-Cannington, Mr. 

Berntson . . . 



870 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1993 

The Speaker: — Order. Next question. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, the destructive 

agenda hidden below the surface of your iceberg budget has 

now been exposed. Your hypocrisy is out in the open and it is 

clear to everyone that your political agenda takes precedence 

over the rights of people in this province. Madam Minister, I 

don't believe the plan is about the wellness of people. It's about 

the political wellness of the NDP government. 

 

Madam Minister, there've been many public meetings over the 

past few weeks. Had you bothered to attend even one of them 

you would know the people are very concerned and that they 

want more. Madam Minister, if you really cared you would 

give people more time and you would attend some of the public 

meetings that are being held. 

 

Madam Minister, will you withdraw your plan to invoke 

closure on this Bill until a full public debate can be held? And 

will you attend some of the meetings to hear what people have 

to say? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite talk 

about many meetings. We're talking about a meeting in Eatonia 

and one in Brock. Last night the Minister of Social Services 

was at Brock, and guess what? When she arrived there they 

were not expecting a political person from the government at 

that meeting. In fact what they said, what they said . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. The members in the opposition 

are simply taking up their own time of question period. Order. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What the 

people at Brock said is they did not want this to be a political 

meeting. They did not expect a political person at this meeting. 

A Health department official was sent; the Minister of Social 

Services was there. When she realized that they didn't want a 

political person there, she said, we won't make it political. So 

she stayed out of the discussion. The member from Kindersley 

decided to keep quiet at that meeting too, I understand, unlike 

Eatonia. 

 

The fact is, is that there are meetings throughout the province 

which you are trying to use for your own political agenda. It's 

quite clear. And your political agenda is not to preserve 

medicare for future generations with a rational formula that 

will ensure high-quality health care services for people, but 

your agenda . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Minister of Health, I'll 

give her a few seconds to wrap up her answer. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Your agenda is to destroy medicare for 

future generations. And that's why you're trying to prevent the 

passage of the district Act, because you don't want medicare 

being preserved for future generations. Because everyone 

recognizes that 

this is the formula to preserve health care for future 

generations, and you want to destroy it. That's your agenda. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, the 

hospitals around the province have been waiting for their 

individual operating budgets. Ever since the budget was read 

on March 18 the release of this information has been repeatedly 

postponed. 

 

 And at the meeting in Brock last night, Madam Minister, Mr. 

Borody from your department said that hospitals will have to 

wait at least another two weeks due to technical difficulties. 

 

Madam Minister, the only technical difficulty is the bad 

reception your plan is getting from the people of 

Saskatchewan. This information has clearly been delayed in 

order to fit in with your political agenda. You have no intention 

of releasing hospital budgets until you can ram Bill 3 through 

the legislature. And once again, your NDP political wellness is 

more important than the wellness of Saskatchewan people. 

 

Will you confirm, Madam Minister, that this indeed is your 

hidden political agenda? If not, will you commit to announce 

the '93-94 hospital budgets before you proceed any further with 

Bill No. 3? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, the hospital budgets will 

be announced in due course, when the department has had an 

opportunity to do all the calculations and put the figures 

together which I hope will be within a matter of days. And then 

they will meet with people to make these announcements. 

 

The members opposite have to begin to realize that 

communities and health care stakeholders throughout this 

province recognize the need and the value in getting organized 

on a district basis in order that needs assessments can be done 

on a district basis and the very smallest of our communities can 

be protected. By trying to delay the passage of this Bill you are 

making it more difficult for people to get organized on a 

district basis. And when you make it more difficult, you are 

doing the smallest communities in this province a disservice — 

a disservice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Last question to the member from 

Moosomin. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, the information we've received 

is that between 60 and 70 small rural hospitals are scheduled to 

receive no acute bed funding for '92, '93. Is that true, Madam 

Minister? If not, why not release the budgets, bring your plan 

into the open and delay passage of this destructive legislation 

until all the cards are on the table so people 



April 6, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 871 

know exactly where they sit. Will you do that, Madam 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, the government will be 

asking some rural facilities to change the role of their facility, 

to look at options such as emergency acute care, expanded 

therapy services, more community-based services and 

home-based services. The details of this will become available 

in future days, Mr. Speaker. But there will be facilities and we 

will be asking for role changes because it's the right thing to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is important however for communities to get 

organized on a district basis so that they can also receive 

services from other communities within the district. Therefore 

the legislation is urgent and organization on a district basis is 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Before I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Greystone, I would like to ask the member 

from Morse . . . He just simply can't constantly utter from his 

chair. You just don't stop. 

 

Health Care Planning Committees 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions, 

too, are directed to the Minister of Health. Madam Minister, 

like most people in Saskatchewan I agree that our health care 

system needs to be overhauled. And I also agree that changes 

must be based on a vision that promotes community wellness. I 

do not agree, however, with the approach that your government 

is taking. 

 

And I must admit that I'm very troubled by what I hear 

throughout the communities in Saskatchewan. And if I thought 

that your health care reform was working, I'd stand up in this 

House and I would applaud you for it. But I see the wheels 

falling off. And I'm going to ask some questions of you which I 

believe merit honest and direct answers. 

 

When you began promoting the NDP (New Democratic Party) 

model of wellness, you went into Saskatchewan communities 

to seek out individuals to participate in health care committees. 

Can you explain the qualifications and the commitment 

required of people who were asked or volunteered to 

participate? And how many of the 12 individuals who were 

named to the Swift Current health care planning committee, 

when it was first established, met the criteria that you are going 

to outline? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, in communities, we did not 

go out and appoint planning groups. This was a community 

developmental process whereby people in the community who 

were interested in health reform came forward and wanted to 

be part of the process. They included people like hospital 

administrators. They included home care people. They included 

public health nurses. They included other people working in 

the health care area and some community people. 

 

The Department of Health did not go out and appoint 

planning groups. Some places we've had excellent planning 

groups; other places there has been some difficulty, and I know 

that Swift Current is one of them. We chose a community 

developmental process, asking the grass roots to get organized 

and talk about what health reform means, what kind of district 

they'd like to be in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to juxtapose this to McKenna's way of 

doing health care . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam 

Minister, I think that you would agree, Madam Minister, that 

the people who were sitting as the initial people on the first 

established planning committee in Swift Current were highly 

credible individuals. They met for 10 months of meetings; they 

worked on average five hours a day to develop what they 

believed was the kind of plan that would work in their area. 

And suddenly they hit a brick wall. 

 

Now can you explain to this Assembly, Madam Minister, why 

9 people out of the original 12 resigned from the Swift Current 

health care committee and why the two doctors who remained 

on the committee actually walked out of the meeting called to 

nominate the new committee members? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, what I'm not going to do is 

on the floor of this Assembly talk about personal problems that 

maybe arise as a result of what is happening in one particular 

community. I'm not going to get into that and I don't think it's 

appropriate for the member to get into that in this particular 

forum. 

 

If she wants to meet with me and the department to review this 

in further detail, if the information is not of a confidential 

nature I'm prepared to do that, but I won't get into personalities 

on the floor of this legislature. 

 

Now what we chose in Saskatchewan was a community 

development process, unlike the Liberal process in other 

jurisdictions in this country where they came forward with a 

map that defined everything, which wiped out boards 

overnight, which went so far as to take over hospitals without 

any input from them. Bang, there it was! Overnight — wham! 

— boards wiped out, boundaries defined — everything. And I 

ask the member opposite, is that her approach or does she 

choose to have communities working together — yes with 

difficulties, because when people work together there are 

always difficulties and differences but we can overcome those. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Madam Minister, I had no intention nor 

would I have intention of speaking about personalities, but I 

think that you should be in the position of talking about why 9 

out of 12 people resigned, the reasons for, not the individuals, 

but the 



872 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1993 

reasons for. 

 

And if you'd like me to talk to you about how I would approach 

this, you have set deadlines of August 17 for local committees 

to establish their boundaries; 120 days later you're expecting 

interim boards to make agreements with hospitals. 

 

Now you say that people are telling you to hurry up. I say that 

when community leaders who have invested hundreds of hours 

of volunteer time working on these projects decide that they 

would rather resign than to be held responsible for your 

wellness approach, you'd better believe that people are telling 

me in . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Does the member 

have a question? 

I want the member to put her question. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Will you explain, Madam Minister, what 

the hurry is on the part of your government, and why you will 

not allow people the time that they need to feel secure? Put 

forward some pilot projects, put forward some pilot projects. 

Explain to us. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, we've allowed more time 

than McKenna, let me tell you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Which is the Liberal approach. 

 

Communities will have a year by August 17 to come together 

and get organized. They have also told me repeatedly 

throughout the province at meetings in the fall that they wanted 

to move more quickly and they wanted the district legislation 

there quickly. I've been told that in virtually every community 

I've been in in this province, in the fall. 

 

So to the member opposite, to the hon. member opposite, Mr. 

Speaker, she may be hearing from some individuals, but I 

believe by far that people throughout Saskatchewan want the 

legislation passed and they want to get on with the health 

reform. It also makes it easier to deal with the budgetary 

decisions that have been taken by our government. 

 

And the member opposite should understand that as we change 

roles of health care facilities in rural Saskatchewan, it is 

important for them to be supported by a broader community. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Madam Minister, it has taken an 

extraordinarily long time to put in place the medicare system, 

and what you're suggesting is that in 365 days you can 

completely change this. Not unlike testing a new drug, one 

must select a control group and monitor the effects. 

 

When will you acknowledge the visible protests of people 

throughout the province, people who would accept a pilot 

project and would willingly accept this 

to implement and to study the changes that you propose? These 

are people who support health care reform. 

 

What they want from you is to slow the process down. Will 

you agree to slow this whole exercise and to implement pilot 

projects to measure the effects of this reform before proceeding 

further? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank my 

colleague, the Minister of Health, for permitting me to take this 

question. And what I'd like to say, Mr. Speaker, to the leader of 

the third party, is that her suggestion is the typical, traditional, 

no-change, 35 years stance of the Liberal Party in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Because when in 1962 Woodrow Lloyd and Tommy Douglas 

introduced medicare, the Liberals of that day stood up in their 

place in the legislature, Mr. Speaker, and said exactly the same 

thing. Don't rush it; get the Keep Our Doctors committee, of 

which the Liberals and the Conservatives were behind; put in a 

pilot project. Whatever you do, do not implement the reform. 

 

I am saying to the member of Greystone, the leader of the third 

party, Mr. Speaker, is this. That a Liberal in 1993 is like a 

Liberal in 1963, like a Conservative in 1963, in 1883. They are 

always opposed to reform. The people know that we're trying 

to change in the sense of saving our health care system, and 

that's what we're about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Sale of Pork to Cuba 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise 

today to inform the Assembly of an international sale that will 

benefit our farmers and rural communities, and especially the 

pork industry in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, later today I'll be addressing the 10th annual 

meeting of the Saskatchewan Pork International Marketing 

Group, an industry umbrella group. One of the things we will 

be talking about, Mr. Speaker, is how the government-industry 

partnership encouraged under the province's economic strategy 

has led to the sale of pork to Cuba to the extent of $2.35 

million. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, this sale is composed 

of two separate parts: first, a sale of $750,000 deal finalized 

shortly after my January ministerial trade mission to Cuba; and 

a second deal that has just been finalized which totals $1.6 

million. This announcement provides an example of what 



April 6, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 873 

Saskatchewan companies can accomplish in the international 

market-place. 

 

Most export development activity is a patient step-by-step 

process that goes on largely behind the scenes in confidential 

negotiations. Trade missions play an important role, but most 

of the work and most of the national and international 

Saskatchewan success stories occur with little fanfare or public 

notice. 

 

I would like to take this opportunity to commend Sask Pork 

International's general manager, Jim Morris, for his skills and 

hard work in arranging sales of this magnitude, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Sask Pork International is exactly the kind of aggressive grass 

roots organization envisioned in the Partnership for Renewal 

economic strategy. I especially welcome their emphasis on 

developing value added opportunities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is further evidence that the Partnership for 

Progress is working. Not megaprojects, but Saskatchewan 

producers and Saskatchewan industry marketing efforts in a 

partnership with the Government of Saskatchewan, have made 

this success possible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I congratulate the Saskatchewan pork industry on 

this significant sale and achievement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also want to 

extend my congratulations to the Saskatchewan pork industry 

for their untiring work in dealing with the international trade 

scene. 

 

I know that they have been working hard to develop markets all 

over the world. They've done some innovative things in Russia. 

They've done innovative things now in Cuba. And we want to 

compliment the pork industry for doing that. 

 

I wonder, Mr. Minister, whether in fact this is a beginning of a 

change of attitude as it relates to North American free trade, or 

whether this is a change in attitude of free trade in Canada and 

the United States, or whether this is a policy statement. 

 

I also want to say that Mr. Morris has done a lot of good work 

in relation to the pork industry. I want to compliment him and 

the board for the innovative activity that they have provided to 

the people of the international scene, and for the benefit of the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I know, Mr. Speaker, that the pork industry is going to do 

more in spite of this government. And, Mr. Speaker, they will, 

they will in spite of the members' opposite narrow-mindedness 

in relation to the North American trade agreement and the trade 

agreement that we're proposing to have with United States and 

with Mexico. 

And this is only a beginning of the opportunities that can exist 

for the pork industry, the beef industry, the wheat industry, the 

durum, oats, all of those kinds of things in the North American 

limelight. And this is only the beginning, when people are 

allowed to do it themselves. Thank you, Mr. Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 44 — An Act respecting the Inspection of Gas 

Installations and Gas Equipment 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I move that a 

Bill respecting the Inspection of Gas Installations and Gas 

Equipment be now introduced and read for the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 45 — An Act respecting the Inspection of Electrical 

Equipment, Installations and Materials 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill 

respecting the Inspection of Electrical Equipment, Installations 

and Materials be now introduced and read for the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 46 — An Act to amend and repeal The Farm 

Purchase Program Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

amend and repeal The Farm Purchase Program Act be now 

introduced and read for the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 47 — An Act to amend The Farm Financial 

Stability Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

amend The Farm Financial Stability Act be now introduced and 

read for the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

PRIVATE BILLS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 01 — An Act to amend An Act to Incorporate 

Aldersgate College 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize the member I do want to 

draw the members' attention to rule 54 of the Rules and 

Procedures. Rule 54 states —and I will read for the members 

— Rule 54 states: 



874 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1993 

No bills shall be read a second time, unless it has been 

printed and distributed to the Members at least one day 

previous and has been subsequently marked "PRINTED" on 

the Orders of the Day. 

 

Now this is no fault of any member but the House adjourned 

last night at 10 to 5 and the Bills did not arrive until 5 minutes 

to 5. Therefore I need leave. Is leave granted? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'm 

pleased to rise today to move on behalf of the petitioners An 

Act to amend An Act to Incorporate Aldersgate College, an 

Act, Mr. Speaker, to further amend this Act of incorporation 

for the purpose of empowering the corporation to grant 

certificates, degrees, and diplomas; and further for the purpose 

of empowering the corporation to own real property without 

limit as to the use, annual value, and length of time of 

ownership thereof. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 01, An Act to 

amend An Act to Incorporate Aldersgate College be now read a 

second time and referred to the Standing Committee on Private 

Members' Bills. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to 

the Standing Committee on Private Members' Bills. 

 

(1445) 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 

 

Tabling of Security Reports Relating to GTECH and VLT 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, at the conclusion 

of my remarks, will have this motion presented before the 

Assembly: 

 

 That this Assembly demand the government to be truly open 

and accountable to the people of Saskatchewan by tabling the 

security reports clearing its gambling partners, GTECH and 

VLT, as well as contracts, correspondence, and other 

documentation relating to the government's dealing with 

these organizations which stand accused of criminal activity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will move this motion at the conclusion of my 

remarks. I want to point out to you and to this Assembly . . . I 

would like to say that this would not be debated here today, 

Mr. Speaker, in this Assembly, had the opposition . . . or the 

members opposite done their homework, nor would . . . I 

should say, if the members opposite would have read their 

homework and found out what was going on. I understand that 

the minister responsible for gaming has not even read the 

security report. I wonder if anyone has read the security report 

over on that side of the House. 

 

Is there, for example, Mr. Speaker, a reason why we 

should begin questioning about an expenditure of $20 

million-plus — $20 million-plus. And actually in the budget 

book it says $23 million, Mr. Speaker, is going to be spent on 

gambling machines in the province of Saskatchewan. And that, 

Mr. Speaker, is the reason why we raise the question. If they 

had done their homework and due diligence, it's my belief that 

we would not be talking about this issue here today. 

 

Now that in itself, had the public and the official opposition 

had the opportunity to get some answers from the NDP 

government, the deal probably would not have been put 

together. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are talking here about companies that are 

interested in this deal. We're talking about companies that are 

interested right in the province of Saskatchewan. I guess the 

members opposite must think the Saskatchewan economy is 

healthier than it is in the United States. 

 

And I want to point out to members of the Assembly the 

headline that read in the Leader-Post on April 3: "Video deal 

puzzles Manitoba". Because there is a video lottery company in 

Manitoba that already supplies these kinds of options and 

makes them available to the people in the province of 

Saskatchewan. I want to point out that the 20 million is, I guess 

in the minds of the people opposite, better spent in the United 

States, better spent in Montana, it's better spent in Rhode 

Island, it's better spent in New York, than it is spent in 

Saskatchewan or Manitoba. And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly 

what the problem . . . and we have seen this as evidenced by 

the people opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP opposite have had four ministers. In 15 

months they've had four ministers responsible for this, and 

we're not even sure whether they took that responsibility 

serious. And as an observation, I think if the minister 

responsible for the Gaming Commission would have been 

doing his due diligence, it would have in fact been appropriate 

for him to read the reports supplied by the security people in 

relation to the report that was submitted to him supposedly 

somewhere before February 5. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one excuse was that there was no contract. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, in a news release that he gave to the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan he said, we have spent $20 million 

in buying a thousand video lottery terminals from one 

company, a thousand from another, and we're working on a 

deal with them for another 500 each. And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

what makes this a ridiculous kind of a commitment by the 

government. 

 

As we have seen here today, Mr. Speaker, we have seen here 

today in question period where the Minister of Health has said 

that she is very likely going to close down — because she 

doesn't want to go out and spend the time in talking to small 

rural hospitals — where she is likely going to close between 50 

and 60 hospitals from doing any acute care beds or having 

acute care beds. And, Mr. Speaker, that is a very, very serious 

problem in rural Saskatchewan. Needless to 



April 6, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 875 

say, I believe that any hospital that has a bed component of 10 

or less is going to have that hospital closed down for acute 

care. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly why the member opposite 

will not go out into the rural Saskatchewan and talk about the 

things that she should be talking to them about, and yet they 

have the time, without any of them taking a serious look at the 

gambling and gaming, they will go out and spend $20 million 

of the people's money. And $20 million is going to be spent in 

gambling when people's lives are at risk. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my part of the province there is serious risk if 

you have to drive 120 miles to get to a hospital with acute care 

where there is a doctor that is going to look after you. Mr. 

Speaker, this is very serious business; $20 million would go a 

long way in providing services to these people. And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is exactly what this resolution is all about; it's about 

choices those people made and the wrong choices that they 

made without any due diligence, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Cabinet made a decision based on a recommendation from the 

minister responsible for gaming. He made that decision not 

even to read the security report. Why, Mr. Speaker? Why 

would he say to his cabinet colleagues that I will not read this? 

Would it incriminate him if he did? That's a question 

everybody's asking. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister responsible for the Gaming 

Commission would not consider the security report made by 

Mr. Egan as a valid document, to have him begin to understand 

what the real dealings of the people around United States and 

other parts of Canada have had with these people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have piles and piles of news releases from all 

over United States — from West Virginia, from Connecticut, 

from Rhode Island, from New York, from Montana, from 

Oregon, from Washington, from California — all over the 

United States, Mr. Speaker, and there's one common thread. 

There's one common thread that goes through this whole 

scenario that we have as it relates to video lottery terminals. 

And that is that there has been corruption, Mr. Speaker, there 

has been corruption, improprieties on the part of individuals in 

direct involvement, from governors to staff and aides of 

governors across these states. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we are saying to the people of the province 

of Saskatchewan, by bringing forward this resolution, that the 

people in the province have a right to know what is in that 

security report. That, Mr. Speaker, is exactly the reason why 

we raise this issue. And, Mr. Speaker, the minister responsible 

for the Gaming Commission hasn't even taken the time to read 

that report. And there, Mr. Speaker, are hundreds of newspaper 

articles condemning these people over and over and over again 

for their incompetence in relation to these terminals. 

 

I want to point out to the minister responsible that 

there are other alternatives. There was a project from the 

people of Saskatchewan that would have been willing to 

become involved in this video lottery terminal business 

venture. There were people in Manitoba who have a proven 

track record about the things that they've been doing, and they 

have a proven record in Manitoba. And the headline says: 

"Video deal puzzles Manitoba." Questions about firms. And 

that, Mr. Speaker, are the same questions we have of that 

minister. And, Mr. Speaker, will he get up and say to us that he 

has gone back and read the report? Will he state unequivocally 

that he feels that the improprieties as outlined in that report, 

that they are not valid? Will he say that the court action in 

different states throughout the United States, that they're not 

valid, that they shouldn't be considered? 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are headlines across the United States that 

talk about involvement of corruption by governors, by aides of 

governors, legal counsel of governors. There are even people, 

Mr. Speaker, who were given $80,000 a year for 10 years in 

relation to the contribution that they made to the decision 

making as it relates to the video lottery terminals being placed 

in that state or that province. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is a part of what we are concerned about on 

this side. And that's why we say that you need to table the 

security report clearing its gambling partners. That, Mr. 

Speaker, is the reason why we bring forward this rule 16 today. 

We want to have the government stand on their feet and say we 

have done due diligence, Mr. Speaker, in spite of all of the 

things that have been involving the kinds of things that they 

have done in the U.S. (United States). 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the paper that the individual has presented to us 

from that side of the House, there is one glaring omission in 

that statement. They have reports from Iowa's Gaming 

Commission. They have reports from the Rhode Island, New 

York, but they have . . . nowhere do they have a report from the 

FBI (Federal Bureau of Investigation). 

 

Mr. Speaker, they are doing those kinds of investigations 

across the United States, and that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason 

why we question, why we question the activities of this 

minister, of the previous ministers as they've gone about and 

done their work in the Gaming Commission. Have they done 

due diligence in relation to the process? 

 

Mr. Speaker, if they had, why don't they stand here and tell us. 

If they had done the due diligence and gone and said these 

companies are clean, then they would have no reason to hold 

back tabling that document, Mr. Speaker, and that's the reason 

why we are bringing forward this motion. 

 

This motion asks the government to put that report on the 

Table, the security report. Mr. Speaker, this Gaming 

Commission in this province has been run first of all by the 

Minister of Labour. It's been run by the Minister of Justice. It's 

been run by the Minister of Finance, and now the minister 

responsible for 



876 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1993 

gambling and for liquor is the minister responsible for Natural 

Resources in the province and he's going to deal with this in an 

equitable way. 

 

There is a history, Mr. Speaker, throughout this government 

that they have pushed this off, and we begin to wonder why. 

Why have they put the head bagman for the NDP Party as a 

responsible individual to put him in the Gaming Commission 

as its chief executive officer? We have to ask all kinds of 

questions, Mr. Speaker, in relation to the evidence that we have 

before us. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it all, it all begins to sound as if there is 

something smelly in here. It's beginning to smell, Mr. Speaker, 

and that is why this opposition has been focusing their attention 

on this problem that the NDP government has. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a part of my observations I will move: 

 

 That this Assembly demand the government to be truly open 

and accountable to the people of Saskatchewan by tabling the 

security reports clearing its gambling partners, GTECH and 

VLT, as well as contracts, correspondence and other 

documentation relating to the government's dealing with 

these organizations which stand accused of criminal activity. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if I may add, they in some places have been 

convicted of criminal activity, and that is even more substantial 

in the evidence that we've provided to this Assembly and to the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

We want to, Mr. Speaker, move this motion so that the people 

of the province know that these people are making choices — 

$20 million to gambling, and nothing to the hospitals. That, 

Mr. Speaker, is the reason why we lay this motion before this 

Assembly here today. 

 

I so move. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The need for 

this motion calling on the government to provide documents 

related to their gambling partners is terribly unfortunate. But 

we feel so strongly about this matter that we are using the rule 

16 opportunity to ensure that the record shows what is going 

on. 

 

The first point I want to make, Mr. Speaker, is the absolute and 

unacceptable arrogance of a minister and a government that 

tries to undo one of the most basic principles of parliamentary 

democracy, and that is the principle that MLAs (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly) shall have access to information in the 

House itself. It was never intended and it was never accepted 

that MLAs must go through the freedom of information Act to 

exercise their duty to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I say to the Premier, how dare you, how dare you try to 

subvert the access to information of MLAs in this 

way? It's bizarre that a minister of the Crown can stand in his 

place and with utter arrogance and contempt fling out a form 

and say to this Assembly, use my bureaucracy to try and get 

your answers. And at the same time saying to himself, and then 

when you don't get the answers, you'll have to blame the 

information officer, the bureaucrat, and I will escape the blame. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we know where the blame for the lack of 

information lies. It lies with the minister. And it's this arrogant, 

deceptive, and cowardly line of the minister of gaming and 

liquor. 

 

Well we will not set a precedent by trying to gain access 

through the freedom of information Act. We will insist on our 

right as members of this Assembly, elected to a duty to the 

people to hold this government accountable and under an oath 

to do so. We will insist that ministers also be held accountable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is doing business with outfits 

that are alleged to have Mafia connections — Mafia 

connections, Mr. Speaker. This GTECH makes Guy Montpetit 

look like a kindergarten kid, a piker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the minister cannot take refuge in saying 

that the information this Assembly wants and needs is 

protected by intergovernmental confidences. He has not even 

asked those governments whether or not they would object to 

the release of information. So I can tell you for a fact that he is 

simply using this provision as an excuse or a cover-up. 

 

I know this, Mr. Speaker, because we have been briefed by one 

of the governments and they had no problems in telling us the 

extent of this government's investigation as far as they were 

concerned. And I'll tell it; it wasn't very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But look at this resolution, Mr. Speaker, and imagine what it 

means that the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly is being 

put in the position of having to get answers from other 

governments because its own government refuses to be 

accountable to the people. It's truly bizarre. 

 

And I want this minister to know, Mr. Speaker, that we are 

going down the list of governments for which he claims 

immunity, and we will be asking them — each and everyone 

— two things. 

 

First, has this NDP government even bothered to ask if release 

of information is acceptable; and secondly, will they, the other 

government, give us the same information? 

 

Because you know, Mr. Speaker, there is no commercial 

excuse for withholding this information. The government has a 

monopoly on gambling and it's ready to use force to back up 

that claim. They certainly proved that to the people of 

Souris-Cannington and White Bear. It has a monopoly so there 

is no competitive threat in releasing information. 

 

There are only two reasons for refusal. The first is that 



April 6, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 877 

the Premier does not want the criminal allegations and the 

extent of criminal background in his gambling partners to 

become known. That is a possibility. The second possibility is 

that no real security checks have been done at all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, look at the nature of the GTECH organization. 

What's its track record? What are the charges for which it 

stands accused? It stands accused of kickbacks to politicians. It 

stands accused of illegal political contributions. It stands 

accused of pay-offs to officials and elected politicians. 

 

Those are part and parcel of the entire record of GTECH. And 

now we have the NDP government appointing their chief 

bagman for the province to run the gambling commission 

which overlooks the VLTs (video lottery terminal) which will 

be dealing with GTECH. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what's wrong with this picture? The NDP's key 

fund-raiser takes over the reins of a partnership involving an 

organization with a track record of political bribery and 

kickback. So you don't have to be very cynical to say there is 

something compelling about putting the two together, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And as Hamlet said: something is rotten in the state of 

Denmark. Mr. Speaker, now something is rotten in 

Saskatchewan when it comes to the government's dealings with 

GTECH. 

 

So I say to the Premier, if there is nothing to all of this, if it is 

purely innocent and the only reason you've ended up in bed 

with those questionable people is that others have done it, and 

you didn't know any better, if that's the case, then release the 

information. 

 

And do not use the business of exemptions under FOI (freedom 

of information) because the Premier knows, Mr. Speaker, those 

exemptions are at his discretion. He's not forced to use those 

exemptions. He can, under the law, release anything in this 

Assembly that he chooses. So he's being cute by half by hiding 

behind a law meant to increase access to information, hiding 

behind it to keep the information secret. 

 

As long as the refusal to provide the information continues and 

we have NDP affiliates, fund-raisers, and political operatives in 

charge of gambling in this province, then the opposition will 

not let this issue go. And the stench of the government's actions 

will continue to spread across this province. 

 

The deal is packed with NDP hacks and now the NDP treasurer 

is sitting at the till waiting for GTECH to come calling. And 

this is despicable, Mr. Speaker. I say, simply table the 

documents. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, at the end of my brief comments 

I will be moving a motion along the following lines: 

 

 By removing all the words after Assembly and replacing it 

with: 

 Commend the government and the Gaming Commission for 

their open, honest, and thorough approach to the introduction 

of video lottery terminals into the Saskatchewan market. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I will be moving that amendment at the end 

of my remarks because I want to put straight the record in this 

House as it has been put straight by the minister many times in 

question period to the deaf ears of the opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a process was set up that was followed very 

stringently. There are a number of people who came forward to 

try to supply, who wanted to supply video lottery terminals to 

Saskatchewan. Those companies were reviewed by the 

government people, by Mr. Egan and two people from Property 

Management Corporation. There was a short list, Mr. Speaker, 

and from that short list two companies, GTECH and VLT 

(Video Lottery Technologies Inc.), were chosen to . . . which 

the government would negotiate a contract. 

 

Now I hear the members opposite standing in their place and 

talking about Mafia connections with GTECH. Well the 

credibility of the member who says that, Mr. Speaker, ought to 

be called to question. Because I will remind the members 

opposite, it was in 1982 under the direction of the minister, 

Paul Schoenhals, that GTECH was given a contract to control 

the western Canadian lotteries. 

 

They signed the original contract with GTECH 10 years ago. 

And now they stand in their place and say: well this 

corporation has Mafia connections, alleged Mafia connections. 

Well talk about credibility, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Maybe they have a short memory, but I ask the question, what 

is the purpose of this? What is the purpose of this type of 

fearmongering? It's very similar to what they do in health care, 

Mr. Speaker — fearmongering, trying to whip up the public. 

 

The member from Souris-Cannington also talked about the 

government using force to shut down White Bear. Well what 

would the member have us do — not have us do it, by the way 

— have the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) do? 

Have something operating outside the rules of this province, 

outside the legislation that's been put in place? Because that's 

what he was saying, we should let this operation continue. Mr. 

Speaker, that is totally . . . has no credibility. But the member 

stands in his place and spews out this garbage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has followed a process that is 

very open and accountable. Security reports on the company 

were submitted and the two corporations were chosen. Security 

report was prepared using information obtained in confidence 

from a number of law-enforcement agencies. And the minister 

responsible for the Gaming Commission has received a legal 

opinion from the Department of Justice, confirming the view 

that because it was in  



878 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1993 

confidence this should not be public information. 

 

So therefore the minister said to the member opposite in 

question period: if you want this information or think that you 

can get this information or should have this information, put 

forward a freedom of information request. The freedom of 

information request has a process to follow. The head of the 

organization, meaning the chairman of the board in this case, 

would decide whether it's possible to release that. If they're still 

not satisfied with that, if it can't be released — in fact a 

summary has been released — if it can't be released, then they 

have an appeal process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the rules, the guidelines, have all been set 

forward. And the members opposite know that. But what do 

they do? They stand in their places and try to slander the 

RCMP, the Gaming Commission, and this government for 

political purposes — strictly political purposes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Got the last one right. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — And the member says, we got the last one 

right, meaning that they're standing in their places trying to 

slander the government. Well I guess that's typical, Mr. 

Speaker, of the 10 sorry Tories opposite. 

 

An Hon. Member: — That's our job. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — He says that's their job. Well I think that is not 

their job. I think their job and the people of Saskatchewan 

would be behind me saying that their job is to try to make sure 

that this government gets this economy moving and to make 

sure that this government, as we govern this province, are 

accountable to the people. And in this situation we have time 

and time again laid out the process, the rules, the regulations, 

the accountability process that all the people of Saskatchewan 

have access to. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this venture, this venture with VLT and 

GTECH is simply a fee-for-service venture. When the contract 

has been established they will supply video lottery terminals; 

we will supply them money for those video lottery terminals. 

Mr. Speaker, there is no long-term contract; it's simply 

purchasing VLTs. 

 

But the members opposite, it would appear, aren't happy with 

that. Well I'll tell you, if you read the reports from the people 

who have VLTs, like the hotel operator in Langenburg who is 

very happy with this process, talk to the people around the 

areas on the east side who had to go to Russell, Manitoba — 

this is all well documented, Mr. Speaker — who say they are 

happy that they now have the opportunity to spend their money 

in local establishments because it helps the local economy. 

 

And what are the members opposite trying to do? They're 

trying to delay or scrap the whole process, and I ask why? Why 

would they want to stand in their places and try to undermine 

an economic activity that will return to this province 

megadollars from the 

people of this province and I would say, Mr. Speaker, from 

other people coming into this province to gamble and to 

entertain themselves in other ways. That's what they're trying to 

undermine or trying to stop. 

 

(1515) 

 

Now I can understand why the members opposite might want 

to do that. Because for 10 years in this province they 

undermined the whole economic base of this province, drove 

the people out, built up a $15 billion debt. But my question is: 

why can't you change? Why can't you change . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well the member says, they're too old. Well I 

know they're an old, tired lot of Tories, just like all the Tories 

across this country, but it doesn't mean that you're going to stop 

good economic development in this province — upfront, open, 

honest, contractual arrangements to supply materials to this 

province. You will not stop that. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the member from Morse, when he was 

speaking, talked about why we selected these two corporations. 

They were selected simply because the review process that we 

went through deemed that these two organizations fit the bill 

for Saskatchewan as far as quality was concerned, as far as 

assuredness of supply was concerned, and as far as having a 

track record in this province since 1982 that the Tories signed a 

contract with, with GTECH in particular. 

 

They have a record of being upfront and honest as opposed, 

Mr. Speaker, to the member from Morse's government who 

spent $5 million buying machines, not unlike machines like 

we're buying, video lottery machines, but they were buying 

machines to translate our laws into French. Five million dollars 

was spent. And you know, Mr. Speaker, believe it or not, there 

wasn't one word translated into French. 

 

So I can see where the member comes from. If his mindset is 

the way it was in his 10 years of destroying this province, of 10 

years of destroying this province, the quality factor never came 

into it. Quality of product never once came into it. And we can 

go through time and time again the number of ventures that the 

former government went into that flopped flat on its face. So 

quality never came into it. But I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, in this 

case quality was the number one factor involved, and that's 

why they were selected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said, there's no contracts that have been 

signed. We are simply negotiating a contract with the two 

corporations that were selected. Now, Mr. Speaker, in the 

review process — and this is another point where the members 

seem to be very, very deaf, as to what's going on — the 

security review was completed, Mr. Speaker, and not only did 

they go through Canadian law-enforcement agencies and 

personal security personnel and gaming control agencies, other 

jurisdictions were contacted as well, but they forget to mention 

this. South Dakota lottery commission, Montana gambling, 

Nevada state gambling control board, Oregon state lottery, 

Rhode 



April 6, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 879 

Island state lottery, Alberta lotteries, Atlantic lotteries, 

Manitoba lotteries. 

 

The Speaker: — Time has expired. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, then I would move this motion, 

seconded by the member from . . . the amendment, Mr. 

Speaker, seconded by . . . I would move, seconded by the 

member for Shaunavon: 

 

 That we remove all words after "Assembly," and add the 

following: 

 

 commend the government and the Gaming Commission for 

their open, honest, and thorough approach to the introduction 

of video lottery terminals into the Saskatchewan market. 

 

I so move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand pleased 

to second the amended motion put forward by the member 

from Humboldt. I find the original motion laughable in view of 

who put that motion forward given their past record, and I 

think it has to be addressed as to what games they're playing. 

 

The opposition is once again trying to instil a cloud of doubt 

over the process of the gaming that we're putting forward in 

Saskatchewan, and we look in the past what this same group 

have done to try and put a grey lining on the lives and 

professions of the people working for this government. They've 

been attacking auditors, they've attacked civil servants. Anyone 

who came out opposed to that former government, they 

attacked. And, Mr. Speaker, I think the time has come to put an 

end to that. 

 

What I want to do is read into the record a letter from the 

Western Canada Lottery Corporation, Garth Manness, the 

president. He writes this letter to Byron Burnett of the 

Saskatchewan Gaming Commission: 

 

 We have been asked to provide a letter of reference for 

GTECH Corporation. 

 

And that's the corporation that these fellows are claiming have 

some terrible dealings with the mafia and the like. 

 

 GTECH has been the supplier of traditional lottery on-line 

goods and services to our organization since 1982. 

 

That's back at the time when Paul Schoenhals was supporting 

this group. 

 

 In 1991 GTECH was selected to provide central system 

functionality for our video lottery test project in Alberta. 

 

Did you say anything about that at the time, I ask the member 

from Morse? 

The video lottery central system has proven to be suitable for 

our test project needs. The selection of GTECH for our 

traditional lottery on-line and video lottery test needs was 

based on their excellent reputation, (that's the reputation that 

the members opposite are trying to destroy once again), as 

well as their ability to meet the required time lines and 

provide ongoing support. 

 

And that is quite important to the province. The last line of this 

paragraph is: 

 

 We remain pleased with our decision to utilize GTECH 

resources. 

 

And that's: Yours truly, Garth Manness, President of the 

Western Canada Lottery Corporation. 

 

And I ask: are you trying to destroy this man also? It seems like 

everyone that has ever went opposed to you guys, you've tried 

to destroy. And yet who's got the dirty record? Well it's the 

members opposite, there's no question. 

 

The member from Morse moves a motion in an effort to have 

an appearance of some cover-up in that he can't get enough 

information. Well let's have a look. The minister responsible 

for Gaming Commission in the province of Saskatchewan, the 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch, sent a letter to — and I'll quote — 

Mr. Harold Martens, MLA, Morse constituency. This is dated 

April 5, only a few days ago: 

 

 Further to our ongoing discussions during question period, I 

am providing you with a copy of the briefing note Justice has 

prepared in response to your request for a copy of the 

Gaming Commission's security report on VLT 

manufacturers. 

 

And he lists a number of points for Mr. Martens to follow. The 

Gaming Commission acts independently of the minister. And 

the member from Morse knows full well that that is the case. 

 

 Pursuant to section 5 of The Freedom of Information and 

Protection of Privacy Act that was proclaimed by our 

government, you have the right to access to information 

subject only to exemptions under that Act. 

 

Yet the member from Morse has never applied through the 

freedom of information Act. He goes on to say: 

 

 Further to this I have advised you, as is confirmed by the 

memo from Justice, that I am not in a position to release the 

security report of the Gaming Commission. This advice is 

consistent with that of officials in the Gaming Commission. 

However I also advised you that you may wish to apply for 

this under The Freedom of Information and Protection of 

Privacy Act. To this extent I have provided you with a copy 

of the access to information form 



880 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1993 

for you to complete. 

 

He's given him the form. All we didn't do was fill it out. Would 

you then send the form back, we'll fill it out and help you along 

with this - I ask the member — instead of trying to muddy 

everyone's lives up. 

 

The facts show, Mr. Speaker, that this government has nothing 

to hide. But let's, however, let's take a look at the record of the 

members opposite. Let's see if they had anything to hide. 

 

Saskatchewan Centre of the Arts reported that three ministers 

used a private viewing suite containing four seats a total of 17 

times free. These are all things that come out in the Public 

Accounts, and by the auditor. 

 

SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) reported they've 

paid taxi fares of $682 for various ministers and their staff. 

You were one of those ministers. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I was not. 

 

Mr. McPherson: — You were so. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I was not. 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Even though a charge account for this is 

available at the Legislative Building. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You prove that. 

 

Mr. McPherson: — You were one of them. 

 

An Hon. Member: — No sirree. 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Saskatchewan Liquor Board paid 

expenses totalling $16,162 for ministers to attend the Big 

Valley Jamboree — so you could go and wear your big cowboy 

hat there. Drink free booze. Free trailers. Free rent. Get in for 

free; eat for free. And you did that while you were putting 

people down. 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I just want to remind the 

member from Shaunavon, he's not to address his particular 

remarks to any member in the House. He's to address his 

remarks through the Chair, and not to a member in the 

legislature. 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'm 

looking at a Star-Phoenix editorial, that was October 10, 1991. 

Star-Phoenix says Four cabinet ministers . . . invested . . . 

taxpayers' money in . . . businesses. 

 

Now they say they have nothing to hide. Let me quote: 

 

 Four cabinet ministers have . . . invested about $4.1 million 

of taxpayers' money in small businesses through a 

government-owned company (quietly) set up last year . . . 

 

The Saskatoon Star-Phoenix reported today. 

 

 As directors of Saskatchewan Diversification Corporation 

(SDC), Grant Schmidt, Lorne 

Hepworth, Jack Klein, and George McLeod, (all former 

members, all former colleagues of the member opposite) 

authorized investments in 19 small companies . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — What's your point? 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Well the point is, you guys were hiding 

information all along, continuously, continuously. It was 

coming out in the papers, of your scams. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here's another one, "Business given priority over 

public", Star-Phoenix, October 12, 1991: 

 

 Perhaps they thought no one would find out about it (it starts 

off). After all, handing out taxpayers' money in secret gets 

around the whole accountability thing. 

 

 But the sheer audacity and ethical bankruptcy demonstrated 

by (last weeks') explanation of why the government hid the 

Saskatchewan Diversification Corporation from 

(Saskatchewan) is astounding. 

 

I'm going to read down, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 Who's going to be responsible if one of these companies sues 

or make the list (of companies SDC invested in) public? 

"Who's going to be responsible if these companies fail?" 

Schmidt asked. The counter question is: What's that got to do 

with anything? 

 

That was Schmidt's response. 

 

And the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, sat there, they 

allowed that to happen. They thought that was okay when 

former colleagues of theirs and ministers and themselves 

refused to bring forward information. There was no problem 

with doing that. 

 

Well the point is is that we are now open and accountable, and 

yet the members opposite are still attacking the lives and 

professions of those people that are serving this province. And 

I think it's shameful. And yes, I second the amended motion put 

forward by the member from Humboldt. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was really happy 

to be told earlier by our whip that I would have a chance to 

participate in this debate. And I even am more happy now that I 

get up to have the opportunity to debate and argue against the 

amendment. The amendment of course, Mr. Speaker, I guess, is 

supposed to somehow tell the people of Saskatchewan how 

great the new government administration is and to assure us 

that the accusations that they've been dealing with crooks in 

this process are not founded. And I guess they have that right to 

try to justify that. 



April 6, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 881 

Unfortunately they talk about having done a review of several 

companies — several companies that were going to provide the 

very same service. And the best one that they could find is one 

that is heavily, heavily scrutinized throughout most of the 

world for having wrongdoings and accusations of wrongdoings 

brought against them. Now these people are the best they could 

find to supply these services. 

 

And it is indeed a pleasure, Mr. Speaker, for me to stand up 

and to speak to this issue. In 1991 the NDP, Mr. Speaker, made 

a lot of promises to the people of Saskatchewan. They 

promised more money for health care, they promised more 

money for education, they promised an improved drug 

prescription plan. They promised to restore the old 

school-based dental program. 

 

(1530) 

 

And believe me, Mr. Speaker, that was a tough issue for me to 

campaign through in my constituency in some sectors, because 

quite frankly a lot of people did think that was a good program 

and they were going to vote NDP to get that program back. 

 

The government of the day, while campaigning, promised to 

conduct an open and honest government. A lot of nice 

promises. But since forming government, the NDP have been 

starving the health care system of money. They haven't 

improved the health care system. They've reduced the funding 

— exactly opposite to what they said. They are closing schools 

in rural Saskatchewan — exactly the opposite to what they 

said. They continue to increase the prescription drug plan and 

the deductibles in the plan; they continue to increase those up 

to $1,700 a year plus 35 per cent thereafter. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the NDP has eliminated the children's dental 

program for anyone not on social assistance. Not only aren't 

they bringing back their promise of a school-based dental 

program, they've wiped out the whole thing. Every child in this 

province is without any kind of support for medical care in the 

dental area. 

 

And these are the kinds of promises that were made to the good 

people of this province. This NDP government has gone on 

record for doing all of these things. And they have a good 

record, Mr. Speaker, in one area; they have a good record for 

breaking promises. It's the only good record they've got. By 

refusing to be open and honest with the people of 

Saskatchewan, the NDP record for broken promises remains 

intact. 

 

It never fails, Mr. Speaker: what the NDP say and what the 

NDP do are two completely different things. I've never seen 

anything like it. The only difference between this broken 

promise and all of the other NDP broken promises is that not 

being open and honest is hard to pin on the deficit or the 

federal government. They can't blame this on anybody but 

themselves. So this is going to be a tough one. This is a deal 

that they've made all on their own. 

What is so ludicrous, Mr. Speaker, is that the minister 

responsible for the Gaming Commission defends the NDP 

government's decision to award government contracts for VLTs 

to suspected criminals. Why would you even try to defend that? 

Why wouldn't you just say: we're going to investigate it; we'll 

check it out; if we made a mistake, we'll correct it. But no, they 

defend this. That's very objectionable. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it is also very indefensible. He doesn't feel 

that the government has done anything wrong. It is as though 

he has never heard of guilt by association. I'm sure that some of 

the people in the back benches could explain that, but he won't 

take the time to listen to his back bench. We've seen that. 

 

Those who deal with criminals are often implicated in 

wrongdoings themselves. It doesn't mean you're necessarily 

wrong, but oftentimes there is an association. The NDP 

government is almost completely made up of lawyers, and we 

wonder why they don't advise the members or the member 

from Prince Albert Northcote to come clean on this issue. 

 

The member from Prince Albert Northcote continues to tell the 

opposition that the Gaming Commission acts independently of 

the minister. Independently, Mr. Speaker. He is starting to 

sound like the Minister of Health who claims she has no power 

over health boards. 

 

To put it bluntly and simply, this is garbage, as the member 

from Humboldt has pointed out. 

 

The minister must take responsibility for the Gaming 

Commission because he is the minister responsible. Why is the 

member from Prince Albert Northcote collecting a minister's 

salary if he's not responsible for anything? If the Gaming 

Commission truly acts independently of the minister, then the 

minister responsible has no duties. No duties, no job. That is 

something the people of Saskatchewan would appreciate — 

less NDP cabinet ministers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know that the member from Prince Albert Northcote 

understands why the opposition wants to see the Gaming 

Commission's security records on the GTECHs and the VLTs. 

We want to see if the security checks were conducted before or 

after the GTECHs and the VLTs were awarded contracts worth 

$20 million — not a buck and a half or three — $20 million. 

 

It is an important item of business, one that the government 

should be concerned about, Mr. Speaker. We want to see the 

security checks uncovered — the GTECHs, VLTs — and we 

want to see this speedily passed. This is an important item of 

business for us and for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The security report will clear the government or they will 

implicate the government, one or the other. Because the 

members across the floor are refusing to cooperate, are refusing 

to table the report, I would 



882 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1993 

have to suggest that they are guilty. 

 

Why would they award government contracts to 

out-of-province firms that are suspect of criminal activities? 

This is a serious business, Mr. Speaker. Did the NDP think that 

we would sit idly by when $20 million, 20 million taxpayers' 

dollars are at stake? 

 

If we are wrong in our suspicions, then the NDP should prove 

it, Mr. Speaker. The minister responsible for gaming and the 

Gaming Commission should prove that he is not guilty of 

doing anything wrong. Come clean with the people of 

Saskatchewan. Table the security report on GTECH and the 

VLTs. Conduct an open and honest government. 

 

Find one more thing that you're good at besides breaking your 

promises. Conduct an open and honest government. Show us 

and the people of Saskatchewan that the contracts were 

awarded legitimately. Prove that Saskatchewan firms were not 

purposefully shut out. Table the security report clearing 

GTECH and VLT. Table the contracts. Table all of the 

correspondence. 

 

Very simple for you to do — clear your name. And if you 

refuse to do that, we have to assume that you are guilty. Table 

all of the documents relating to the government's dealings with 

these companies, companies accused of criminal activities. 

Table these documents and prove that the NDP government is 

not implicated in shady dealings. You have that obligation and 

that opportunity. 

 

And to say, Mr. Speaker, that we should apply through the 

process of access to information, is really terribly bad. To 

suggest that an opposition should not use the vehicle of 

question period to have the minister . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I must inform the member that his time has 

expired. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 

me a great deal of pleasure to join in this debate in support of 

the amendment moved by my colleague, the member from 

Humboldt, and seconded by also my colleague, the member 

from Shaunavon. 

 

In reality, Mr. Speaker, what this debate is all about, it's about 

open and honest and accountable government. And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is words and terms that is very foreign to the ears of 

the opposition. And I guess, Mr. Speaker, this foreign word is 

what sprang them into questioning the merit or the open 

accountability of our government. 

 

And I agree with my colleague from Shaunavon who said that 

the motion brought forth by the opposition is laughable. It is, 

Mr. Speaker, it is laughable. For the opposition to suggest that 

our government is anything but open and honest and 

accountable is like the pot calling the kettle black. Mr. Speaker, 

all we have to do is look back at the record of their 

government, a 

record that they try to now suggest is lily-white and as pure as 

the fresh, wind-driven snow. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think not only we in this House, but I 

know that the people all across this great province know that 

that is a myth. And I would just like to quote a few comments 

from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, Mr. Speaker, in regards to 

the record of the former government. One of the quotes, it says 

the former Premier's office hid $980,000 worth of political 

employees in various departments and Crowns. The opposition, 

Mr. Speaker, might call that open and honest government, but 

the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix calls it a fraud. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is unlimited list of secret deals that was 

carried out by the former government, most of them to benefit 

themselves and members of their government personally, such 

as the Liquor Board hiding $15,000 worth of booze that was 

delivered to the PC (Progressive Conservative) cabinet 

ministers; Liquor Board hiding $10,000 worth of kickbacks to 

the PC ministers and their guests when they visited the Big 

Valley Jamboree. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the list goes on and on. The list also indicates that 

the Liquor Board was forced to pay a kickback of $1,000 to a 

defeated PC MP, John Gormley, that paid for the services that 

he would never perform or intended to perform. And then, Mr. 

Speaker, they have the gall to suggest that our minister in 

charge of the Gaming Commission is not being open and 

honest with them. 

 

Yet, Mr. Speaker, Hansard will record that whenever the 

opposition have asked him a question he has given them a very 

straightforward, clear, and concise reply. Again, Mr. Speaker, 

it's a little like the pot calling the kettle black. 

 

I also find some comments from the Provincial Auditor's report 

for the year ending March 31, 1987, rather interesting. And the 

Provincial Auditor indicates in his report the lack of 

cooperation that he and his department received from the 

former government. 

 

I find it regrettable, Mr. Speaker . . . And I will quote from one 

of the comments made here: I find it regrettable that for the 

first time since my appointment I must incur in my annual 

report comments concerning the lack of cooperation in 

obtaining information that I need to . . . necessary to carry out 

my work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are just some of the indications of the lack 

of cooperation and the intentional moves by the former 

government to operate in secrecy, to hide the truth not only 

from the members of the legislature but to hide the truth from 

the people of this province. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, truth will always out. They fooled the people 

of Saskatchewan for a while, but I believe it was a gentleman 

by the name of . . . former president of the United States, 

Abraham Lincoln, who said that you can fool some of the 

people all the time and all the 



April 6, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 883 

people some of the time, but you can't fool all the people all the 

time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that became absolutely, evidently true with the 

results of the last provincial election, where people in that 

election did not vote just for one political party or another 

political party. What they voted for was honesty, openness, and 

that's what they're receiving from this government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to stand up in 

this legislature today and offer my voice in support of the 

amendment, for that amendment most truly reflects the 

principles that govern this government and the principles that 

the people of Saskatchewan have long looked for during the 10 

years of tyranny of the former government. Mr. Speaker, those 

are the principles that have carried us through in this province 

through tough times, and those are the principles that will 

restore this province, restore the dignity to this province. 

 

(1545) 

 

We have to look at new and modern ways of economic 

development throughout this province, and a part of that, Mr. 

Speaker, is the introduction of the VLTs. But we are doing it, 

Mr. Speaker, in the most upright, straightforward manner 

possible. We have done it with the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people and taxpayers in mind, putting into place 

through the Gaming Commission stringent regulations and 

screening system to ensure that those who participate are of the 

highest standards possible. That, Mr. Speaker, is not something 

the former government can boast of. Mr. Speaker, we well 

know and the people of this province well know the standards 

on which they operated and the standards on which they made 

their deals and the lack of standards that they used to create 

their partnerships. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is no partnerships by the Gaming 

Commission. The Gaming Commission is not entering into a 

gambling partnership with GTECH or VLC (Video Lottery 

Consultants). There will be a direct purchase of VLTs from 

suppliers with no ongoing relationship. Mr. Speaker, there is no 

contract and there has been no substantial exchange of money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have as government, and I think something to 

be very proud of, put into place the highest standards of 

anywhere in North America in scrutiny of the gambling process 

as it takes place in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am more than happy to offer my voice in 

support of the amendment to the resolution. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 

pleasure to enter this debate for the short time that's left to it. 

It's interesting listening to the government members how they 

have done everything possible to try and scratch enough to 

cover their tracks here. 

 Obviously the government is roundly embarrassed about the 

fact that they've been dragged through the mud on this 

particular topic, Mr. Speaker, for some time now. 

 

They've spent $20 million of the taxpayers' money. They aren't 

willing to come forth with the due diligence, with the proper 

information for Saskatchewan taxpayers to make sure that this 

is seen as above-board and open. Instead they'll put a 

succession of back-benchers here to come up and drag up a 

bunch of stuff from the past to try and cover their tracks. And I 

think, Mr. Speaker, that just emphasizes to this Assembly and 

to Saskatchewan people that these people have something to 

fear. 

 

The problem we have here, Mr. Speaker, with GTECH and 

Video Lottery Consultants of Bozeman, Montana, is the fact 

that in a dozen jurisdictions in the United States and places like 

Australia, these people are under investigation — under 

investigation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I mean the opposition doesn't throw around the names of the 

FBI lightly. These people have been indicted in some cases. 

They've had people removed from their board of directors. 

They've had pay-offs. They've had governors of states get 

themselves into hot water because they're dealing with these 

people. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in the question of these two companies and 

the due diligence done . . . And we suspect that some front 

bench minister over there signed this deal before Mr. Egan ever 

came along and before anybody else ever came along. They've 

had four ministers, Mr. Speaker, responsible for the Gaming 

Commission. They've had CEOs (chief executive officers) 

without end. They've had people resigning, always for personal 

reasons. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you and I both know that you don't get a 

succession of well-respected bureaucrats in this province 

resigning for personal reasons every time they touch the 

Gaming Commission. And on top of it, Mr. Speaker, we have 

the former treasurer of the New Democratic Party in this 

province getting a hundred thousand dollar a year job as the 

chairman of the Gaming Commission. 

 

Now if I was going to put somebody in place to try and cover 

up my tracks, who would I choose? Well they went the 

ultimate route, Mr. Speaker. And it's obvious to see the reaction 

of these members in here — that they're afraid of this, that 

they're afraid of the government record in this case. So we see 

them coming up with all sorts of things to try and draw the 

public's attention off of this case. 

 

Well I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of people in 

this province want to know how that $20 million was spent. 

They want to know that there isn't some member of that 

particular political party involved in this, that the friends of the 

New Democratic Party aren't involved with GTECH or VLC. 

That's what the people out there want to know. 



884 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1993 

We've asked the question in this House time and time again, 

Mr. Speaker. Why don't you table your due diligence? Has it 

ever been the role of the opposition in here not to ask those 

questions? Have we ever had ministers with the audacity before 

to stand in this legislature and say, use freedom of information? 

Mr. Speaker, it was the former Conservative government that 

put the freedom of information Act together. 

 

And I think it is a shame, Mr. Speaker, that we would have the 

minister responsible for the Gaming Commission sending a 

form over to the member from Morse saying here, apply 

through the freedom of information laws and maybe after 90 

days, maybe we'll give you the information. Maybe we'll give 

you the information to say that we checked these people out 

and we did our due diligence, but no. 

 

Even at the end of 90 days, Mr. Speaker, they can turn around 

and come up with a technicality and say, say to the member 

from Morse, say to the opposition, say to the people of 

Saskatchewan, we don't have to give you that information. And 

this is after, Mr. Speaker, we have had these two companies 

investigated all over the world for wrongdoing, for 

manipulating the political process, for using their hired people 

to subvert the political process in other jurisdictions. Where we 

have states in Australia throwing them out of the country, 

where they're saying you are persona non grata in our 

jurisdiction because of your corrupt and crooked ways. 

 

And yet this government says to us, we shouldn't ask those 

questions, we should be content to work through freedom of 

information. Well, Mr. Speaker, that has never been the role of 

the official opposition in this legislature and it will not start. 

This government is responsible to the people. They are 

responsible to table those results in this legislature. 

 

I sat in here, Mr. Speaker, all through the GigaText affair, and I 

saw the member from Prince Albert, who is now the minister 

responsible for the Gaming Commission, say day after day: 

Madam Minister, would you table your due diligence? Would 

you table the Dun & Bradstreet that was done on Guy 

Montpetit? And now this same hypocritical minister has the 

gall to stand in this legislature, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I know the member inadvertently used 

a word which he knows he cannot refer to a member in this 

House as being hypocritical, and I ask him to withdraw that 

word. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will delete the 

word from my repertoire and I will find another one that suits 

the minister. 

 

Simple fact is, Mr. Speaker, that when that member was in 

opposition he expected answers out of the government of the 

day on a due diligence process. The minister didn't send over a 

freedom of information form for him to fill out. These people 

are hiding, Mr. Speaker. They're hiding from the truth and they 

don't want Saskatchewan people to know about the process that 

had $20 million of taxpayers' money 

spent. These people had Saskatchewan folks come along and 

say, we'll do the job for you. We'll do it above-board, we'll 

create some employment in the province. Was that acceptable? 

No. We'd rather do business with somebody that is in trouble. 

We'd rather do business with someone in the United States. 

 

What we would like from this government, Mr. Speaker, is to 

have that information compiled by the FBI, compiled by the 

gaming commission in Oregon, compiled by the gaming 

commission in West Virginia, compiled by the governor of 

New York state. We want that information tabled in this 

legislature, Mr. Speaker, because only then will Saskatchewan 

people have the confidence that they should have in the 

expenditure of $20 million, that they'll have the confidence that 

the friends of the government aren't involved in this. And that 

is why we've seen them scratching today so vigorously, Mr. 

Speaker, scratching to cover up the tracks, lighting up the 

blame thrower, trying to divert the public's attention. 

 

The gall of these people, Mr. Speaker, in even bringing this 

motion, this amendment which tries to subvert legitimate 

questions that are asked in this legislature on almost each and 

every day, tells me that we have a government that is losing 

touch with Saskatchewan people quicker, quicker than any 

government in our history. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people should learn from the past. They roundly, 

roundly castigated the former government because of the way 

the GigaText thing was handled. They said that your due 

diligence, your Dun & Brad, everything else, was not up to 

snuff. 

 

And I remember well that member from Prince Albert and that 

member from North Battleford standing on their feet day after 

day, and yet we now have those two members sitting in a 

cabinet of the province of Saskatchewan expecting 

Saskatchewan people not to expect as much from them as they 

asked of the former government. 

 

It is just one more betrayal, Mr. Speaker. It is say one thing in 

opposition and it is do another in government. I really wonder 

how comfortable some of these back-benchers are. I wonder if 

this stuff has been talked about in caucus. I wonder if the due 

diligence has been brought forward. Or do they say to their 

own members: here's a freedom of information form, fill it out. 

This is the only way you're going to find out anything in this 

government, fill out a freedom of information form. I wonder 

how many of these back-benchers have done that. 

 

I'm sure there's a lot of curiosity, Mr. Speaker; it was a question 

at their convention last fall. I'm sure that some of these 

new-found Democrats in this province are curious about 

GTECH and VLC. I'm sure they would like to know about the 

workings of the Minister of Economic Development and Trade. 

I'm sure they'd like to know about the workings of some of the 

former members who held that portfolio. I'm sure they would 

like to know about the former campaign manager of the 

member from Melfort. 



April 6, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 885 

There are a lot of questions here, Mr. Speaker, that aren't being 

answered. And I am wondering if the members of the 

government back benches have taken the time to fill out their 

freedom of information forms so that they can get the goods 

and have the assurance that there isn't some kind of chicanery 

going on with this particular operation. Mr. Speaker, those are 

legitimate questions that are asked in this Assembly each and 

every day. They are asked so that we, as the official opposition, 

fulfil our responsibilities to Saskatchewan taxpayers in this 

expenditure of $20 million. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they will be asked over and over and over 

again, until that minister lives up to the expectation that he left 

with this Legislative Assembly while he was in opposition, 

about the government doing their . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member's time has elapsed. 

 

Mr. Johnson: — Mr. Speaker, on this particular motion I feel 

that the amendment is the direction to go, and that it commends 

the government of the province of Saskatchewan and the 

Gaming Commission in the province of Saskatchewan for the 

honest and thorough approach to introducing the video lottery 

terminals into the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

But first of all, before commenting further on that, I would like 

to indicate that the previous speaker was really trying to cover 

some of the problems that they had generated while being a 

government, in not doing the thorough approach to studying 

what was going on. 

 

What he had indicated to this Assembly, and he demonstrated 

what he was attempting to do in covering up what they had 

done in the past, and saying that the Conservative government 

was the one that had put into . . . together the freedom of 

information Act; and that's accurate as far as it goes. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, he forgot to indicate to this Assembly that 

the former government didn't bother to bring the Act into 

effect. And therefore although they put the Act together, it 

wasn't in place to be used by anyone. And he was attempting to 

basically inform this House incorrectly about what was taking 

place there. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the motion that we have . . . the amendment 

which we have before us today, indicates that there have been a 

number of decisions that are taking time to be put into place. 

One of the things is that there is a security report on the 

companies which submitted proposals, and this was prepared 

by the Gaming Commission. Both VLT and GTECH passed 

this security review and these companies do not stand accused 

of any criminal activity. 

 

(1600) 

 

No contracts have been signed and the government is 

negotiating for details in the content of these particular items. 

Mr. Speaker, one of the things in purchasing items of this 

nature is that one needs to know exactly what's being 

purchased, and that's what's taking place. 

 

I'd like to say that the individual who spoke previous to me 

indicated that there were investigations on individual 

companies all over the world. But that's as far as his statement 

went. He's just simply taking and highlighting something and 

attempting to do what no one . . . to cover what they had been 

doing in the past, in covering their own tracks, by highlighting 

things which were not necessarily being effective. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the VLC and GTECH in the . . . VLC was 

recently selected, Mr. Speaker, as the supplier of the video 

lottery terminals to . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I must inform the members that the 

time for a motion under rule 16 has elapsed. 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — Before we go to the next item on our agenda, 

I want to inform the members that I would like to table the 24th 

annual report, 1992, of the Commonwealth Parliamentary 

Association, Saskatchewan branch. 

 

We will now proceed to the next item on private members' 

motions. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' MOTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 4 — Government Spending Cap 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I'm going to take a few moments 

today to speak on a very relevant topic I believe at this time. 

And when I finish my debate, or my remarks, I'm going to be 

moving a motion that reads as such: 

 

 That this Assembly urge the government to keep the 

Premier's promise to the Saskatchewan people to cap 

government spending at $4.5 billion and demands the 

government immediately bring forward legislation capping 

total government spending at $4.5 billion consistent with that 

promise. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reason for the motion is we just . . . it wasn't 

that long ago that the Premier of this Assembly of this 

province, the Leader of the NDP Party, gave a promise to 

Saskatchewan voters that indeed we should be able to live 

within a budget of $4.5 billion. 

 

And during the election campaign and prior to the election 

campaign of 1991 the then leader of the opposition, Leader of 

the NDP Party, and now Premier and many of his colleagues 

went around the province of Saskatchewan and basically 

promised Saskatchewan voters that they would cap government 

spending at $4.5 billion, that they wouldn't need any more than 

$4.5 billion to indeed balance the budget, bring in a balanced 

budget and show the people of 



886 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1993 

Saskatchewan that they could not only hold their spending 

within 4.5 billion, but they could use a $4.5 billion budget to as 

well reduce the operational deficit of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

At that time, Mr. Speaker, we are all aware on numerous 

occasions of some of the remarks or many of the remarks the 

Premier made. And I go back to September 3, 1991, where the 

Premier's speaking on CKCK-TV said: we believe in living 

within our means. We think $4.5 billion expenditure a year 

roughly is what we now expend in the province of 

Saskatchewan, and we believe it's enough. 

 

And that's what the Premier was saying at that time. And I 

believe if the Premier really believes that what he was saying 

then was true and really meant it that it would be appropriate 

for the government then to bring forward legislation or indeed 

show that they can live within the $4.5 billion expenditure. 

And rather than raising taxes, they should be cutting or 

reducing government to the point that they can live within the 

funds that are available to them. 

 

In fact in February of 1991 the Premier said tax increases were 

not needed to pay for the GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) and NISA (net income stabilization account) 

programs. 

 

And I believe at that time, Mr. Speaker, the Premier was 

referring to the suggestion made by a former colleague of mine, 

then Finance minister, when the Finance minister of the day in 

1991 came out and suggested that by harmonizing the sales tax 

with the goods and services tax that indeed there would be 

enough revenue derived, additional revenue brought into 

provincial coffers to pay for Saskatchewan's commitment to the 

GRIP and NISA programs as well as add additional funding to 

government revenues that would provide the means for the 

government not only to meet its expenditure targets, but as well 

to reduce its operational budget and the Consolidated Fund; 

and in the long term, Mr. Speaker, to address the overall total 

debt of the province and through a period of years, reduce that 

debt. And at that time, Mr. Speaker, the now Premier said that 

it wouldn't be necessary to harmonize. We don't need to 

increase taxes. 

 

And yet what do we see today? We see a government and a 

Premier . . . or being led by a Premier who has found, I believe, 

that it's more convenient to say what people really want to hear 

rather than being totally up front and honest with people prior 

to an election to get elected, and then afterwards turn around 

and do totally opposite of what he had said. 

 

And as we were discussing in the Assembly this afternoon, Mr. 

Speaker, we were raising some concerns and questions 

regarding health care in this province; raising questions that are 

being raised by hospital boards and care home boards and 

home care boards, health care givers across this province, about 

funding. 

 

And we asked the minister to release the details of the 

funding that these hospital and care home and ambulance and 

home care boards could expect from this government in the 

1993-94 budget, and what did we find? In question period, Mr. 

Speaker, we indeed found that the Minister of Health wasn't 

ready to come forward with the numbers or indeed wasn't 

willing to release the numbers so that health care givers out in 

Saskatchewan, not only our large urban centres but even our 

small rural centres, would know exactly how to set their 

budgets for this upcoming year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one has to wonder if indeed this government 

really is as open and as honest and even as accountable as they 

would lead us to believe, or would lead the Saskatchewan 

public to believe, or the taxpayer. And it would seem to me, 

Mr. Speaker, that many of the taxpayers out there are 

beginning to question the real integrity of the government, 

questioning the Minister of Finance if indeed at the end of the 

day we are going to see a balanced budget on the side of the 

operational . . . or on the operational side of our ledger, or in 

the Consolidated Fund. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I just want to raise your attention to the fact 

that in the debate on the Appropriation Bill last week, the 

Minister of Finance refused to answer any questions about the 

impact that opposition members, my colleagues, were bringing 

forward about the impact of the 1 per cent increase in the sales 

tax from 8 per cent to 9 per cent. 

 

What kind of an impact would that have upon spending in this 

province? And if indeed at the end of the day that the 

government would realize real dollars, enough dollars to help 

them meet this year's budget and not only meet this year's 

projected budget and projected shortfall but also generate the 

funds that would be needed to balance the operational side of 

this budget, Mr. Speaker, as well as address the long-term debt 

in this province. 

 

Now as we all know, the increase from 8 per cent to 9 per cent 

was the second increase that we've seen in taxes. And yet prior 

to the election of 1991 the Premier and many of his colleagues, 

many of the members who are now sitting on the front benches 

of this Assembly, told the people of Saskatchewan there would 

be no new taxes. 

 

In fact I look at an article of September 6, 1991 and I quote: no 

new taxes would be imposed. Instead the NDP would cut 

wasteful spending and encourage new economic development. 

One has to wonder exactly what the then NDP leader meant 

when he said no new taxes would be imposed. Instead the NDP 

would cut wasteful spending and encourage new economic 

development. 

 

It would appear to me, Mr. Speaker, that when the NDP leader, 

the now Premier of this province made those promises, even 

though he knew what the deficit of this province was at the 

time because it was brought out in the leadership debate on 

CKCK TV, the Premier, then NDP leader acknowledged that 

indeed the overall budget deficit for this province was $14.2 

billion. He acknowledged that, Mr. Speaker. 



April 6, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 887 

And yet he said . . . he went out prior to the election and said, 

no new taxes. He said they'd cut wasteful spending. However, 

when the NDP formed government and established their Gass 

tribunal and Mr. Gass and the other members of the tribunal 

went through the books, what did they say? What did they have 

to say? 

 

Did they find the wasteful spending and the mismanagement 

that the NDP of the day, the NDP Party, the opposition of the 

day said was there that they would bring under control and they 

would be able to just overnight, just a snap of the fingers they'd 

be able to balance the budget? No. 

 

Indeed, Mr. Speaker, I think if you look very carefully at the 

submission made by Donald Gass, Mr. Gass indicated that 

indeed the government of the '80s was open, was accountable, 

that the books were open, they were accessible for everyone to 

see, there was nothing hidden. 

 

And that is reflected in the fact that the Premier, while in 

opposition and as Leader of the NDP Party going into the 

provincial election, indicated that he knew there was a $14.2 

billion deficit. But he also said, even though there is a $14.2 

billion deficit, we will take and we will live within a $4.5 

billion a year operational budget, and we won't increase taxes; 

we're not going to dip into people's pockets. 

 

Unfortunately what have we seen? People of Saskatchewan 

have come to realize — and it's very unfair in the way it has 

been transpired — the people of Saskatchewan have been made 

aware of the fact that their pockets which they were holding on 

to very carefully, trying to make sure the government didn't dig 

into them, are now open even wider than they were before. 

 

Because if the Premier argues that increasing utility rates isn't a 

tax on people of Saskatchewan, I don't think the Saskatchewan 

people would believe him. If the Premier would argue that 

increasing the provincial sales tax is not a tax, I don't think the 

Saskatchewan people will really believe him any more. In fact 

I'm sure the Minister of Finance is finding it awfully difficult to 

go and talk to people across Saskatchewan who are finding that 

the bottom line, the net take-home that they have at the end of 

the day has diminished significantly since October 1991, while 

at the same time government spending has not necessarily 

diminished. In fact it's increased. 

 

We see the former minister of Finance in his new position as 

Provincial Secretary has actually received an $800,000 increase 

to his department. And one has to ask ourselves, we have to ask 

ourselves indeed, what was that increase for? Where is that 

increase going? Why was that increase put into the Provincial 

Secretary? It could have been used to reach out to people in 

Saskatchewan by strengthening our rural fibre and urban fibre, 

strengthening our health care, strengthening our educational 

programs. 

We find that the Premier said prior to October 1991, he 

promised a government that will live within its means and 

spend no more than the current budget estimates of $4.5 billion 

annually. 

 

And what we're asking the Premier . . . because we have seen 

this government has refused to indeed take to heart the words 

of its members and of its leader and of the Premier, and indeed 

live with its means. And we've seen a budget . . . two budgets 

in a row that have continually dipped into the pockets of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

We feel, and I believe it's very imperative that if this Premier, 

the Premier, the member from Riversdale really believes what 

he said prior to October 1991, that he indeed live up to his 

commitments to Saskatchewan people. Because I believe 

Saskatchewan people are beginning to say, we cannot afford 

any more, we cannot afford to see our services cut. 

 

(1615) 

 

And we don't have to look too far and see what is actually 

taking place. Even in urban Saskatchewan, people are 

beginning to realize some significant hurt. But when I look at 

some of the rural areas that I represent, Mr. Speaker, it boggles 

my mind when I look at the suggestions that are now being 

made by the Department of Health and the reduction of 

services when every time I remember being in this House from 

the period of October '86 through to October of 1991, through 

that period, through the period of the late '80s, the present 

government and many of its members who were here sitting as 

opposition members continually stood in this House and 

berated the government for not spending enough in health, not 

spending enough in education, indeed not looking after the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I must look at . . . I picked up a recent article out of the 

Saskatchewan . . . I believe it was the Star-Phoenix, April 3, 

'93, and I want to quote a paragraph of this article that says: 

 

 Two years ago, Simard was in the legislature bringing up one 

health (scary) . . . story after another . . . 

 

And I think we heard the minister today talking about scare 

tactics. 

 

Well I don't know if there was anyone who had a greater ability 

to create fear and fearmongering and raise scary stories in this 

House than the present Minister of Health when she was an 

opposition member. And I quote here: 

 

 . . . Simard was in the legislature bringing up one health 

(scary) . . . story after another — people's lives were at risk 

because of cuts to the drug plan, hospital waiting lists 

threatened someone else. And every day, then Health 

Minister George McLeod discounted her claims, saying 

Simard missed the mark too 



888 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1993 

often to be taken seriously. 

 

And yet what do we have today? We have a minister who all of 

a sudden has turned the tables and is not willing to divulge the 

information that people across Saskatchewan both in our large 

urban centres and in our rural centres need to know, need to 

have in front of them, so that they can address the budgets that 

they will be putting together to serve the needs of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

And in fact, Mr. Speaker, what we're going to find, and I 

predict that what many of these regional health boards will 

find, that at the end of the day that global budget that is going 

to be coming their way will not be anywheres close to the 

money that is presently going into their area right now through 

hospital and ambulance and care homes and home care boards, 

Mr. Speaker. And that's what's scaring people out there. 

 

They don't mind the government living within its means. They 

don't mind and they want to see a government that lives within 

its means. But they have difficulty in trying to understand when 

a government promises to live within its means, promises not 

to increase taxes, promised to provide services and even greater 

and more enhanced services. They have grave difficulty in 

trying to understand where a government is really heading 

when in fact what they're seeing, a government reducing 

services — increasing taxes and reducing services. 

 

And the other thing, Mr. Speaker, as we have been discussing 

in this legislature, the budget presented by the Minister of 

Finance, the greatest portion of that budget has yet to be seen. 

And the Minister of Health just confirmed that today when she 

refused to commit to present the budgets so that rural 

communities and rural health centres would know what figures 

they could use in establishing their budgets. 

 

In fact I had one administrator mention to me that they were 

budgeting on the basis of a 3.5 — at least that was the 

impression they were left with last year — 3.5 beds per 1,000 

population. And so they're trying to draw up a budget on that 

basis. But now we see the government suggesting they should 

be looking at 1.5 beds per thousand patients . . . or population. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, do you know what that does to a small rural 

hospital? Basically it's saying, the minister is saying she's not 

closing hospitals. She's not going to make that decision. It's 

going to be made at the local level. Mr. Speaker, what we have 

is indeed the headline that I see in the paper recently where it's 

talking about communities, towns drawing health care battle 

lines. People just are not certain of where they stand today. 

 

Because of that, communities are banding together because 

they want information. They want to know exactly where the 

government's going. Are they going to really address their 

commitment to living within their means without putting all the 

onus on the local taxpayers? 

A recent article said: Towns drawing health care battle lines. A 

tide of fear and resentment is growing against the provincial 

government's plans for rural health care and the future of small 

town hospitals. 

 

People expect the government to live within its means. And 

people are not immune or not hiding their head under the sand 

or under a basket and saying that a government can't live within 

its means without having the revenue to provide the services, or 

government cannot continue to provide services if they're going 

to cost more than it's drawing in. 

 

People are willing to give, and people are talking about 

rationalization in the health system and in our educational 

system. But, Mr. Speaker, what they're having a problem with 

is the way the government is approaching the whole . . . the 

whole process that is being put forward by the government 

right now. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, if I were to commend the minister and the 

government, I would say they've done a fine job of putting all 

the onus on someone else to make the decisions, so at the end 

of the day they're actually going to look quite . . . probably look 

quite clean in the fact that they never made any of the major 

. . . or weren't forced to make the major decisions because they 

offloaded the responsibility onto larger, regional health boards. 

 

In fact what I see, many of the health boards that have been 

formed today, there are many people are beginning to question 

and are asking themselves: do I really want to be involved on 

this regional board, as I begin to see the funding; and the fact 

that my neighbour down the road, is he going to be happy with 

me when I come out, when our board says, well your hospital 

must go or your school's going to have to trim its budget or 

we're going to have to cut the services in home care. 

 

I talked to a young gentleman yesterday, Mr. Speaker, whose 

wife at present is at home and is receiving services under home 

care. Here's a young lady who is very vibrant and healthy and 

active, and just over a year ago she came down with cystic 

fibrosis and today is totally dependent on somebody else. But 

he was commenting about the fact that he was pleased that his 

wife could be at home and that he was receiving home care 

services. But his question was, how long will those services be 

available to me? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we must look at how the government is 

indeed trying to address the commitments they made to 

Saskatchewan people prior to the election. Now maybe the 

government is going to say at the end of this term, well we're 

now living within our $4.5 billion budget that we've talked 

about. We've reduced services. We've reduced our commitment 

to Saskatchewan people — someone else has that 

responsibility. We've cut our spending because we've 

offloaded. 

 

And who knows at the end of the day if indeed the government 

is going to have to look for more funding, 



April 6, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 889 

because we're aware of the $106 million that the federal 

government wants back from the province of Saskatchewan 

because of their overpayment. So what I find, Mr. Speaker, is 

that where the Premier was being honest and the Premier 

suggested that he live within $4.5 billion, we're saying: why is 

the government not taking the position of living within it, the 

$4.5 billion, the commitment it promised . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . And the Minister of Social Services asks, what 

would you do there? 

 

Mr. Speaker, a number of communities in my area have already 

taken to rationalizing health care delivery and services in their 

communities. In fact one of the major problems we face 

throughout Saskatchewan is the fact that we've got too much 

government, too much bureaucracy. We've had home care 

boards. We've got care home boards. We've got hospital 

boards. We've got ambulance boards. And through the '80s, and 

it was the former minister of Health, the member from Indian 

Head-Wolseley, Mr. Taylor, who went out to communities 

when he was Health minister and asked communities to look at 

ways in which they could rationalize and cut spending in order 

to control spending across Saskatchewan in health care. 

 

And one of the communities that I represent, Mr. Speaker, I'm 

pleased to see today doesn't have four boards. They have one 

board, one health board. That's a commitment and a suggestion 

that I made over the years, that communities must look at 

addressing health in a global context rather than a care home 

board over here and a hospital board over here, and a home 

care board over here, just taking the money that comes out to it 

and using it because they might lose it tomorrow. 

 

And that's another problem we have, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, why should communities or health boards or hospital 

boards be forced into a position where they say, well I've got a 

global funding and if I don't use it today, it's gone. I think, Mr. 

Speaker, there are other ways we could address the question as 

well, and looking at ways in which we could rationalize 

without taking hospital beds and care home beds and home 

care services out of rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to move this motion, seconded by the 

member from Thunder Creek. The motion reads: 

 

 That this Assembly urge the government to keep the 

Premier's promise to the Saskatchewan people to cap 

government spending at $4.5 billion and demands the 

government immediately bring forward legislation capping 

total government spending at $4.5 billion consistent with that 

promise. 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I'm just wondering 

if the previous speaker, the member from Moosomin, would 

take a question. 

 

The Speaker: — Will the member from Moosomin 

take a question? Yes, he will. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I listened very intently to your 

comments and I have a couple of questions for you. As a 

person who was born and raised in rural Saskatchewan, rural 

Saskatchewan people are worried about a couple of things. 

What are the . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member can only ask a question. 

She can't make a comment. Question to the member. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — My apologies. I was trying to put my 

question in context. But I guess my question to you is this, 

member from Moosomin: in terms of your rural hospitals, how 

many of those hospital beds are occupied daily by people who 

have had operations or had babies? I'd be interested in hearing 

your response to that. And would it not be better to take money 

that is spent on empty hospital beds and move that money into 

more appropriate health services? 

 

Mr. Toth: — I thank the member for her question, Mr. 

Speaker. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, one of the communities that I 

was talking about has a team of doctors who have been really 

providing an excellent service. The member talked about how 

many beds there are being utilized due to babies born in the 

community. 

 

Well in the community of Kipling, that has become a centre 

where many women are coming to have their babies because of 

the competent team we have in the community. It's a 

community where we have, because of the doctoral team we 

have there, that many people around the area in fact are coming 

to the community. And the last I talked to the administrator, 

they were above their allocated daily census of usage of 

hospital beds. 

 

At one time, I will acknowledge the fact that there were more 

level 4 care patients and that was one area that was a burden to 

that hospital. But because of the compatibleness of the hospital 

and the doctors and the services they receive there, and the 

commitment of that health centre, we find there was a very 

solid usage. 

 

And the greatest fear, as I indicated earlier, was the fact that if 

we had a way to address the daily census figures, and rather 

than just a global funding but you had funding available on the 

basis of usage, you wouldn't have had hospitals just stacking 

patients to make sure they protected their daily census. And 

that's why I stand here and defend rural communities and rural 

hospitals. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. 

 

Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

give notice that I am putting forward an amendment to the 

motion by the member from Moosomin, that would be moved 

by myself and seconded by the member from Saskatoon 

Idylwyld. 

 

And the amendment would be to: 



890 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1993 

 Remove all the words after "Assembly", and replace them 

with the following: 

 

 support the government and the Minister of Finance for 

having the courage to address Saskatchewan's financial crisis 

in a responsible manner, so that the province can regain its 

financial freedom; 

 

 and be it further resolved that this Assembly commend the 

Minister of Finance for bringing in the 1993-94 budget at 

$4.080 billion for government spending, well below the $4.5 

billion target, except for the $847.5 million payment for 

interest on the previous government's debt. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm amazed, and I wonder at where the member 

from Moosomin was during the nine years of the Tory regime 

where each and every year they came forward with a budget 

filled with debt. 

 

I would like to restate again, Mr. Speaker, that except for the 

$847 million payment in interest that is gone, and leaves this 

province yearly to be paid out to interests elsewhere, that we 

would have lived within the target that we spoke of. 

 

And when we look back and we talk about the record of the 

members opposite who are now trying to force on this province 

an immediate living within the target that they're talking about, 

what would be their record from the last 10 years? Well we can 

look back, and in 1982 they inherited a surplus, a surplus they 

acknowledged. And they signed on the dotted line to say yes, 

we've accepted that there is a surplus of over $120 million in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The debt, according to some of the borrowings of long-term 

debt, would be about $3 billion, covered by the many billions 

of dollars at that time in assets that were held by the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

So they did indeed agree that they inherited a fine situation. 

And the former premier, the member from Estevan, as he left 

this province and went to New York in 1983, bragged at that 

time indeed that, you know, Saskatchewan has so much going 

for it that you could afford to mismanage it and still break even 

— our former premier from Estevan in New York. He wouldn't 

have had the nerve to say that in Saskatchewan. 

 

But it gets back to people in Saskatchewan. And then they look 

at, what is the record of the previous administration, the 

previous government? And so we look to the 1986 big whoops 

after the election where they projected they were not going to 

come in with a very large debt. There would be some and they 

would account for that. 

 

And after the election . . . I remember at that time having 

people take lotteries and look at saying, let's guess how far out 

the Government of Saskatchewan 

could be in their projections on what the debt would be. That's 

how under control they were and how aware they were of the 

budget figures. 

 

What happened in 1986? Well the hot tubs and whirlpools 

came back to haunt them and, whoops, there was another 

horrific debt for the province of Saskatchewan, another deficit 

budget. 

 

So where were they when they're talking about now living 

within a certain means or putting forward that now all of a 

sudden we should put more duress and hardship on the people 

of Saskatchewan by trying to live within their arbitrary figures 

and their arbitrary means. Where were they in the last nine 

years in this province when we talk about bringing in balanced 

budgets? Where were they when their Mr. Hepworth writes a 

letter? 

 

Now you think that when a minister of the government writes a 

letter under the letterhead and quotes the premier of the 

province and says, we're going to come in with about $265 

million deficit this year, that that could be believable. And if all 

projections were true, they were going to come in on target. 

 

What do we find after the 1992 election? Another big whoops! 

And a '91 election? A big whoops. We're dealing with it in '92; 

we're dealing with it in '93. Another big whoops from the 

previous administration. 

 

And how did they respond to this crisis? How did they continue 

to respond to the increasing debt and the further and further in 

the hole that they were putting the province of Saskatchewan 

into and the compromising of social programs and the 

economic well-being of this province? They responded with 

the flip, offhand comments, give 'er snoose Bruce and you don't 

say whoa in a mud hole. You just keep going and somehow 

you get further and further in debt and magically it'll turn 

around someday, somehow. They knew someday and 

somehow. They know that New Democrats always clean up the 

mess that's left behind by the previous administration or a 

Liberal administration in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

We've said whoa, enough is enough. And people asked us 

during the last election to say, whoa. Enough of the outrageous 

deals, the legacy of the Tory Conservatives in this province. 

Enough of the outrageous deals to some of the largest 

corporations in the world who they themselves now who are 

looking at renegotiating with us feel that they can do something 

to turn around the outrageous deals that were given to them 

during the previous administration — the Weyerhaeusers, the 

Saskfercos, and the Federated upgrader that we're looking at 

now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there's a legacy of the deals of the Tory 

Conservatives that go back to the people of Saskatchewan. And 

you put it before them and you say, this is really unbelievable. 

We cannot believe that someone who says that they are 

business managers and have control over the trust that people 

put in 



April 6, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 891 

them, trust and control of the taxpayers first, that these business 

people would do this with a trust, with the taxpayers' dollars. 

 

Why did they do it? Well when we look back it's for the 

pork-barrelling and individual greed. You've heard members 

earlier talk about the good time they'd have at our expense at 

Big Valley Jamborees, tickets to the Centre of the Arts, booze 

hauled into the Legislative Building. When you talk about 

decorum to the Government of Saskatchewan, that's the kind of 

decorum that they displayed in this legislature. It was a 

disgrace, and the people of Saskatchewan said it was a 

disgrace. 

 

But let's talk about who suffered. Let's talk about . . . we know 

who gained . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well, you can't constantly be interrupting from 

your chair. You should give the respect to the member to allow 

her to make her statement. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I was reading out loud, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. 

 

Ms. Hamilton: — It's not often, Mr. Speaker, you see just a 

twinge of remorse from the members opposite, but we see a 

little bit of that present here now. 

 

Let's look at then, Mr. Speaker, who suffered under the Tory 

regime in the province of Saskatchewan. As a member of city 

council, we had to look at the daily line-ups of people who 

were going to the food banks. Mr. Speaker, in 1982 there were 

no food banks in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 

let's look at who suffered. Let's look at the welfare system that 

was set up that was policing people, spending money on trying 

to look at the individuals and try and find any little individual 

way they could put people under duress. 

 

We all know 3 to 4 per cent of the population either can't work 

or will find ways not to work. We know that — 3 to 4 per cent. 

But when you had unemployment climbing to 10 and 12 per 

cent, that was not people who didn't want to work, Mr. 

Speaker. That was people who couldn't find a job under the 

previous Tory government unless they were friends of 

government. 

 

Let's look at the discussion that we had one night at city 

council when social workers came forward and say their 

case-loads are increasing. They're not allowed to spend time 

with their individual clients, talking about how to manage their 

dollars and make do with the meagre amount that they were 

going to be allocated, and provide some personal support and 

some individual support and help; but rather to say, let's victim 

bash. Let's skulk around the bushes and try and find out . . . if 

we'd spend money on finding out those few people who were 

really abusing the system. 

At that time a report came forward to city council called "On 

the Breadline", a sad statement in itself, Mr. Speaker. And 

when we looked at the statistics in there, we found as the 

numbers dropped as the appeals grew longer to social 

assistance, as they knocked people off for any excuse in any 

way they could get them off their social assistance rolls, we 

saw the numbers in the food bank increasing and the attitude 

that charity and that churches would pick up and take care of 

those people greatest in need. Not that it was a responsibility of 

a reasonable and a caring and compassionate government; it 

was now somehow the responsibility of people if they felt they 

could have some goodwill and charity toward others. Those are 

the people who suffered under the 10 years of Tory regime. 

 

Let's look at the situation of the municipalities and how 

uncertain they were from year to year about their budgeting 

situation and in particular the city of Regina who in one year 

lost $9.2 million in offloading from the previous government. 

 

They didn't find out about that, Mr. Speaker, early in the year 

to be able to adjust to a major cut-back like that, but not until 

July when they finally had their act together and could tell 

municipalities they were going to receive a major thump and a 

removal of dollars from the community at a level and a 

property tax level that is the least fair way to pay taxes because 

it's not based on ability to pay. 

 

And a few years later they attempted to cut special needs 

transportation. Are those the kind of cuts they're talking about 

when they want to see the immediate coming into terms with 

their waste and mismanagement? 

 

People who should be hurting no further are now having to take 

responsibility with the rest of us to clean up the Tory mess. 

And the greatest frustration I hear out there and the greatest 

danger of all is that they're saying, it's unfortunate that 

somehow we had nine years of getting into this mess and 

you've been put into the position where you really have to 

address the financial mess and the financial situation to be able 

to even get the money that you need to run and operate what 

you're trying to accomplish and turn this province around in 

less than four years. 

 

That's the frustration of the people that they're trying to help us 

and feel for us in our task of trying to clean up. Let alone put it 

on a hurry-up track when we talk about trying to also deal with 

the additional $800 million per year in interest payments on top 

of that. 

 

We could have lived within the $4.5 billion, and we would 

have lived well within that targeted budget if it were not for 

those interest payments. 

 

Well let's look at also where the idea comes up now that we can 

also do a balancing of the budget and where they were going to 

act. Let's look at health care where they had a health care 

system that they kept putting money to and money to in trying 

to address the concerns and tinker around the edges. The no 

ideas 



892 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1993 

group, the no community development group. We're just going 

to try and decide how we can take a little bit out now of the 

system when we realize we have to finally come to terms with 

the amount of money going out. But a blanket cutting of dollars 

to health care, putting the health care system at risk for future 

generations without any care or regard because they don't have 

a vision and didn't have a vision there on health reform or 

moving to a wellness model of health care. 

 

And let's look at a morning I sat on a black Wednesday toward 

the end of their last budget when they were talking about . . . 

we're going to make announcements that say there's no 

increased funding in health care. But we meant that for rural 

Saskatchewan and urban Saskatchewan, your decrease is a 

minus 3 per cent decrease. On top of inflation and everything 

else that the health care providers had to deal with at that time, 

it was a major withdrawal of funding. 

 

But wait a minute. What happened to that budget? If these 

people were so wise and under control and had their financial 

house in order, surely they would have had a budget presented 

to the people of Saskatchewan. Well it shows that this is a no 

conscience and a morally corrupt group of people we're dealing 

with when a member from Estevan can go out to a high school 

and pretend to the students there that somehow they passed a 

budget that year. 

 

What did we find when we had to come to terms with the 

budget that they left behind? And, Mr. Speaker, no one knows 

how they would have lived up to their commitment of a Fair 

Share Saskatchewan and the millions of dollars that our 

conscientious civil servants could see going out the window in 

that ill-fated scheme. 

 

I could go on to talk about the kinds of severance deals and 

contracts and sly, scheming packages that were being dealt to 

the friends of the Conservative government as we took power 

in 1991, the kinds of unconscionable contracts you talk about 

when someone's lining their own nest before they know they're 

going to take a fall, and do it at the expense of the taxpayers' 

trust and the taxpayers' dollar in Saskatchewan. 

 

But I think, Mr. Speaker, the part that hurts the most, it was 

deliberate; that the deals that they made and the kinds of 

contracts that they were signing were a deliberate scorched 

earth policy. And they were even bold and braggart enough to 

stand up and say it, as Mr. Berntson said in a speech that was 

quoted in the paper for days, that had cartoons written about it 

— talking about at that time Saddam Hussein and the likeness 

to Eric Berntson when they talk about scorched earth policy. 

He was going to leave a province that would be left in such a 

state that no one would be able to manage or govern the 

province. 

 

(1645) 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, our record speaks for itself. People no 

longer trust the kinds of things that the politicians 

are saying because of what the Conservatives did. But let's 

compare it to a New Democrat record. Eleven years of 

balanced budgets under the Blakeney government — good 

times and bad times of New Democrat government — there 

was only one deficit budget in the province of Saskatchewan 

and at that time it was to address not the hot tubs and the 

whirlpools and the gas tax — there's a tax, then there's not a 

tax; then it's increased, then it's decreased; it's off, it's on — or 

a lottery tax, and so on. But it was to address the unforeseen 

emergencies that come up in talking about a province when 

you have an agricultural crisis. Not to buy the votes, but to 

address in an extreme situation, an emergency or a concern 

through a slight deficit. A far cry from the 11 years of the Tory 

regime. 

 

I could go on, Mr. Speaker, to talk about over 40 new taxes that 

were put in during the Conservative era, and I've heard their 

solution — a provincial GST (goods and services tax) — that 

old gouge and scratch tax that the federal Tories have put in. 

Another tax on low income earners and people who could least 

afford to pay. No addressing progressive reform and tax reform 

that needs to happen in this country. Just another tax on the 

average person every time they turn around. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you look at what's before us in the budget 

address that we put forward, and that was put forward by the 

hon. member from Saskatoon Westmount, it states right in the 

financial pages that, had we not had the $847.5 million each 

year — over $2 million a day to throw out the window because 

of the Tory mismanagement on interest payments — we would 

have lived within the $4.5 billion allotted. In essence, we 

would have lived with $4.80 million. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to stand before you and say, 

where were the 10 members of the rump across from us when 

they had their opportunity to balance budgets and walk their 

talk. 

 

The amendment I've put before us today, Mr. Speaker, is one 

that says, that's our intent. We did try to do what we said we 

would do, before we realized the kind of debt that had been 

rung up by the members opposite. And we have put forward in 

this budget a determination to do so. 

 

It's with pleasure I put forward the amendment to the motion. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I welcome this 

opportunity to speak to the original motion put forward by the 

member from Moosomin and against the amendment. 

 

The member from Moosomin reminds us of the promises made 

by the Premier, the member from Riversdale, and indeed every 

New Democratic Party member of this legislature. An 

opportunity that allows members of this Assembly to reflect on 

the shallowness of political promises ought to be welcomed by 

us all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the motion brought forward by the 



April 6, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 893 

member from Moosomin demonstrates the difficulty many 

people have with government and with politics in general. Just 

this week a poll was released which compared Canadians' 

feelings about politicians to those of their western world 

counterparts. The poll indicated that Canadians were more 

cynical and more distrustful of their politicians than any other 

peoples in the western world. 

 

Much of that, Mr. Speaker, is fed by statements and shallow 

political promises made by people who sit on the government 

side today. People in our province are tired. In fact people in 

the country are fed up with politicians who say one thing and 

do another. 

 

The Premier claims that his party represents reform, that it 

represents change. I question, Mr. Speaker, what sort of reform 

there is in making promises just to get elected. I say with 

respect to the Premier, respect he claims to offer me, that he is 

not really committed to reform; he is just better than most at 

practising the ancient, and I quote, promise one thing but never 

deliver, politics that has gone on in this place for years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, despite the obvious inconsistency of the members 

opposite, there is much more to discuss about this resolution. 

Just today the government released polling information to the 

public. This example of openness is to be commended. The 

government's record, however, has to be more than the odd 

example. But a solid record is what we need, a solid record of 

performance, and for that I wait patiently. 

 

The polls released today indicated that earlier this year almost 

58 per cent of Saskatchewan people are not satisfied with the 

way in which the NDP government has managed to control 

government spending. Last year the members opposite 

increased government spending by $103 million. They did that 

in part, Mr. Speaker, by introducing $340 million of new taxes 

last year, and that is increased by another $193 million this. 

 

This represents a serious change. In an economy that has a total 

output of $18 billion, our government has decided that it wants 

to socialize another $500 million of everyone's income. The 

question people want answered as a result of all of this new 

taxation is, how does that represent controls on government 

spending? How does that represent $4.5 billion is enough? 

 

The answer, Mr. Speaker, is that it does not and it never will. 

During his reply to the budget speech, the Premier chose to 

refer to authorities beyond our province to show that his 

government made the proper budget choices. Well I am going 

to take the same liberty this afternoon. The Premier, I would 

hope, would pay heed to people like Mr. Lloyd Atkinson who 

is the chief economist at the Bank of Montreal. 

 

In a recent address to the parliamentary Standing Committee on 

Finance, Mr. Atkinson stated that to get 

their financial houses in order, governments in Canada must 

abide by two fundamental principles. Those two principles, Mr. 

Speaker, include: reducing operating expenditures; and 

secondly, keeping to a policy of zero per cent tax increases — 

zero per cent tax increases, Mr. Speaker. While the government 

has made an effort to reduce operating expenditures, it has 

failed miserably on the zero per cent increases in taxation. 

 

It appears that we do have people here, our socialists of the 

1990s, who are no longer interested in creating social programs 

for every problem. They just want to socialize incomes of 

Saskatchewan people with their tax increases. In the last 

election, Mr. Speaker, an election in which my party did its 

best to put out the message to reduce abuse of taxpayers' 

dollars, we put forward a proposal similar to the one called for 

in this resolution. We offered the people of this province 

policies that would force governments to balance their budgets 

over a four-year period. We proposed making government lay 

out a four-year vision of what its tax plans would be. 

 

We wanted this laid out in law, Mr. Speaker. While I realize 

that governments have authority to change laws, we felt so 

strongly about controlling spending and controlling taxation 

that we were prepared to put our promise into the black and 

white of legislation. We were so prepared to hold the line on 

spending that we were willing to put a plan into legislation, 

stay with it, and face the consequences. 

 

If the member from Riversdale and his colleagues are so 

committed to their plan, why not risk placing it in legal 

language of a taxpayers protection Act, or spending controls. 

Why don't they do it, Mr. Speaker? That is the question to 

which I would like an answer. 

 

I can only guess that the Premier wants the freedom to blame 

the problems on other people, the freedom to be able to not 

meet an objective because it was someone else's fault. And I 

find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, that we are living in the here 

and now, the Premier blames the harsh impact of his plans will 

have on families of this province, always on the previous 

administration, always on the federal colleagues. 

 

He always blames it on megaprojects of the previous 

administration. And I agree that there were many, many things 

that happened in the last nine and a half years that were 

unconscionable. But we do have a New Democratic Party in 

power now, sir, that was responsible for governing in the most 

lucrative times in Saskatchewan's history where oil prices, gas 

prices, where potash prices, and grain prices were the highest 

ever seen in the entire history of Saskatchewan. And what did 

they do about the debt in the 1970's? It went up, not down. The 

overall debt went up. The overall debt to gross domestic 

product was not reduced when we had every opportunity at our 

disposal to keep our province safe, lucrative, stable, and secure 

for times to come. 

 

Yet today, Mr. Speaker, we see that one of the Crown-owned 

corporations is deciding to start a $42 



894 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1993 

million project to build a transmission line across much of the 

province. We have to ask and you should be asking the 

members opposite: do we need this project? Do we need it in 

this time of restraint? Can we afford these kinds of projects 

when we are broke? But we're still spending more than the five 

point billion dollars which is supposed to be enough. 

 

The government argues that it cut the deficit by hundreds of 

millions of dollars. If one accounts for the cost of servicing the 

debt, one finds that the controls on spending which the 

government introduced are really not all that significant. 

Spending was reduced by .6 per cent, Mr. Speaker, and 

revenues were increased by 6.1 per cent — 10 times full. How 

does that equate with the Premier's promise of $4.5 billion is 

enough? 

 

The answer, Mr. Speaker, is that raising revenues at a rate 10 

times greater than the rate at which one reduces expenditures is 

not getting one's priorities straight for the people of this 

province. It is no wonder that the majority of people in 

Saskatchewan are dissatisfied with this government's attempt to 

rid itself of the addiction of government spending. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, while people agree with the 

seriousness of the financial state our province is in, they know 

that job-killing taxation is not the solution. 

 

I support the original motion. I ask the government to 

reconsider its directions, reconsider the damage that hollow 

promises make and continue to do to a public that is already 

distrustful of its elected officials. The members opposite must 

above all remember that if they seek the cooperation of the 

public, they must have the trust and confidence of the people. 

One more unkept promise will do nothing to gain the trust 

needed to remove the province from this current crisis. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Given the time, I ask that we adjourn 

the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:59 p.m. 

 


