




















































Hansard: June 16, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2565 

 June 16, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I have a 

petition here to present this afternoon on behalf of the 

Saskatchewan residents.  And I'll read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition comes from Turtleford and Mervin, 

Saskatchewan.  I present it now. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, as well I'd like to read the prayer of 

the petition that I'll be presenting to the Assembly: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed from individuals 

as well from the Turtleford and Mervin area.  I so present them 

to the Assembly. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have 

petitions to present today.  The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation 

introduced to redefine NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate 

governance and financing arrangements. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the Turtleford and 

Saskatoon areas, and I would present them now. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm happy today to 

present a petition on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan with 

the prayer reading as such: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

From the city of Regina and the town of Lumsden.  And I'll 

table it now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's again with 

pleasure for me to lay on the Table some petitions pertaining to 

the following.  And I'll just read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These, Mr. Speaker, this page is all from Melfort, Spalding, 

Kinistino.  And the next page is all Saskatoon.  It's a pleasure to 

lay these on the Table.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I wish to present 

these petitions on behalf of people primarily from Swift 

Current, Herbert, Tompkins, Kenaston, and the city of 

Saskatoon.  And the prayer is as follows: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I'll table them now. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have 

petitioners asking the government this.  And I'll read the 

prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And I have people here from Melfort, Regina, and Gronlid. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a pleasure for 

me today to stand in the Assembly and on behalf of 

Saskatchewan citizens bring their names forward today, Mr. 

Speaker.  I'll read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that 



2566 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 1993 

 your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to defeat any 

legislation introduced to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. 

corporate governance and financing arrangements. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, I have citizens from the communities of 

Aberdeen, Hague, Osler, Langham, Martensville, Watrous, 

Saskatoon, Rosthern, and Swift Current.  And it's my pleasure 

to table them on their behalf today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order, a petition regarding the 

construction of a 230 kV transmission line from Regina to 

Saskatoon presented on June 15 has been reviewed, pursuant to 

rule 11 and rule 6 and 7, and is found to be irregular and 

therefore cannot be read and received. 

 

According to order, the following petitions have been 

reviewed, are in order, and pursuant to rule 11(7), they are 

hereby read and received. 

 

 Of citizens of the province praying that the Assembly may be 

pleased to defeat any legislation introduced to redefine the 

NewGrade Energy corporate governance and financing 

arrangements. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

Standing Committee on Estimates 

 

Clerk Assistant: -- Mr. Kowalsky, chair of the Standing 

Committee on Estimates, presents the second report of the said 

committee which includes the main Estimates for legislation, 

supplementary Estimates for legislation, main Estimates for the 

Provincial Auditor. 

 

Your committee further recommends that upon concurrence of 

its report by the Assembly, the sums as reported and approved 

shall be included in the next Appropriation Bill for 

consideration by the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Kowlasky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  At the end of my 

remarks, Mr. Speaker, I'll be moving a motion which moves the 

concurrence of the second report of the Standing Committee on 

Estimates. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the mandate of the Committee on Estimates is to 

examine, to scrutinize, and to approve the Estimates for the 

Legislative Assembly which is under the purview of Mr. 

Speaker, and also for the Provincial Auditor.  It's my pleasure, 

Mr. Speaker, to note and to bring to your attention that despite 

the reduction of spending in all departments, save one, due to 

the pressures of the provincial economy and because there is an 

attempt on the part of government to show reductions across all 

agencies, the committee 

approved the retention of the level of spending for the 

Provincial Auditor the same as it was in the previous year at 

3.815 million. 

 

The committee in its work asked the Provincial Auditor to 

identify his priorities.  He stated that his priorities were, first of 

all, to present a summary of the financial statement for the 

entire province, recognizing the need for the Assembly and the 

public to know exactly where we stand financially.  Three other 

priorities were to review the annual reports of all agencies, to 

work on improvements towards the budgetary process, and to 

examine the transition areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the auditor is currently instituting changes, and 

some of these have partly been done.  I'm pleased to say that he 

reported that his system is going from one of the weakest 

across Canada to one of the best in terms of being useful to the 

public.  So in view of these, Mr. Speaker, the committee felt 

that the increases in the past three years from 3.050 million to 

3.815 million, an increase of 25 per cent over the last three 

years, was quite justified. 

 

I therefore move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the member from 

Regina Albert North: 

 

 That the second report of the Standing Committee on 

Estimates be now concurred in. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I've sat on the 

Committee of Estimates, and we've had quite a few hours at it 

this year -- more than ever before.  I was a little disturbed this 

morning, as I made the comment in Estimates this morning, 

that it seems to be a tendency of the government members to 

question the auditor of his spending and his efficiencies.  And 

this is absolutely wrong, Mr. Speaker, that they're wanting to 

cut back in every department and Crown corporation in 

government. 

 

Now how are you going to scrutinize the government agencies, 

the Crowns in this province if you don't have an auditor doing 

it?  They seem to want to cut back on the funding to the auditor 

instead of increasing. 

 

I know of no other way -- no other way, Mr. Speaker -- of 

scrutinizing the departments and the Crowns without an 

auditor.  Everybody in this Assembly knows -- my colleagues, 

the government members -- that everybody, every company 

from a church board to a big corporation to a little corporation 

is audited.  And somehow or other, Mr. Speaker, this 

government, I've picked up this morning, does not want to 

audit the government.  They want to cut back.  And this is 

wrong, Mr. Speaker.  And I leave this message with all people 

that this government does not want their departments to be 

audited or else they would not be cutting back on the auditor. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I heard the member say this morning very 

clearly that if we're going to have 



June 16, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2567 

cut-backs in this department, we're going to have cut-backs in 

that department, why not the auditor's department?  That is not 

right.  That is doing it backwards. 

 

And I was the only member there that could vote and I couldn't 

outvote six, so there was no sense even in bringing a motion in.  

But I ask the people of the province of Saskatchewan to keep 

an eye on these people because that's exactly what they're 

going to do, is to cut back on auditing so the people of 

Saskatchewan won't know what they're doing.  Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Further to the 

motion, I want to point out a number of other things that I think 

are important for the legislature to understand and the public of 

Saskatchewan to understand. 

 

It is the responsibility of the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker, 

to audit all of the books of the province of Saskatchewan.  And 

under a typical audit, random sample, he goes through every 

department.  What he has said to us on numerous occasions in 

different committees is that there is roughly a 40 per cent of the 

province's assets, books, and income that will not be audited 

for this year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And why?  The reason is that his funds are not sufficient 

enough to do that.  And yesterday or the day before the Finance 

minister said, well we've increased his budget by 25 per cent.  

But that, Mr. Speaker, is included in what he has as a 40 per 

cent deficiency in all of the bookkeeping that he has to do in 

relation to the audit. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the problem that we on this side of 

the House want to have the public in Saskatchewan not only 

identify but understand that the government is not providing 

sufficient funds for providing efficiencies -- as the member 

from Arm River has stated -- providing efficiencies and a good, 

solid foundation for this government to be held accountable.  

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why we feel that the 

auditor should be provided more funds in order for him to do 

his job.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- I too sit on the Estimates Committee.  And just 

for the record and for the information of the members opposite, 

the Estimates Committee is a committee of this legislature 

removed from the legislature but the same as the Estimates for 

any other department. 

 

Members opposite have gone through the majority of the 

Estimates in this House asking questions of efficiencies and 

spending of the government.  The same procedure applies to 

the auditor and to the Legislative Assembly Estimates, where 

members can ask questions about efficiencies.  In a time when 

we're 

suffering from overspending for the last number of years, we 

have to become efficient.  The members ask these tough 

questions of efficiency.  The auditor answered very well, but 

that's the procedure. 

 

Some of the questions, Mr. Speaker, were that comparison of 

Saskatchewan's to the rest of Canada.  In Saskatchewan, we've 

had a 25 per cent increase over the last three years.  In the other 

provinces of Canada, it's been less than 10 per cent; in fact 

some of them, 2 and 3 per cent increases over the number of 

years. 

 

It's our job and responsibility as elected members to ensure that 

the taxpayers' dollars of this province -- as the members 

opposite ask questions in Estimates in this House -- to ensure 

the taxpayers' dollars of this province are spent efficiently.  

That's the purpose.  That's what we did, and I think that we had 

a very good exchange, and we gained a lot of knowledge and 

experience in doing that.  As the member said, longer this year 

than has been done before. 

 

The theory of writing a blank cheque and spending more 

money to try to save money is a legacy that was left in a $16 

billion result. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I find it passing strange that 

the members would make these comments, because if the 

members would read the Report of the Provincial Auditor for 

the year ending March 31, 1992, the members would see that 

the Provincial Auditor has said throughout his report that we 

are moving from the worst system of public accountability, 

which was created of course under the direction of the 

members opposite, to the best system of public accountability. 

 

And I would encourage the members opposite to read what the 

Provincial Auditor has actually said.  It has been noted that the 

Provincial Auditor's budget has been increased in the last few 

years by 25 per cent.  And I just find it passing strange that 

members who were not able even to present a budget to this 

legislature in 1991 would complain about the system of public 

accountability we have in this province when the Provincial 

Auditor has noted that it is significantly improving, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I took the 

opportunity, while I was not a member of the committee, to sit 

in on all their deliberations.  And it was very enlightening to 

listen to the government members ask the questions on this 

committee. 

 

One of the government members asked a question of whether 

or not the auditor was being funded properly or in a proper 

amount.  And to quote the auditor, his 



2568 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 1993 

reply was that he was severely underfunded to perform the 

duties as outlined in legislation.  And this is what the 

government is saying:  no, no, he has to be more efficient.  He 

is not receiving enough monies presently to carry out his 

mandate. 

 

One of the members today has described the Committee of 

Estimates as comparable to the Committee of Finance and 

considerations of Estimates.  In Committee of Finance and the 

consideration of the Estimates of the various departments, we 

get to talk about policy as being brought forward by those 

departments.  We get to question the minister in charge about 

that policy. 

 

However, in the Committee of Estimates when questions of 

policy arose, it was determined by the chairman at that time 

that we were not allowed to discuss the policy of the people 

involved. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it is not the same as Committee of Finance 

within this Chamber because there we discussed policy; in the 

Committee of Estimates, we were not allowed to discuss the 

policy and the decisions being made by those representatives 

sitting there for the legislative accounts that we were 

considering. 

 

And the question of the auditor, Mr. Speaker, is very clear.  

Throughout the government's moves in the Board of Internal 

Economy, Committee of Estimates, that they wish to restrict 

the access of the auditor to examine the books as they have 

built them, and this is why, Mr. Speaker, that they are limiting 

the amount of funds available to the auditor -- to restrict his 

access. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to on division. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

Through you and to members of the Assembly today, I would 

like to introduce my family who are down for a few days 

visiting in Regina.  And in your gallery today is my spouse, 

Ruth, oldest son, Reece, age 6; Brianna, age 4; and Gavin, who 

will be 1 next Monday. 

 

So I would like all members to welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly 23 grade 4 and 5 students in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The students come from Wilfred Hunt School in the 

constituency of Regina Wascana Plains.  And they're here 

today with their teacher, Ms. Marjorie Burns, and chaperons 

Joanne Durst and Cheryl Wilk. 

 

We've had an opportunity to get a picture taken 

together.  We've had . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Order.  It certainly shows a lot 

of discourtesy for a member in the House when she has the 

floor, when others are constantly interrupting. 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We did have an 

opportunity to get together in room 131 and ask questions and 

have a question-and-answer time.  And I did mention to them 

that they would probably see one of the more rattier times of 

the day, and I didn't expect it to start this soon.  But they are 

looking forward to question period and they've had an excellent 

tour.  They're looking forward to going through the building 

with Arnold. 

 

I'd ask all members to join with me in welcoming our students 

from grade 4 and 5 at Wilfred Hunt School. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure this 

afternoon to introduce to you and to members of our Assembly 

this afternoon 30 grade 3 and 4 students from the high school . . 

. or I should say the elementary school of St. Jerome, which is 

located on Rink Avenue in the constituency of Regina North 

West.  Mr. Speaker, they're seated in the west gallery and 

they're accompanied by their teacher, Stephanie Evans, as well 

as with five chaperons, Ms. Hrynuik, Ms. Rodrigue, Mr. 

Nielson, Ms. Fuentes, and Ms. Eirich. 

 

I would look forward, Mr. Speaker, to meeting with them after 

question period to discuss what is happening during question 

period as well as to have some refreshments.  And I would ask 

all members to join with me in welcoming these students and 

their teacher and chaperons to our Assembly this afternoon.  

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce to you and to the rest of the members of the 

Assembly 33 grade 3 and 4 students from North Valley 

Elementary School in Neudorf.  They are sitting in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Following question period I will be meeting with them and 

having drinks and a photo opportunity, and prepare to answer 

some questions and discuss some of the proceedings they've 

seen here this afternoon.  And I'd like all members of the 

Assembly to welcome them here.  And I wish them a good trip 

home. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 

delighted to introduce to you and through you to my colleagues 

in the legislature 46 grade 4 students from Lumsden 

Elementary.  They are seated in the west gallery.  And they are 

accompanied by their teachers, Garth Asmundson and Carole 

Youck-Cousins, their chaperon Colleen Kraus, and their bus 

driver Al  



June 16, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2569 

Duncan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I've been invited out to Lumsden school on 

several occasions.  And it's always a delight to visit with these 

very progressive students and their very enthused and inspired 

teachers.  And I would ask all members here to join me in 

welcoming them to Regina this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Compensation for Hemophiliacs 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 

Health.  Madam Minister, this morning I had the opportunity to 

participate in a news conference in support of compensation for 

hemophiliacs who have contracted the HIV (human 

immunodeficiency virus) virus through the blood supply. 

 

And it was certainly heart-warming to meet with a number of 

the members and specifically Jeff Lee and his wife who have 

four children -- four young children; the oldest will be coming 

11 shortly -- and just to have the discussion and meet them and 

get a better understanding of the problems that they are facing. 

 

Madam Minister, Mr. Lee and his family would like an answer 

to the questions that have been raised in the House, the 

question that was raised this morning at the news conference.  

They are tired of 19 months of stonewalling by your 

government, and they're certainly disappointed that their 

concerns are only now being taken seriously after they have 

gone openly and public with the media and raising it in the 

House and coming forward with the problems that they face. 

 

Madam Minister, a simple question.  Mr. Lee and other 

Saskatchewan hemophiliacs deserve a simple and 

straightforward answer.  Will the government of Saskatchewan 

be providing a compensation package to hemophiliacs who 

have contracted HIV through the blood supply? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the 

Minister of Health, I want to respond to the question by the 

member and indicate to him that it's interesting the great 

concern that member has now, when at the time while he was 

on the government benches the arrangement was made by the 

then premier, the member from Estevan, that this was a federal 

responsibility.  And a program was worked out by the federal 

government; I believe it was $120,000 compensation spread 

over four years. 

 

In fact we are reviewing it.  And I say that's more than the 

previous minister or premier did when they were in office. 

 

My understanding is there's a meeting at 2:30 which 

will be attended by the deputy minister of Health to review 

with the association.  So we will look forward to the results of 

that meeting. 

 

But I want to say it's under review and that is certainly more 

than the previous administration did on this issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, and to the minister.  The minister 

talks about meetings and ongoing consultation.  Madam 

Minister -- and maybe the minister could remind the Madam 

Minister -- when you made these same comments in the House 

the other day the people at the news conference were very 

confused.  In fact what they said this morning is that there 

really hadn't been any consultation even though they've been 

trying to consult with government members, both now and 

while in opposition.  They've been asking for a meeting with 

you since your government took office and you still haven't 

met with them. 

 

They said the associate met . . . However, they did admit the 

associate minister met with them once.  However, he refused to 

answer any questions.  That's the same associate minister I 

believe who on a continuous basis raised the questions of the 

hemophiliacs and compensation while he was in opposition.  

They are looking for some answers. 

 

Madam Minister, why do people with legitimate concerns have 

to hold news conferences before you start paying attention? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- In the absence of the minister, I 

want to indicate to the member that in some couple of minutes 

the meeting will be held between the deputy minister and the 

hemophiliacs society.  And I want to say to the member that 

these discussions will go on as they have. 

 

I say again that it seems passing strange that these are the 

members raising the issue when, while they were in 

government, they did nothing on this issue.  In fact they said it 

was a federal responsibility and stuck with that until the day 

they were defeated. 

 

So I just say that there is a meeting taking place on this 

important issue, and we hope that the meeting results in some 

resolve of this issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, my question this time is to the 

Premier.  And, Mr. Speaker, I trust the Premier will not follow 

the example of the Minister of Economic Development who 

has again reverted to the old tactics of blaming the former 

government. 

 

Mr. Premier, we're supposedly in -- I believe one of the 

ministers indicated that the other day -- in a new era, in a dawn 

of a new age.  And yet people are still 



2570 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 1993 

waiting for the sun to rise with this government.  They're still 

looking and waiting for answers. 

 

In fact, the concern they have and the confusion they have is 

the fact that on Monday last or Tuesday -- I believe it was 

Monday -- the Premier said this, and I quote:  The 

Saskatchewan government is working on a compensation 

agreement for hemophiliacs infected with the AIDS (acquired 

immune deficiency syndrome) virus.  Then we receive a letter 

today from the minister saying our position is that 

compensation extra to that already paid from the federal 

government would not be forthcoming from the province. 

 

Basically, Mr. Premier, who is telling the truth?  Were you 

being honest with the people of . . . the hemophiliacs and the 

people of Saskatchewan or was the minister?  Who's telling the 

truth here?  I wonder if you could respond to that, Mr. Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate 

again to the member opposite that he's going to have to be 

patient on this issue.  There's a meeting taking place at 2:30.  

And coming out of that meeting we hope there will be some 

resolve of the issue.  And I tell the member that this is a great 

deal more than was done by the previous administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Again to the minister.  

The minister indicates that there is a meeting taking place this 

afternoon, and we appreciate that and the hemophiliac 

association appreciated that as well. 

 

They were disappointed however, Mr. Speaker, on the fact that 

neither the Minister nor the Associate Minister of Health were 

going to be attending the meeting.  Now, Mr. Minister, it's fine 

to have the deputy minister and Health officials there, but the 

reality is the final decision is going to be made by the minister 

and by the cabinet members. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you make a commitment today that you will 

sit down and look very seriously and compassionately at the 

request being forwarded by the hemophiliac association, bring 

it to your cabinet, and make a commitment to this association 

that you will listen to their concerns and put together a 

compensation package.  Will you do that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to 

indicate to the member that that's exactly what the meeting is 

about, and they will be looking at the options, as is the 

responsibility of the deputy minister of Health, to meet with 

groups and individuals.  The Minister of Health, I believe, is at 

an opening of a health centre in Eastend, and when she returns 

I am sure she will meet with her deputy and they will discuss 

this important issue; because as you have 

indicated, and has been agreed to by this Assembly, it is a very 

important issue that we are dealing with. 

 

I say again, that is much more than happened under the 

previous administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, one further question to the minister 

who's responding, the Minister of Economic Development, 

answering the questions.  I believe it was the member from 

Regina North West who made a comment -- actually a 

particularly eloquent quote -- a couple of years ago and I'd like 

to quote it:  the true test of a society is not whether we had the 

abundance of those . . . not whether we add to the abundance of 

whose who have much, but whether we provide enough to 

those who have little. 

 

Mr. Minister, you've assured us that there's a meeting taking 

place this afternoon.  You've assured us that the deputy 

minister of Health and Health officials will be attending the 

meeting.  Mr. Minister, the hemophiliacs are looking for a 

commitment from your government to work out and look very 

favourably and compassionately at a compensation package for 

them in light of the fact that they had no control over the 

disease that they have now acquired. 

 

Will you make a commitment in this House today to effectively 

work out a compassionate compensation package with the 

association in light of the discussion that is taking place later 

this afternoon?  Will you do that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, for the fifth time I'll 

answer the same question.  I don't know how long we want to 

repeat. 

 

But we have made a commitment to meet with the society and 

to try to bring about some rational solution to this problem 

which isn't new and was in existence under the previous 

administration.  You failed to deal with it.  It's yet another 

problem that was left by the previous administration, and yes, 

we will be working on it and solving yet another problem left 

by the previous government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Cross-border Shopping 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, a few 

weeks ago members of the opposition asked the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) government about their backward tax 

policies and the effects that it's having on cross-border 

shopping in the community of Swift Current and area. 

 

Small-business men, city councillors, chambers of commerce, 

and others have legitimate concerns about the out-migration of 

people in retail sales to the province of Alberta as a result of 

this government's tax policies, Mr. Speaker. 



June 16, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2571 

And as usual the member from Swift Current replied in the 

same vein that his Premier has, the hon. member from 

Riversdale, to the business community province wide.  He 

says, in a condescending way, that we know better and you 

should be quiet and not bother. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Minister of Finance.  

Madam Minister, the same situation is now occurring in 

north-west Saskatchewan.  And I trust rather than being 

condescending, you will respond to these people in a proper 

manner. 

 

We received correspondence from the town of St. Walburg, 

and they are saying that your tax grab is devastating their 

business community and devastating their livelihoods. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, would you begin by recognizing the 

fact that there is a problem, that the same problem that occurs 

along our southern boundary occurs on the western borders of 

this province.  And people are losing business because of your 

tax increases and your utility rate increases and, Madam 

Minister, they would like a response from you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd be pleased to 

respond to that and I think I'd respond first of all by looking at 

some statistics.  The members opposite have consistently 

questioned the budget Estimates on retail sales, and I will say 

that we do have some figures in as of now.  And the figures are 

that in January and February, the retail sales increased by 4 per 

cent in Saskatchewan, one month; 5 per cent another month.  In 

March, retail sales in Saskatchewan increased by 3 per cent. 

 

Now the members opposite talk a lot about cross-border 

shopping.  In the same month, March, in which Saskatchewan's 

retail sales increased by 3 per cent, Alberta's retail sales 

declined by .3 per cent.  So I think we might start by looking at 

some basic statistics. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, I 

am sure lots of people did buy things in March because they 

anticipated what you were going to do to the Saskatchewan 

economy in your budget.  They went out and they stocked up. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, the people in St. Walburg, 

the 1993 tax equal committee, have written you about the 

situation.  And in that letter I say, and I quote: 

 

 Your taxation system is killing rural Saskatchewan small 

towns and playing havoc on our larger centres.  The citizens 

who use our education and health systems are taxed to the 

extent that they have no extra cash available 

and are forced to shop where it's cheaper, where there is no 

E&H (education and health) tax. 

 

That place, Madam Minister, is Alberta. 

 

Now much like the businesses in Swift Current, the people of 

St. Walburg are saying your tax grabs are killing rural 

Saskatchewan.  Madam Minister, are you planning to address 

this problem in a real way, or are you simply going to say to 

the 1993 tax equal committee, as your member from Swift 

Current did, get lost, get out of our hair, we don't believe you?  

Are you going to do that, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, once again I know the 

members opposite often have an aversion to facts and statistics.  

But I will say that in March our sales went up 3 per cent; 

Alberta's declined by .3.  Now there's a lot of factors involved 

there, I can see.  But to say there's a rush of people across the 

border doesn't look valid. 

 

I'll also say we do not have the breakdown on April statistics, 

but we do have the overall numbers in for April which is 

post-budget.  And all that I can tell you is that our revenue 

projections are slightly above the target.  So if you're talking 

about a mass out-flux of people, please, sir, provide some 

evidence. 

 

Now with respect to our sensitivity regarding border 

communities, we did show sensitivity regarding border 

communities.  We put in place an extended . . . a fuel-pricing 

system which allowed communities that are in a very tight 

competitive situation to have the fuel tax in Saskatchewan 

lowered, and we did it on both sides of the province, with 

respect to Alberta and with respect to Manitoba. 

 

So once again, let's look at some facts.  The facts are that 

statistically we don't see a massive out-flux of people from the 

province of Saskatchewan into Alberta.  There are numbers 

here that do not suggest that's the case. 

 

The second point is that we have responded to the situation in 

ways that are consistent with our budget problems. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well unfortunately, 

Madam Minister, that's the answer that they expected from you.  

So they've written letters to other chambers and other 

communities all over north-west Saskatchewan.  And in that 

letter they say, and I quote: 

 

 Our present E&H tax is increased to 9 per cent and yet we're 

still losing our hospitals and our education system is being 

eroded.  By raising taxes the government is forcing an 

underground economy to expand, and they, the government, 

lose in the end. 



2572 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 1993 

Now, Madam Minister, all along the western side of our 

province, businesses, farm families, and communities are being 

devastated by your tax system. As of August 1, the business 

community in the town of St. Walburg will stop collecting the 

NDP PST (provincial sales tax). 

 

Madam Minister, is that what people in this province have to 

do?  Is it like the hemophiliacs had to do with your Premier to 

get an audience, that they have to stop collecting the tax in 

order for you to listen? 

 

Madam Minister, they are proposing solutions.  Business 

people are proposing solutions to your government every day.  

You refuse to listen.  Why won't you talk to people that are 

contemplating breaking the law as of August 1, Madam 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, this government 

regularly consults with business people.  I wish the member of 

Estevan would for once listen instead of talk. 

 

The members opposite are enthralled with the Alberta situation, 

what's going on in Alberta.  And I'm not surprised.  I'm not 

surprised, because Alberta is really Saskatchewan in the 1980s.  

What I'm quoting from here is The Globe and Mail, a quote 

about a report done by the Alberta government on its own 

financial situation. 

 

Once again the member from Estevan should learn to listen.  

What it said is this:  within about three or four years the 

Alberta debt situation will be comparable to the Saskatchewan 

debt situation.  It says that the debt situation in Alberta, and 

this is a quote from that report:  is like a racing car going down 

a track into a wall.  And it concludes by saying -- again, I 

quote:  we're the worst province in the country at the rate at 

which we are overspending. 

 

So I'm not surprised that the members opposite consistently 

say, why couldn't we be like Alberta.  Because Alberta is now 

like Saskatchewan was in the 1980s.  And their day of 

reckoning will come as well. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, if Madam Minister would 

answer the question of Saskatchewan business people rather 

than criticizing the newly elected Premier of Alberta and her 

own defunct party in Alberta. 

 

Madam Minister, you have a business person in the town of St. 

Walburg who has already stopped collecting the PST.  As of 

August 1, the rest of them stopped collecting the PST.  One is 

already doing it, more are going to start on August 1.  And they 

anticipate communities all over because they have to compete 

with Lloydminster where there is no provincial sales tax, 

Madam Minister.  Contractors are losing contracts. 

 

People all over the north-west want you to listen, Madam 

Minister.  What are you going to do when they stop collecting 

the PST?  Answer that then.  August 1 

they stop doing it.  What are you going to do? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, this government 

regularly and consistently sits down with business groups and 

talks through problems.  I'm sure things are difficult there.  I'm 

sure things are difficult all across Canada, but let's be realistic 

here. 

 

These members talk about the taxes that we placed on the 

electorate of Saskatchewan.  What they failed to recognize, 

admit, concede, apologize for is the problems that we inherited 

from them.  What they fail to admit is what they did to the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

As my colleague quoted Les MacPherson saying, the most 

scandalous and most incompetent government in the history of 

Saskatchewan.  And we are putting the pieces back together 

and turning around the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, 

these people want to pay their taxes.  What they want from you 

is fairness.  What they want from you is understanding.  And 

what they want from you is non-partisanship. 

 

Matter of fact, Madam Minister, one of the solutions that they 

suggest to you, because they want to pay their taxes, is that you 

add the PST to the GST (goods and services tax).  But then you 

would have to deal with that H-word and we know that Madam 

Minister has a problem there. 

 

Business people in the province of Saskatchewan in St. 

Walburg, Madam Minister, have written to you, and they want 

to pay their taxes.  But your government won't listen, it is 

unfair, and you are driving them out of business. 

 

The least you can do today, Madam Minister, is commit in this 

Assembly that before August 1 rolls around you will meet with 

the committee from St. Walburg, and that you will honestly 

look at all of the solutions they propose and put your political 

agenda aside.  Will you commit to that today, Madam 

Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm sure that 

representatives of the government will meet with that particular 

group of people and any other group of people that would like 

to meet with the government. 

 

It's interesting the opposition has another new idea about how 

to solve our financial problems.  They have two new ideas -- 

privatization and harmonization.  And they would expect a 

rational, logical government, on the eve of a federal election, to 

say, wait, we're going to jump in now and change the tax 

system, when we have one party in Ottawa, at least, saying 

they wouldn't even have the GST, another 



June 16, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2573 

party saying, I'm not sure what. 

 

And let's go back to harmonization.  We opposed it because we 

had legitimate concerns.  We don't believe in taxing books, for 

example.  Harmonization means taxing kids' clothes. 

 

So we had legitimate concerns in the past; we continue to have 

legitimate concerns.  What we look forward to is a new 

government in Ottawa with a new mandate that will be really 

committed to tax reform and tax fairness. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Sale of Saskoil Shares 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, yesterday I noticed 

that you sold off all your Saskoil shares and raised $24 million 

to pay down the deficit. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, that wasn't so hard, was it?  You did a 

privatization.  The sky didn't fall in.  The world didn't come to 

an end, like you used to suggest it would happen any time the 

PCs (Progressive Conservative) did a privatization.  In fact, for 

once you did something that may even be helpful to the 

province. 

 

Mr. Premier, now that you've learned how to say the P-word, 

now that you know that it isn't so painful, will you consider 

selling $360 million worth of Cameco shares and put that 

money towards paying down the deficit instead of driving 

business out of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To the hon. 

member's question, you're correct, we made a sale of some 

Saskoil shares.  It has nothing to do with privatization.  In fact, 

when you were decimating the economy of this province, it 

was always intended that those shares that were held by 

SaskPower would be sold. 

 

And we made a good business decision and we will have funds 

available, either to reduce our borrowing demands because of 

the big debts that you've left us with or in fact to pay down 

some of the debt that you also left us with.  So yes, we 

appreciate you recognize that we made a good business 

decision yesterday and it had nothing to do with privatization; 

that was your ball game. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, you 

could have balanced the budget this year and you could have 

done it without raising taxes, without closing hospitals, and 

without destroying the drug plan.  All you had to do was sell 

the government's shares in Cameco.  But no, because of your 

ideological opposition to privatization, you had to inflict all 

kinds of hardship on the Saskatchewan people, just because 

you're too scared of the privatization word. 

But you're learning now, aren't you, Mr. Minister?  You've 

learned that you can take one small step and sell $24 million 

worth of Saskoil shares.  Why don't you do the same with your 

Cameco shares and use the money to lower taxes that are 

driving jobs and hope out of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well the hon. member I think needs to 

realize that it might be possible to do that.  What will we do in 

following years?  I mean you sold off virtually all the assets of 

the province of Saskatchewan and you left us with a $15 billion 

debt.  The province struggles every day to make ends meet. 

 

And I think that the Minister of Finance and the Premier and 

the Executive Council and our government have done a good 

job of putting the pieces of Saskatchewan back together.  And 

we won't take that kind of advice from you in the 

sanctimonious way that you stand up in this House, advising us 

how to put Saskatchewan back together.  We're putting it back 

together by our methods, not the way that you wreaked havoc 

over this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, if I might have leave to offer a 

message of congratulations in the Assembly today. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Election Results in Alberta 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, and thank you to all members of 

the Assembly for granting me leave. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday Alberta elected a new government, and 

I rise to offer the congratulations of this Assembly to the 

Premier of Alberta, the Hon. Ralph Klein. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, in the overwhelming move to 

free enterprise, another respected Canadian, Ray Martin, the 

leader of the NDP in Alberta, lost his seat with the rest of his 

colleagues. 

 

And I think it is appropriate, Mr. Speaker, for this Assembly to 

recognize Mr. Martin's contribution to the national life of our 

country and offer him our best wishes in the future.  I think Mr. 

Decore in Alberta also deserves a congratulations for coming 

from almost nowhere and forming a strong opposition.  And it 

is our expectation that he will continue to contribute to Alberta. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it was appropriate that I offer these 

congratulations to the new government of Alberta because that 

province has such a strong impact upon  



2574 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 1993 

our province.  So many of the things that Albertans and 

Saskatchewan people do are the same, Mr. Speaker.  There is 

the oil industry, the cattle industry, the grain industry.  And we 

compete with Alberta in many regards. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope that the new government in Alberta and 

the government in Saskatchewan can cooperate in these areas.  

And I'm sure that if this Assembly congratulates unanimously 

today, Mr. Klein, that it will set a precedent, Mr. Speaker, that 

will allow the cooperation that's absolutely necessary. 

 

So I once again would say to the people of Saskatchewan and 

the members of this Assembly, congratulations to Mr. Klein 

who came from a long way back and obviously gained the hope 

and the confidence of his province in being the new Premier of 

that province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 79 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 79 -- An Act to 

Provide for the Division of Saskatchewan into Constituencies 

for the Election of Members of the Legislative Assembly be 

now read a second time, and the amendment thereto moved by 

Mr. Swenson. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, we 

have spent some time on Bill 79, and the question that we have 

on this is: why is this Bill presented now?  Why at this time, 

Mr. Speaker, when it usually is in 10-year . . . a span of 10 

years? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have put forward an alternate plan, but so far, 

Mr. Speaker, we've had no favourable response from the 

government opposite.  Mr. Speaker, we will be discussing this 

quite extensively, I would think. 

 

This is something, Mr. Speaker, that I believe we need to 

discuss at quite some length.  This is a plan, Mr. Speaker, that 

will have an impact that will go on for many, many years, and I 

suggest we should not rush into this plan. 

 

In our response to the plan, we put forward an alternate plan 

which we feel will not only save the Government of 

Saskatchewan money, it will save the Government of 

Saskatchewan time.  And it will also, Mr. Speaker, give the 

people of Saskatchewan a feeling of fairness which, under the 

plan proposed by the now government, they don't have that 

feeling. 

My own constituency, Mr. Speaker, feel very uncomfortable 

about this new plan, and it's simply because of the politics 

involved.  The constituency of Wilkie have only elected an 

NDP member once in the history of the province, and that was 

only for one term. 

 

And because they have no reason to trust the government, they 

have no reason to believe that they won't do anything in their 

power to maintain control of Saskatchewan.  And I refer you to 

a couple of things very, very dramatically and that is the GRIP 

(gross revenue insurance program) Bill, Mr. Speaker, and also 

the upgrader Bill.  Those Bills, if you look at them, remove 

any, any hope that anyone in Saskatchewan would have that 

there's any protection under the law for the people of 

Saskatchewan under this government we have. 

 

And while we will be discussing this further, Mr. Speaker, we 

feel that we can address this in committee.  We are still 

hopeful, Mr. Speaker, that the government will listen to some 

reasonable changes to be made to this Bill.  We may be able to 

encourage them to make changes, listen. And indeed, Mr. 

Speaker, we are hoping that they will pull this Bill to another 

session till we have some time to look into it more deeply. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with those few remarks I would suggest that 

we on this side are prepared to allow this to go to committee 

and we will then try and bring some common sense to the 

government at that time.  Thank you. 

 

I allow this to go to committee, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 2:58 p.m. until 3:02 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Britton 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd Goohsen 

Toth  

-- 7 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Murray 

Tchorzewski Johnson 

Lingenfelter Draper 

Shillington Whitmore 

Koskie Sonntag 

Solomon Flavel 

Goulet Roy 

Kowalsky Scott 

Mitchell Wormsbecker 

MacKinnon Crofford 

Penner Stanger 

Upshall Harper 

Hagel Keeping 

Bradley Carlson 

Lorje Renaud 



June 16, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2575 

 

Lyons Jess 

Pringle Haverstock 

Lautermilch  

-- 35 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Could we just have order, please, so 

we can get the results.  Well let's have order. 

 

The division bells rang from 3:05 p.m. until 3:06 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Van Mulligen Murray 

Tchorzewski Johnson 

Lingenfelter Draper 

Shillington Whitmore 

Koskie Sonntag 

Solomon Flavel 

Goulet Roy 

Kowalsky Scott 

Mitchell Wormsbecker 

MacKinnon Crofford 

Penner Stanger 

Upshall Harper 

Hagel Keeping 

Bradley Renaud 

Lorje Carlson 

Lyons Jess 

Pringle Haverstock 

Lautermilch  

-- 35 

Nays 

Swenson Britton 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd Goohsen 

Toth  

-- 7 

The Bill read a second time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Bill No. 90 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 90 -- An Act to 

protect the financial viability of NewGrade Energy Inc. be now 

read a second time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I can't 

say that I take any pleasure in rising in the Assembly to speak 

on this particular piece of legislation.  In fact I find it an 

affront, Mr. Speaker, to the very basics of our society that a 

government would bring in legislation such as what we see 

here in Bill 90. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, a lot of people around the province 

of Saskatchewan have correctly identified, correctly identified 

what is wrong with what the government is doing in this 

proposed legislation.  Mr. Speaker, on June 8, 1993, a letter 

was sent from Federated Co-operatives' headquarters to all 

retail cooperatives and general managers in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  And I would quote from that letter, Mr. 

Speaker.  It is called: a call for action. 

 

 Never in the 65-year history of the Co-operative Retailing 

System have we been threatened to the extent that we are 

right now. 

 

 On May 31 the Government of Saskatchewan introduced . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Why is the member on 

his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, not to interrupt 

proceedings, but my understanding is on Bill 79, the 

constituency boundaries, we didn't ask the important question 

of when we'd deal with the Bill in committee. 

 

The Speaker: -- Could I ask leave of the Assembly to revert 

back to Bill 79 to get the . . . All right? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Bill No. 79 

(continued) 

 

The Speaker: -- When shall the Bill be considered in 

committee? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave, later this 

day. 

 

Referred to a Committee of the Whole later this day. 

 

Bill No. 90 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, and I 

will continue quoting from the letter of June 8, 1993: 

 

 On May 31, the Government of Saskatchewan introduced 

legislation that gives the government the power to take all the 

earnings and assets of the Co-op Refinery to pay the 

government's debt on the NewGrade upgrader.  This is 

legislation that you would expect in a totalitarian state, but 

never in a democratic country like Canada. 

 

 I have said many times that the earnings from the Co-op 

Refinery have built our Co-operative Retailing System.  If 

ever there was a time to band together, it is now. 

 

 It's your refinery and your earnings at stake. 

 

 It's up to all of us as leaders of the Co-operative Retailing 

System to do all we can to protect the future of our system 

and our members' equity. 

 

 You have been provided with a number of communications 

tools -- pamphlets, pro forma news releases, advertisements, 

and posters.  Please use them and any other means you can 



2576 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 1993 

think of to carry our message to our co-op members, the 

general public, and politicians at the provincial and federal 

level. 

 

 (Signed) V.J. Leland, president. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would think it is most unusual for the president 

of the retailing system of cooperatives in western Canada to 

have to send such a letter out to the member retailing outlets of 

their association. 

 

It is unusual, Mr. Speaker, that they would take out full-page 

newspaper ads in papers all over the province saying, it's your 

rights, your property, your business, and it is at risk.  And they 

go through, Mr. Speaker, I think, a fairly well-defined litany of 

how the NewGrade upgrader deal was struck, how it was 

carried out, how it has performed up to present. 

 

And I think the response, Mr. Speaker, has been indicative, 

indicative of the co-op movement's call for its members and the 

public to respond to this government -- in their words, 

totalitarian government. 

 

You have seen, Mr. Speaker, week after week, day after day in 

this Assembly, the petitions of thousands of co-op members -- 

thousands of people across the province of Saskatchewan who 

have asked that their name be tabled in this Assembly so that 

they can express their displeasure at this NDP government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some of the headings in that co-op advertisement: 

a threat to democracy; CCRL (Consumers' Co-operative 

Refineries Ltd.) a treasured legacy; Estey confirmed co-op 

position; 50 million a year in benefits to the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the co-op movement has gone to great amounts of 

detail and expense to tell the side of the story which this 

government would not like to have exposed. 

 

I think it's pretty sad, Mr. Speaker, when we see a Bill such as 

this, a Bill which contains clauses in it that says that the 

minister, the minister has absolute, unlimited power in dealing 

with the situation, that the minister is final and conclusive and 

not open to question or review in any court and no decision 

made and no certificate filed by the minister shall be restrained 

by injunction, prohibition, mandamus, quo warranto, 

certiorari, or other process or proceeding in any court or be 

removed by application for judicial review or otherwise in any 

court on any grounds whatsoever. 

 

That the minister, Mr. Speaker, in this legislation is the 

equivalent of Adolf Hitler when it comes to the co-op 

movement in this province. 

 

(1515) 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I would ask the Leader of the 

Opposition to withdraw that statement of comparison to Adolf 

Hitler. 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, I withdraw that reference to 

Adolf Hitler, and I will quote from another document instead. 

 

 Its threat of legislation to unilaterally amend the upgrader 

agreement is a totalitarian act unworthy of a democratically 

elected government. 

 

And I'll let the public of Saskatchewan make their own 

conclusions from there, Mr. Speaker.  I'm sure there are lots of 

individuals in the history of society that that particular 

reference would equate with quite admirably.  And I will leave 

it up to the viewers and the taxpayers and the voters of this 

province to decide which person out of history that performed 

acts like this that they would attribute this government to.  And 

I will leave them unnamed at this time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the fact is, Mr. Speaker, that legislation such as this means 

that this government, this government is either so unsure of 

themselves in the process that they're going through, or they 

know that they're on some kind of a political agenda that they 

don't want questioned down the road, that they have to give the 

minister the absolute, unquestioned authority to take over the 

board of directors of NewGrade, to dip into the dividends of 

co-op members for years and years into the future without 

question. 

 

In other words, Mr. Speaker, as we raised with the Premier in 

Estimates yesterday, that if down the road co-op members 

question the legitimacy of the arguments put forward by this 

government, if something should come out about a political 

agenda or something should come out about the NDP friends of 

the Premier who were over at CIC (Crown Investments 

Corporation) in the way that they have handled these 

negotiations, the way they have handled the business of the 

province of Saskatchewan, if there should be some doubt, if 

there should be a half-truth, if there should be misleading 

statements somewhere in the process, Mr. Speaker, they are not 

open to questions, they are not open to litigation, they are not 

open to the basic rights of Canadians, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It seems, Mr. Speaker, we have an unfortunate pattern 

developing in the province of Saskatchewan since the New 

Democrats got elected as the government, and that is the use of 

this Legislative Assembly to quash, quash rights which we as 

Canadians have taken as a birthright -- rights which we have 

gone through war after war to defend, Mr. Speaker, that of the 

right of seeking redress. 

 

And I reminded the Premier of our province that he was one of 

the key people in repatriation of the constitution back in 

1981-82.  And part of that repatriation process, Mr. Speaker, 

part of that process was the movement of the final authority of 

legislative assemblies in Canada to the court system; that the 

fundamentals of the British parliamentary system in our 

country were being changed.  Because the Charter of Rights 

and Freedoms demanded that people have that ability to hold 

the executive branch of 



June 16, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2577 

government responsible through the court system. 

 

Now whether you or I disagree with that, Mr. Speaker, the fact 

of life is that it is now in place in Canada and that it is 

considered the norm.  In fact there is hardly a week go by in 

our country where a decision of the Supreme Court, based upon 

the charter, does not set new precedent whereby the rights of 

individuals, of groups in this country, are further protected. 

 

But always, whether we agree or disagree, the right of access to 

the court system, Mr. Speaker, is guaranteed.  Always the right 

of access to the court system is guaranteed.  In the case of 

co-op members, Mr. Speaker, 230,000 strong in the province of 

Saskatchewan, that right is being stripped by this government. 

 

I said to the Premier yesterday in his Estimates, Mr. Speaker, 

you are a duly elected government. You have the right to bring 

in legislation.  And you can use your majority to take this 

legislation through this Assembly in due course, and no one 

disagrees with that.  But why do you need to bring in a Bill 

with clauses that not only take away from co-op members 65 

years of progress, but also take away their fundamental rights 

as citizens? 

 

And that is the part of this whole process, Mr. Speaker, that 

people find so heinous, that they just can't conceptualize a New 

Democratic Party government being part of.  They just cannot 

conceptualize how New Democrats, the people that are 

supposed to stand up for the underdog, the people that backed 

the charter to the hilt, the people that said everybody should 

have their day in court, would bring in such legislation. 

 

They thought that maybe GRIP was an aberration.  Because the 

member from Rosetown-Elrose had got into so much trouble, 

that he had stumbled over his tongue so many times, that he 

had mucked up the agricultural situation so bad that they had to 

bring in face-saving legislation. And the only way to do that 

was to pass legislation saying that the minister did something 

that he didn't and that that couldn't be questioned in court. 

 

Well the verbal screw-ups of the minister, the former minister 

from Rosetown-Elrose, Mr. Speaker, is one thing, and bringing 

in legislation to fix that, Mr. Speaker, is one thing.  But to take 

away the right of 230,000 people to challenge a very large 

piece of legislation that fundamentally takes away the rights, 

Mr. Speaker, that is something else. 

 

Mr. Speaker, co-op members all over the province of 

Saskatchewan have asked questions of this government and 

they haven't got answers.  For instance, do you support the 

value added processing of Saskatchewan natural resources in 

Saskatchewan by Saskatchewan people?  That's a legitimate 

question. Fifty-three thousand barrels of heavy crude oil a day 

being processed and value added to it. 

 

Another question, Mr. Speaker.  The Bi-Provincial 

upgrader in Lloydminster cost $1.6 billion; the NewGrade 

upgrader cost less than half that amount.  That's a one-time 

saving of $700 million.  At 8 per cent interest that's a saving of 

$56 million a year, Mr. Speaker, or $153,000 a day, that the 

people of Saskatchewan didn't have to put up because the co-op 

movement put their refinery up. 

 

The question to the government that hasn't been answered: do 

you agree that this is a substantial benefit to all the people of 

Saskatchewan?  I think it is, Mr. Speaker.  Yet the government 

refuses to recognize it or answer it. 

 

Question no. 3 that the government doesn't want to answer but 

co-op members are posing to me each and every day: how 

much cash has the government been required to contribute to 

NewGrade Energy Inc. since September of 1990, September of 

1990, Mr. Speaker?  How much cash?  They don't want to 

answer that question, Mr. Speaker, because it's virtually nil -- 

virtually nil. 

 

But they go around the province of Saskatchewan and they're 

telling people that there is a tremendous outlay of cash on 

almost a daily basis and that the upgrader is going to fail 

tomorrow.  Why won't this government answer the questions of 

co-op members? 

 

Question no. 4: what are the economics of the project if FCL 

(Federated Co-operatives Ltd.) is forced to walk away from the 

Co-op refinery?  Who will buy the refined petroleum products 

manufactured by the Co-op refinery?  What happens to the 

employees of the Co-op refinery? 

 

Not only are co-op members asking this, I'm sure the mayor of 

Regina and city councillors and hundreds of people that are 

associated, because they're associated with spin-off activities of 

that refinery, would like to know the same thing.  What will 

happen to the employees if they're forced to walk away from 

their refinery? 

 

No. 5, Mr. Speaker: the Co-op refinery has been a part of 

Saskatchewan's history for more than 60 years.  It is a major 

supplier of fuel to our agricultural industry.  It has had a 

dramatic impact on rural communities by generating savings 

that are returned to local co-op through patronage refunds.  

Over the years it has been a competitive balance that has 

helped ensure that all farmers pay a fair price for their fuel.  If 

the cooperative loses their investment in Co-op refinery, how 

will you compensate the co-ops and the communities they 

serve?  Not one word out of this government.  Not one word 

out of this bunch of new-found democrats here when co-op 

members ask those questions. 

 

No. 6, Mr. Speaker: how do you expect businesses, especially 

those considering making an investment in Saskatchewan, to 

react to the use of legislation to change a legal and binding 

contract? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I suspect you do like the Premier does.  

You go off to New York, Mr. Speaker, and you give a speech 

called: Saskatchewan, a great place to 



2578 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 1993 

invest.  And you talk about corporations such as TRW, Digital, 

Monsanto, Ciba-Gigy.  And you talk about national and 

international companies such as Cargill, Hitachi, IBM, 

Northern Telecom, Weyerhaeuser, to name a few that all have 

substantial projects in our province and are good corporate 

citizens. 

 

I suspect that's what you do, Mr. Speaker.  All of those things 

brought to this province by previous administrations.  But then 

you come home and you give a speech in Harris, 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, where you absolutely condemn 

the same people. 

 

I suspect that's why they don't want to answer the question no. 

6 as posed by co-op members.  Because this Premier runs off to 

New York and he praises Cargill and Weyerhaeuser and 

Hitachi and IBM.  And then he comes back in this Assembly 

and he proposes legislation that takes away the fundamental 

rights of 230,000 of our citizens and says that his political 

friends over at CIC, Ching and Dombowsky and Banda and 

Hyde and the rest of them, with all the silly little political 

games that they play, are the ones that we should listen to and 

take advice from on this issue. 

 

That all of the patronage appointments that he said he would 

never make -- and has made -- are the ones that dictate today 

that co-op members don't have recourse to the court, that co-op 

members can have their dividends taken, and that co-op 

members are advised by one of the accountants that this 

government likes to talk about so much, by Mr. Donald Gass 

and his firm of Deloitte Touche . . . advises co-op members that 

they might be better off to walk away from their refinery rather 

than put up with the political guff that this government 

proposes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, question 7: FCL's operations span the four 

western provinces with a large percentage of its food volume 

generated in Alberta.  If FCL should lose the Co-op refinery, 

would you expect it to maintain its home office in this 

province, and why should it?  That is the question that's being 

asked of people around the province. 

 

People in Saskatoon are asking me: what happens if this bunch 

over here with their political cronies at CIC dictating the 

government agenda, what happens if they mess this up 

irrevocably, Mr. Speaker?  People in the city of Saskatoon are 

concerned.  Because if the refinery is no longer in the hands of 

co-op members and they have to buy their petroleum products 

somewhere else, and most of the revenue from the food side of 

the retail system is generated in Alberta, what possible reason, 

what possible allegiance should co-op members have to this 

province?  That is a question that members of this government 

simply refuse to answer, that they brush off. 

 

Question no. 8: do you agree that the current upgrader 

agreement was designed to be revenue neutral for the Co-op 

refinery?  That is, the refinery was to be in the same position 

with the upgrader as it had been without it.  If that is the case, 

how can this government justify the allegations that FCL is 

receiving windfall profits from the upgrader?  They 

aren't, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1530) 

 

Everyone knows that the agreement said that all of the 

government funding had to be paid out first.  That the entire 

indebtedness of the NewGrade project had to be paid back to 

the proponents before there was any splitting of revenue.  And 

yet this government has alleged that FCL is taking windfall 

profits from the upgrader. 

 

The upgrader agreement was signed by three parties: the 

Government of Canada, the Government of Saskatchewan, and 

FCL.  How could there be a so-called sweetheart deal between 

two of the parties when there was another one involved?  Mr. 

Speaker, those are very legitimate questions which co-op 

members all around this province are asking members of the 

government and they are getting no answers on.  They are 

getting no answers on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is common knowledge in this province that 

members of the New Democratic Party were fully aware of the 

NewGrade arrangement and agreement through its entire 

evolution.  The initial discussions took place with an NDP 

government in 1981.  That right up to and through the 1986 

election campaign members of the New Democratic Party, the 

member from Riversdale, Mr. Don Ching over at CIC, and 

others were fully aware of what was going on.  In fact there is 

some speculation, Mr. Speaker, that they were the ones that 

were pushing FCL to be as difficult as possible because they 

wanted that agreement torpedoed for narrow political purposes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was always understood, it was always 

understood that that particular project, the upgrading of 

Saskatchewan heavy crude oil, would not return a profit in this 

decade.  Mr. Speaker, it would take time for things such as 

horizontal drilling to prove themselves in the heavy oil fields.  

It would take time, Mr. Speaker, for those syncrude products, 

those refined products, to find their place in the market-place.  

It would take time for the spin-offs in the oil patch in 

manufacturing and other areas to show their worth. 

 

And today, Mr. Speaker, that upgrader, that refinery is 

producing more product than it was designed for.  In the words 

of Justice Estey, it is a resounding operational success -- 

53,000 barrels of oil a day, which this government claims 

would have been processed anyway. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is an absolute fallacy, absolute fallacy.  

Mr. Speaker, anyone that is familiar with the oil business in 

this province, in western Canada, knows that our heavy oil for 

decades was sold below what it should have garnered in the 

market-place simply because we did not have the ability to 

upgrade; because we did not have the ability to upgrade that the 

asphalt market was the main outlet.  And, Mr. Speaker, asphalt 

is only poured in North America for about five and a half 

months of the year.  It is only used above the frost line in North 

America and 



June 16, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2579 

below that most of the highways are primarily concrete.  

Asphalt is used because it has the ability to give and take with 

frost in the fall and in the spring. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if you were dependent upon the asphalt 

market and any upgrading capability that exists is in the United 

States of America or eastern Canada, you can see that often the 

price of heavy oil was discounted against the WTI, the West 

Texas Intermediate price, which is the benchmark for oil prices 

in North America.  And if one of those refiners or if one of 

those big asphalt operations decided to have a retrofit to do 

something different, then Saskatchewan heavy oil was shut in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the previous NDP administration of Allan 

Blakeney knew that.  And I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, 

having been a part of a cabinet in that government that you're 

very familiar with some of the arguments that were made about 

upgrading Saskatchewan heavy crude. 

 

We sit on an equivalent amount of oil as Saudi Arabia.  Our 

problem has always been the technology to get it out of the 

ground and the technology to upgrade it sufficiently that it can 

be used.  I have heard Estimates as high as 365 billion barrels 

in place, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now certainly we will never hope to recover that amount of oil.  

But just think, Mr. Speaker, if 10 per cent of that became 

available.  Even 10 per cent of that came available, what a 

boon, what a bonanza that would be to Saskatchewan long into 

the future.  But it requires, Mr. Speaker, technology and 

cooperation, and that is what happened with the NewGrade 

project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no one involved in that project could foresee the 

differential would go as narrow as they have since the 

inception of that project.  There wasn't one industry analyst out 

there that could predict that those differentials would shrink to 

$3.50 at one period in time.  No one would know, Mr. Speaker, 

about three major fires in the start-up phase of that refinery and 

upgrader. 

 

Those cost overruns, those shrinking differentials have been 

very difficult for NewGrade to look after, Mr. Speaker.  But 

that the fact that all of those problems and the operation today 

is an operational success, the fact that it pays the interest costs, 

that it pays the operational costs, and that it will not go broke 

tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, tells me that this government has been 

on more of a political agenda than an economic one. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am not for one moment suggesting that 

there isn't an opportunity to renegotiate the basic tenets of this 

arrangement.  And I don't think you would get any dispute 

from anyone, Mr. Speaker -- co-op members, the executive 

directors, people in industry -- that there is an opportunity to 

renegotiate an agreement.  But it has to be by consent, Mr. 

Speaker, it has to be mutual; it does not have to have a political 

agenda tied to it in order to succeed. 

We in the opposition have suggested, Mr. Speaker, to the 

Premier and to others, that perhaps if he would take it out of 

the hands of his political cronies and friends at Crown 

Investments Corporation, there might be less of a problem. 

 

Justice Estey said he was very, very close to an agreement; 

another week, another 10 days, that perhaps it was there to be 

had. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I for the life of me don't understand why this 

government, this New Democratic government, this bunch of 

new-found democrats, would want to have this type of 

legislation on their heads.  Why in the world, Mr. Speaker, they 

would want to leave as a legacy to the people of Saskatchewan 

this particular Bill with all of its undemocratic -- in the words 

of co-op members -- totalitarian aspects about it, I don't know 

why any New Democrat would want to be associated with this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that there is an opportunity for this 

government to show Saskatchewan people, co-op members, the 

business community, and potential investors, they have the 

opportunity to say to them, to show to them, that their political 

agenda can go on hold, that their political friends can go on 

hold, and that this piece of legislation can go on hold, and that 

it never see the light of third reading in this Legislative 

Assembly -- that it never see the light of third reading.  And the 

implications attached to it, the sulliness that will be there will 

never occur to this Legislative Assembly.  And the conscience 

of every last New Democrat member of this government will 

not have to be, at some point, exercised because of them going 

ahead with this piece of legislation. 

 

Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the Premier challenged me in debate 

on his Estimates to write a letter to a co-op member in Redvers, 

Saskatchewan, explaining the tenets of The Police Act that was 

brought in by my government, and how that was the same as 

taking away the rights that this Bill proposes to do in this 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I took the opportunity last evening to look 

at the clauses around The Police Act of 1990.  And I would say 

to the Attorney General, to the Minister of Justice who's in the 

Assembly today, that I will swap the legislation in The Police 

Act of 1990 with what you have here today and let this Bill go 

ahead. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, there are some fundamental rights that 

are always protected in that piece of legislation that aren't 

protected here; some fundamental rights that will allow co-op 

members in the future, if this legislation is passed, to hold this 

government accountable through the court system. That if there 

is politics at work here, if there is another agenda at work, if 

there is something untoward being done by this government, 

the co-op members will have recourse to the court. 

 

And I make that offer to the government.  Let's take The 



2580 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 1993 

Police Act of 1990, let's take out clause 16, throw it away, and 

put the sections that the Premier quoted yesterday in here.  

Because those sections have protection attached to them, 

protection that the Premier didn't want to talk about yesterday, 

the protection for individuals in our society.  And I'd swap 

them gladly today and let this legislation proceed.  Do away 

with section 16. 

 

Let me write a letter to Mrs. Lemieux in Redvers, 

Saskatchewan, saying that the government has accepted that 

change.  And down the road, if her suspicions are confirmed 

that she, as a co-op member and a citizen of this province, will 

have the ability to ask redress from this government, I would 

gladly swap that.  And I make that offer to the government now 

and I'll make it to the Premier when once again he comes into 

this Assembly in his Estimates, because those basic rights 

would be protected. 

 

Better yet, Mr. Speaker, what we should have is a Bill that 

doesn't have any of section 16 in it, that simply the 

government, the New Democratic Party, bringing forward 

legislation to take over the board of directors of FCL, of the 

NewGrade project, of taxing the dividends of co-op members, 

and let the chips fall where they may. 

 

If they've got clear consciences, if they don't have politics on 

their mind, they know that that legislation will be supported by 

Saskatchewan people and they don't have to worry about the 

court system.  They will know that they are negotiating in an 

honest and upright manner. 

 

They don't need section 16.  If they can bring in the Bill and it 

will stand the test of political time, Mr. Speaker, they don't 

need to take away the right of the court.  They simply bring in 

the legislation and say, here it is, folks, this is our agenda, this 

is what we're going to do, and we're prepared to live with the 

consequences.  We don't have to hide, we don't have to hide 

from our own citizens. 

 

(1545) 

 

But no, this new-found bunch of democrats so far, Mr. 

Speaker, have said, I don't have the courage to do that.  I don't 

have the courage.  I've got to hide behind legislation that allows 

my ministers to be totalitarian in all aspects of this Bill. 

 

It really makes you wonder, Mr. Speaker, when you recognize 

the promises made in the fall of 1991.  It makes everyone in 

this province recognize, Mr. Speaker, where the truth lay in 

those promises. 

 

There was no truth, Mr. Speaker, about an open, honest, 

accountable government.  There was no truth in that at all.  If 

there had been, section 16 wouldn't have been there.  You don't 

have to hide from your own people, Mr. Speaker.  You don't 

have to hide like this government wants to hide in this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are going to have many questions for the 

government in Committee of the Whole.  And I 

think the questions that I have posed today on behalf of co-op 

members by their thousands, the ones that have tabled their 

names in this Assembly, the ones that have called, the ones that 

have written letters, and the ones which in the days to come 

will bring their pressure to bear on the government members in 

this Assembly, will have questions -- lots of questions -- to ask 

this government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it's only right and fair that this new-found 

bunch of democrats take this opportunity to pull this legislation 

from the floor of this Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I welcome the 

opportunity to rise in this House today and speak on Bill 90, 

An Act to protect the financial viability of NewGrade Energy 

Inc.  And as I begin, I feel compelled to restate something that 

I've said in this Chamber a number of times, and that is, I do 

feel a tremendous responsibility to represent the middle 

ground.  There are some, including many in the co-op 

movement, who say that I'm the only one who can speak with 

any credibility on this side of the House because the members 

of the official opposition must in part shoulder some of the 

blame for the very introduction of this legislation. 

 

This Bill, these five brief pages, although relatively 

insignificant in their volume, have enormous significance in 

their content.  This Bill carries on the recent trend by this 

government of establishing one form of justice for some people 

and another form of justice for others. 

 

Governments have a responsibility to make an unfair and 

unjust world more fair and more just.  This legislation is a 

complete and utter abrogation of that responsibility.  And I find 

it very frightening because of the precedent it sets and the 

message that it sends. 

 

My responsibility today is to provide a credible argument on 

behalf of people who are at the mercy of this legislation -- 

directly, those people who are the actual owners of Federated 

Co-operatives, those hundreds of thousands of people in our 

province who through their memberships are all owners of FCL 

and thereby have a contractual agreement with the provincial 

government that is now being broken. 

 

Indirectly however the list of people affected by this piece of 

legislation will be staggering.  Every person and every 

company that ever has a contract with this province and the 

provincial government, could one day find themselves the 

victim of such measures as the ones contained in this Bill.  

Every business and every investor throughout Canada and 

indeed abroad who may be considering doing business in our 

province is going to be affected by this legislation as well. 

 

And I don't think that this Bill is a dirty little secret that's being 

kept within the boundaries of Saskatchewan.  I've had calls 

from people all over this country, people who are shocked by 

the enormity of this hard line approach by a supposedly 

democratic 



June 16, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2581 

government. 

 

In fact one call from Ottawa ended up in the following, Mr. 

Speaker. They said, the Premier of the province of 

Saskatchewan has just given the Premier of New Brunswick an 

ace up his sleeve; everything is so competitive these days as far 

as economic development and investment is concerned that Mr. 

Frank McKenna must be delighted that the province of 

Saskatchewan is bringing in this kind of legislation. 

 

This Bill and what it means really is extremely Draconian.  It 

gives absolutely unlimited powers to the Crown Investments 

Corporation and to cabinet. 

 

CIC has the power to submit questions to arbitration on behalf 

of NewGrade, but it is the government that decides if the 

arbitration is proceeding promptly and then tell the arbitrator 

how to conduct the dispute.  There is nothing here that prevents 

cabinet from directing the arbitrator to make a finding or from 

constraining the arbitrator so that there could be only one 

finding. 

 

For business people in this province or those considering 

entering this province, this legislation is a precedent that could 

be considered terrifying by some.  The government is giving 

itself unilateral powers, such as deciding how much cash must 

be injected by CCRL.  If CCRL fails to make this payment, the 

government can ask a court to enforce this order of payment 

from which there is no appeal anywhere, notwithstanding that 

CCRL had no input into that decision. 

 

Now cabinet may amend the NewGrade agreement by order in 

council in a manner which it considers, and I quote directly, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

 . . . necessary to protect the financial viability of NewGrade 

or to improve NewGrade's corporate governance. 

 

Business interests should shudder at the lack of consultation 

and the total control imposed by this legislation.  There is very 

little accountability required of CIC.  The only accountability 

on the part of cabinet is to lay out before the legislature any 

order in council it passes amending the NewGrade agreement.  

However that accountability provision is diluted by not 

specifying a time requirement for this disclosure.  Therefore 

there's not even the requirement of timely disclosure contained 

in this Bill. 

 

CCRL has no recourse to any court and is completely at the 

mercy of the government.  By stating that this Act prevails over 

everything with no recourse available to CCRL against the 

government, this government is effectively saying, Mr. 

Speaker, even though we are breaking the law, we are not 

breaking the law because we've passed a law that says that we 

are not breaking the law. 

 

The Premier has been questioned extensively on this issue.  Of 

all the hundreds of copies of the Estey report, Mr. Speaker, that 

have been printed and copied and 

studied throughout the province of Saskatchewan, it is truly 

amazing to me that the Premier seems to have received the only 

copy in which a villain is identified and a legislated solution is 

recommended. 

 

Again and again in this legislature his response to repeated 

questions about his attack against Federated Co-ops and his 

disregard for the legality of this contract have been to answer 

with a question, the question being, where do you stand on 

Estey? Or, do you support Estey? 

 

Given the recent statements of the former Supreme Court 

Justice Estey, the question that seems more appropriate at this 

juncture is, where does Estey stand on Premier Romanow?  Or 

does Estey support Premier Romanow's position? 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I think the member should be 

aware by now she cannot use the proper names of people in 

this House. She should only refer to them by their position. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Yes, I apologize, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Premier's other rehearsed answers are little more than 

blame laying on the former government.  But I do not want to 

add to that blame laying now.  Whether this is a fair deal, a 

sweetheart deal, a good deal, or a bad deal, is not for me to 

judge in this debate. 

 

In a recent letter sent to the Premier of which I received a copy, 

a Regina resident very eloquently said, and I quote: 

 

 There was a time in our province when a handshake was 

most often as good as a written document.  What will you tell 

your children and grandchildren about a deal or contract and 

what their word is worth? 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is what this is all about.  And it's 

shameful.  Shameful that we have betrayed our ancestors 

whose hard work and decent values built this province. 

 

If we cannot afford the financial consequences of the current 

deal, we certainly cannot afford the potential consequences of 

this particular piece of legislation.  Those consequences are the 

loss of this province's integrity, the loss of our capacity to 

attract new investment, and the loss of trust -- further loss of 

trust in government, an institution which unfortunately suffers 

from a great deal of mistrust by too many in our society. 

 

Without integrity, Mr. Speaker, what have we to offer as a 

province?  If we cannot demonstrate to the world that we have 

honour, and that we honour things so basic as legal and binding 

contracts, what hope do we have that anyone will want to live 

in our province, conduct their business here, and risk their 

monies here.  We cannot afford to be bullies to threaten instead 

of negotiate, to legislate instead of placate. 

 

Over the past few weeks in this House and in the 



2582 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 1993 

media, there have been many interferences . . . or inferences, 

pardon me, made about the reputations and the motives of the 

various players in this particular event.  The motives and the 

reputations of the FCL officials have been questioned and 

they've been challenged.  The motives and the reputations of 

the government's officials have been maligned and degraded.  

But I will not participate in that kind of action and name calling 

and character assassination. 

 

These people are not responsible for this legislation.  As 

business people and public servants, we owe them the benefit 

of the doubt, the assumption that they are doing their jobs the 

best they can, with professionalism and good business acumen.  

Ultimately this legislation is the choice, the choice of the 

minister in charge, the Associate Minister of Finance, and the 

Premier.  Those three people must be answerable now and in 

the future for this action. 

 

In a democracy, government is all about accountability.  And 

the principle of accountability requires that power ultimately be 

vested in elected office holders.  They must be accountable.  

They, Mr. Speaker, for each action that has been taken, each 

action that has occurred, to bring us to this point of debate 

today. 

 

And let me tell the minister, the Associate Minister of Finance, 

and the Premier of the province that when the voters present 

them with their Bill for this legislation in a few short years, 

they are going to have to be willing to pay the price. 

 

A competence for power is required by elected officials.  This 

competence for power requires an understanding that wielding 

power over other human beings is a privilege, not a right.  

History books are full of examples of amateurism in this 

regard, illustrated by scandal after scandal in which power is 

and has been misused. 

 

We as elected members in a democracy must realize that the 

opportunity to stride confidently down the corridors of power is 

only by virtue of occupying temporarily a public office. 

 

I urge all members of this Assembly one last time to back off, 

to reconsider, and to make an honest effort, and I underline 

honest effort, to resolve this impasse without sacrificing so 

much of what all of us have been taught to hold dear -- our 

heritage of honesty, our heritage of trust, and our heritage of 

integrity. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

(1600) 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 59 -- An Act to amend The Education Act (No. 2) 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm pleased to 

introduce Michael Littlewood who is the director of the board 

and teachers' services branch of the Department of Education.  

And any questions the members have, I'll be doing this Bill on 

behalf of the Minister of Education.  And if there are questions 

that the members are unable to receive right now, we'll get 

those answers very quickly for them. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister.  

Well since this Bill was presented to the House, we've had a 

change of minister, and at that time I wrote my questions up 

with Madam Minister, so I'll have to be careful when I check 

these.  Mr. Minister, who did you consult with in the 

preparation of this Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I guess the Bill is based on a 

document that the members may or may not have, but basically 

called, "The Advisory Committee on Home-Based Education 

Program", and this committee was composed of members from 

the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, the teachers' 

federation, the league of educational administrators, as well as 

members from the Saskatchewan home-based educators and 

other members at large, and I believe also the Saskatchewan 

independent schools had representation on the committee as 

well.  So it was a consultation and fairly major review and 

discussion that went on and actually resulted in the document 

that I indicate here. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- In the consultation, Mr. Minister, did 

you provide any mechanism for those people who are not 

represented by an association to have input into the Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- It's my understanding that following 

the document and the study that went on through sort of the 

formal mechanism that I referred to earlier, following that 

submission to the minister there were actually regional 

meetings that were held throughout the province to which 

parents and families, as well as school officials who were 

interested in home-based schooling were able to come and put 

forward their views. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- My concern there was, Mr. Minister, that 

there are a number of people who are not represented within 

official organizations, but yet wish to home school.  And I was 

concerned that they had the proper opportunities to be part of 

this process. 

 

When this proposal came forward with this legislation, is it not 

true that this Act will restrict significantly the teachings of 

parents who choose to home school their children, that you are 

restricting their ability to teach what they want with this Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The member will want to be aware 

that what is happening here is the attempt to have a balance 

where the students who might go through the home-based 

schooling would have the 



June 16, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2583 

tools so that they could compete on leaving the schooling 

process to be able to have a rounded education as it would 

compare to other students in Saskatchewan or Canada. 

 

Parents could obviously add more to that.  And so rather than 

talking about as a restrictive process, it restricts only in the 

sense that enabling the students to get the proper education so 

that they would be equipped to compete with other students 

upon completing that portion of their education. 

 

There would also be some minor restrictions as it would relate 

to what is acceptable within Canadian society.  But it's very, 

very broad as to what they might be able to teach in addition to 

the normal classes or the process of education within the 

regular school system.  It's to ensure that the students who 

come through this system are equipped as other students in our 

society to meet the needs of getting a job and entering 

university or to enter the next level of school. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, everyone in the 

province wants the children as they progress through the school 

system to be put into the position where they can move out into 

the job market, that they do have the proper education.  But 

those parents who wish to school their children outside of the 

normal process, you might say, do so for particular reasons, 

that they have some argument with the curriculum as laid out in 

either the public or the separate school system or now, within 

the francophone school system. 

 

So if you tighten things up too much, if you're too 

heavy-handed, then there's no point in having home-based 

schooling if you've eliminated all the choices that parents could 

have.  So this is the concern that I've received phone calls on, is 

to the amount that you are tightening it up.  Have you given 

considerations to that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The member should be aware that 

in designing this kind of a program, not unlike designing the 

regular school system, that you're always going to find the 

system isn't perfect for everyone.  But I think what we've 

arrived at here as a result of the extensive consultations, both 

with organized groups as well as with the regional meetings 

that were held throughout the province, is that we have a 

system that will meet the needs of the parents and the students. 

 

And I think it's fair to say that there will be enough flexibility 

within the system and within the Act and within the regulations 

to allow for those parents who for conscientious reasons may 

want to use an alternate form of education, that they will be 

able to fit within the parameters of the legislation and 

regulation.  And it's also fair to say that people within the 

department and within the education system will be working to 

make sure that the aspirations and needs of the parents and 

students are met. 

 

Now having said that, obviously you're never going to have a 

Bill or a piece of legislation that meets the 

needs of absolutely everyone 100 per cent of the time.  But I 

think the department has done a pretty excellent job of 

balancing the needs of the students and parents along with what 

is needed by students when they leave that education process. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  Because 

parents remove their children from the current system, based in 

a lot of cases on their personal lifestyle values that they support 

and because they feel that those values are not reinforced 

within the current system, they have some concerns about this. 

 

If the curriculum . . . if the established policies, as you will 

define, do not meet their personal requirements, what type of 

an appeal mechanism will be put in place for them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- To the hon. member, I want to say 

that this is obviously a concern whenever you have the 

potential for a dispute arising, and this has been considered.  

And basically what has been set in place is that there is a . . . 

each education region will be required to set up an appeal 

mechanism that will review and work with the family in order 

to resolve the dispute if one would arise. 

 

The dispute-settling mechanism or panel would be made up of 

one individual appointed by the parent and one by the school 

district . . . region.  And they would then try to work out the 

problem.  And we believe that in the vast majority of cases that 

after discussion and consultation, that this review panel and 

dispute settling mechanism would resolve the majority of cases 

that might arise. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay.  Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. 

Minister, I see where in Bill 59 you're amending clause 

27(2)(b), that the Government of Canada under section 114 of 

the Indian Act no longer has to enter into an agreement 

regarding Indian reserve schools.  Why is this? 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I'm informed that the reason this is 

occurring, that many of the Indian bands are asking for and 

receiving the right and the privilege to manage their own 

school systems, and the federal government is agreeing with 

that and turning over control of administration to the local 

bands. 

 

As that happens, the Department of Education has to have 

within its purview flexibility as well to work with the then new 

system or new situation that arises.  And so this change to the 

Act will allow that kind of flexibility, so that we can work with 

the newly established school boards. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So you would do this either on the case 

of the whole reserve, or you could take portions of it and 

subdivide it.  Would that be permissible and what impact 

would that have? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- It's my understanding that 



2584 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 1993 

that would be possible.  For example, if one portion of a given 

reserve, the students in that part went to the public school, that 

then of course would set up a different situation on one part of 

the reserve as opposed to the other.  Obviously this would be at 

the choice of the local government or the reserve council. 

 

They would then, those students that would attend the public 

school, the parents of those children would have the right then 

to elect someone to the board within the non-reserve school 

district.  And so you will see, or could see potentially the 

situation where as the transition occurs, that not all of the 

reserve would be changed at once.  It could be done in such a 

way that it was done gradually where one part of the reserve 

would move and then over years the whole reserve might move 

into that situation. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- One of the other changes we see in this 

Act, Mr. Minister, is the change to The Education Act 

regarding a sale of school property and buildings.  In 

subsection 350(3) strikes out the existing cap of $2,500 and 

replaces it with "the amount prescribed in the regulations."  

The same holds true in sections 352, 355, and 358.  In every 

instance you have eliminated the cap on dollar amounts and 

replaced it with whatever regulations say. 

 

Why have you eliminated these totals and made them subject to 

regulations, basically leaving it open to whatever the minister 

finds acceptable? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- As the member probably has 

assumed, the reason being is that the number 2,500 has been in 

the Act since 1978, and the SSTA or the Saskatchewan School 

Trustees Association has asked that the number be increased 

from something from the level of 2,500 to something higher 

than that. 

 

And through consultation between the department and the 

SSTA, we've arrived at a plan whereby the number in fact 

would be increased and it would be put in regulation so that 

you wouldn't have the situation where the Act would have to be 

opened up in order to make this happen, but that any changes 

that would occur would occur as a result of serious consultation 

that would go on between the SSTA and the department.  And 

it's a way and means of keeping current on what that amount 

might be as inflation forces you to change it from time to time. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  The reason 

I'm interested in this is because I've received a number of 

phone calls from the community of Buchanan dealing in 

particular with the sale of a school.  And the minister, in 

Estimates, at the time said she would look into that and get 

back to me with a response, and I have yet to receive that 

response. 

 

But there the school board was selling the school buildings.  As 

it turned out, they sold it to the local recreation authority, 

which would be the village in actual fact, and therefore it didn't 

need to be advertised for sale even though the value was over 

the $2,500. 

And a number of the people in the community were very upset 

about this because they felt that if the school was to be sold, 

that they should have had the ability to have some impact on 

that.  In the first part, they didn't want the school to be sold, and 

they had hoped that they might be able to purchase it to use as 

a facility within the community. 

 

So when you change this and allow it by regulation, you put it 

into a situation where it can go forward or backwards.  And 

some of the people in the community I think would be 

concerned about that if the school facilities were being sold off 

at a price too low if it's being sold off for something that is not 

community facilities. 

 

And so I think it needs to be done carefully, Mr. Minister.  And 

it needs to be done in a manner such that the people in the 

general public know and understand what is happening.  So 

what do you have in place that would allow that to happen? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, I want to say to the member 

that on the issue of Buchanan I want you to make sure that . . . 

maybe you could send me across the concern that you gave to 

the minister, just to make sure that this hasn't fallen between 

the cracks.  And we'll take it up with the Department of 

Education and get you a response as quickly as we can.  I 

would expect we get something back by the end of the week if 

we were to get it today. 

 

The other point is on the sale of the school to the local 

government or to a local recreation board.  It's been the policy 

of the government that on the sale of a school building, that if it 

were intended that it would go for some other community event 

or some other community purpose, that is a community 

building, a school, moving over to another area of community 

endeavour -- let's say a recreational centre, I guess as in this 

case -- that it was believed that the local board or the local 

people should be able to make that decision rather than put it 

out for bids where it may end up outside the purview as being a 

locally controlled building.  And this has been the case for 

some time and basically that's the rationale, that it would 

continue to be a community building and used for such 

community purposes. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, in clause 4 of the 

Bill and in clause 5 deals with curriculum resource materials 

and recommended textbooks.  I'm just wondering who makes 

the recommendation and who decides whether or not a 

textbook or resource materials are to be used within the 

home-based schooling, and what is acceptable and what is not. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Just for the clarification of the 

member, clause 4 and 5 do not apply to home-based schooling.  

These would apply to the regular curriculum within the school 

system. 

 

As it would relate to the home-based school program and 

textbooks that might be used there, what might happen here is 

that parents would apply to the local school board office with 

their plan of education along 



June 16, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2585 

with the textbooks that they would intend to use in that training 

program. 

 

And there's a good deal of flexibility, as I understand, in what 

books might be used.  And that would mean that it would not 

necessarily be restricted to the books that might be used in the 

regular public school system.  But there would be a fair bit of 

flexibility that would reflect the conscientious situation of that 

family.  And as long as it met the criteria, the basic criteria, 

both the plan of education as well as the textbooks, it would 

likely be allowed. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I think in that 

particular case there needs to be a whole lot of flexibility 

because in a good many cases the reason people are using the 

home-based system is because they don't agree with what's in 

the textbooks under the public and separate systems. 

 

Also in clause 5, it talks of, subject to regulations, making 

grants for the provision and enhancement of language 

education programs within the home-based schooling system, 

I'm wondering what grants are these and what languages are 

involved? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Here again the member will know 

that these grants do not refer to home-based schooling, but 

special grants for special arrangements within the school 

system, such as French language grants or heritage language 

grants, that kind of thing.  And it is just the clause that will 

make this system more workable within the regular school 

system. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Minister.  Clause 39 of the 

Bill deals with section 365 of the Act, and I'm just wondering 

why is this clause being placed where it is.  In my mind, it does 

not bear a lot of relationship to section 365 of the Act.  I'm just 

wondering if you could explain that for me please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Maybe if I could, I'm just going to 

ask my official to check into that.  But if you have a problem 

relating to Buchanan, if you have it with it you, if you could 

just jot it on a piece of paper, send it across, I'll then send it out 

and see what we can do here quickly for you. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, the section deals with 

some fines of up to $50.  And while the amendment in this 

particular case also deals with fines, to me the two subjects 

involved are totally unrelated.  So I'm just wondering why it's 

being placed where it's being placed. 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Here I'm a little bit . . . Well I just 

want to say that if you look at 365, 366, 367, and 368, you'll 

find that they're all fines or penalties that would relate to an 

Act.  It's a simple matter of drafting; that when Justice 

reviewed the Act and was in the process of writing the Bill, this 

is where they chose to put these particular sections in.  And I 

guess it might be argued they should be somewhere else.  But 

this is where the drafters decided to put it. 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 42 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'd like to 

thank the minister and his officials for coming in today and 

answering our questions.  We basically supported the Bill so 

that's why there was very little questions.  And we feel it will 

serve the people well. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, I just wanted to join with the 

member from Souris-Cannington in thanking my official who's 

here today and also the member for Souris-Cannington for his 

questions.  I also make the commitment to get back to you as 

quickly as we can with the issue of Buchanan. 

 

Bill No. 1 -- An Act respecting the Conduct of Members of 

the Legislative Assembly and Members of the Executive 

Council, respecting Conflicts of Interest and to enact 

Consequential Amendments resulting from the enactment 

of this Act 

 

The Chair: -- At this time I would like to ask the Minister of 

Justice to please introduce his official to the committee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  With me today 

is Mr. Doug Moen, the coordinator of legislative services in the 

Department of Justice. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, as you 

are aware and the members of the Assembly are aware, the 

minister is certainly aware of the fact that it's the reason for 

such a Bill to come forward is the fact that the public at large 

and in general certainly have over the past number of years had 

a lot of questions.  And the integrity of members of the 

Legislative Assembly and people in general involved in public 

life is in question. 

 

I believe the idea of the Bill as presented by the minister is to 

try and clarify some of the demands on members, and clarify 

the rules and the guidelines, trying to make them more open, 

trying to be more accountable while at the same time 

recognizing the responsibility of members to certainly conduct 

themselves in a way that gains public favour and public trust 

and not leave themselves open to the public mistrust.  And in 

fact we're all going to be scrutinized by the members of the 

public. 

 

I'm wondering if the minister would take a moment just to lay 

out some of the significant portions of the Bill.  It would appear 

to me, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, as we've already 

discussed, that regardless of the guidelines and the rules that 

we would lay out, even as they're being proposed in Bill No. 1, 

there will probably always . . . someone in the public's mind or 

in the public or even on the media side who would feel at the 

end of the day that possibly every area 



2586 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 1993 

hasn't been addressed or hasn't been totally addressed.  And 

when you set out rules, there's always bound to be someone 

that may find a way to get around the rules. 

 

And I don't know if we're really intending or we're trying to set 

rules in such a way that we're so binding on people that we're 

going to make it more difficult, in fact close the doors to a lot 

of individuals who might look at public life but because of the 

rules and the restrictiveness of the guidelines would say, well 

I'm not really interested in serving the public.  I've got a 

business to contend with, a business that's doing well, and I'm 

not willing to sacrifice, make those sacrifices just to open 

myself up. 

 

Because it seems to me with what we've had laid out and in our 

discussions, basically a person being asked or getting 

involving, putting their name forward and getting involved in 

public life and being an elected representative, is basically 

laying their soul bare to the public for scrutiny, and at the end 

they still may be accused of not laying it bare enough.  And I 

wonder if the minister at least could give us some of the major 

points that the Bill is trying to address. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, Mr. Chair, I'll be glad to do that.  

Of course we've had legislation like this covering many of the 

points covered in Bill No. 1 for some years now in 

Saskatchewan.  I believe the existing Act was passed in 1979. 

 

One of the problems with the existing Act is that there is no 

place that members of this Assembly can go in order to resolve 

any questions that they have under the Act.  For example, there 

is no place that members can go to get a ruling as to whether or 

not certain interests have to be laid out in the disclosure 

statements, so that the present Act was deficient in that respect.  

And under this Act, the legislature will have a conflicts of 

interest commissioner who will sort out these questions and 

help us to determine what parts of our lives have to be laid out 

in the statement that the member was referring to and what 

parts do not. 

 

As well, the commissioner will be dealing with whether or not 

we are ever in conflict of interest with respect to any of our 

activities in relation to our personal lives and personal interests. 

 

So that's the first thing the Act does, is provide for a 

commissioner, and I think that's a welcome improvement to the 

legislation and one which all members will appreciate as they 

try and determine what their responsibilities are under this 

legislation. 

 

That leads me to the second point, which is the requirement in 

this Bill for a broader disclosure of our personal assets and the 

assets of our families and our associates, and that's much 

broader than is the present Bill. 

 

As the member has noted, the public demands this, and we are 

simply in this Bill trying in this legislature to respond to the 

legitimate public demand that we make it clear when we would 

be in a conflict of 

interest situation by disclosing in a public way what our 

personal interests are.  And the member is quite right, that's 

something that not many members of our society have to do in 

relation to their employment or their offices; but it, I think, is 

something that we simply can't avoid.  We're elected to serve a 

particular function, and in the exercise of that function, the 

public is requiring that we disclose any conflicts of interest that 

we may have, any opportunity we may have to personally 

benefit from any of the things that we do in this House.  So 

that's the second thing. 

 

The third item that I would mention in response to the 

member's question is that the Bill will prevent cabinet ministers 

from being involved in businesses or other activities which 

constitute a conflict of interest, a conflict between their former 

role as a cabinet minister and the contacts and influence that 

they have in the public service in relation to contracts during a 

period of one year after they cease being a cabinet minister.  

And I think that's a useful thing. 

 

The Bill specifically prohibits using insider information as it's 

known: information gained as a result of being an elected 

member or cabinet minister for the advancement of personal 

interests. 

 

The next item that I would mention is a prohibition against 

accepting a fee, gift, or a personal benefit other than as a matter 

of protocol or social obligation.  Where a gift is acceptable as a 

matter of protocol or social obligation and such gift exceeds 

$200 in value, the gift must be disclosed.  The fact of the gift 

must be disclosed to the conflict commissioner. 

 

So those are the highlights of the Bill.  There are, of course, 

very complex provisions respecting disclosure, but I think I've 

responded to the member's question with that answer. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister . . . or Mr. Chairman.  I 

guess one of the major concerns is when we start talking of 

disclosing information and we ask ourselves, how far do we go 

and who all do we cover by it.  Now if I understand it correctly, 

right now when the member signs . . .  we do have a conflict of 

interest form we sign that basically we lay out what are the 

assets we hold and what, if any, shares we may have in the 

company, and just laying out what we personally have as an 

individual. 

 

I believe what this Bill does is goes beyond that and requires 

that even our spouse . . . we've got to release that type of 

information other than it doesn't get into, say, a child, if I'm not 

mistaken. 

 

I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could just let us know 

exactly how far it goes and what must be declared.  Like I think 

there are small investments that are made or people . . . whether 

every savings account that you've got is to be declared.  How 

far or what is brought forward and required of in this Bill? 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- What is required to be 



June 16, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2587 

disclosed, Mr. Chair, are the following:  the name and the 

address of the registered office of each corporation in which 

the member holds shares, share warrants, or share purchase 

options.  Now when I use the term "member," I am including 

the member and the member's family when I give this 

information to the House. 

 

Secondly, we must disclose the name and address of each 

business from which the member or the member's family 

receives remuneration for services as an employee, officer, 

director, trustee, partner, or owner. 

 

Third, the names and addresses of proprietorships or 

partnerships in which the member or the member's family has 

an interest. 

 

Fourthly, the identity of bonds and debentures with a value 

greater than $2,000 held by the member, other than treasury 

bills and bonds issued by the Government of Canada or any 

provincial government or any municipal government, but all 

other bonds and debentures having a value greater than $2,000 

have to be disclosed. 

 

A fifth, the identity of investment funds, mutual funds, 

investment trusts, or similar securities again exceeding $2,000, 

other than the retirement -- RRSP (registered retirement 

savings plan) -- and RHOP (registered home owners' plan) and 

their registered education plans.  But apart from those 

exceptions, all investment and mutual funds have to be 

disclosed if they exceed $2,000.  Real property which we own 

inside or outside Saskatchewan. 

 

The next one is the identity of and the extent of the member's 

participation in any government contract.  And that includes 

the member's family as well as the member, of course. 

 

The identity and the extent of any gift or benefit received by 

the member or the member's family.  The identity of any grant 

or subsidy from the Crown that was received by the member or 

the member's family, other than certain grants that are paid 

pursuant to government contracts or pursuant to (a) an Act or 

regulation where there's no discretion in the giving of the grant, 

where the grant is a standard type of grant that are objective in 

nature and don't depend upon our individual situation. 

 

So those are, in a quick summary way, the kinds of information 

that we have to disclose to the commissioner pursuant to this 

Act. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, one of the concerns that certainly 

arises and crops up from time to time is when elected members 

are involved and the decisions are made by caucus or made by 

the Legislative Assembly. 

 

And in particular let me just use the example of a person's 

involved in the agricultural field.  And I guess the concern and 

the question that arises is a person whose background is a 

farmer and is still actively involved in the farm other than 

possibly they've got . . . 

hiring someone to manage the farm for them, run the farm for 

them, or they've leased out some of their land or the . . . 

because of the fact that they don't have the time to work. 

 

When we look at this Bill, are we basically asking members if 

the agriculture is their main occupation that they should refrain 

from being involved in any major discussions or decisions by 

caucus or Executive Council or of cabinet on any question that 

would relate, like, say to agriculture or in the legal community 

or even in the business community, some of these questions 

that are raised there. 

 

It seems to me that that's an area that concern has been raised 

time and time again.  And I would think that when you're 

elected to represent your constituency, even if your background 

is agriculture and the area you're representing is agriculture, it 

would be important that you're there speaking on their behalf.  

And I don't know if it's sure that the Bill is all that clear 

whether you should be removing yourself from some major 

discussion of that aspect.  I wonder if you could make a 

comment on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes I can, Mr. Chair.  That specific 

situation was very much in our mind when we drafted this Bill.  

In section 3 of the Bill it is stated that a member has a conflict 

of interest when the member makes a decision or participates in 

a decision and at the same time knows that in making that 

decision there is the opportunity to further his or her private 

interest or his or her family's private interest. 

 

Then we have included a definition of private interest, at least 

one of those sort of "does not include" definitions: 

 

 "private interest" does not include an interest in a decision: 

 

 (i) that is of general public application; 

 (ii) that affects a person as one of a broad class of persons; 

 

And those are the two relevant exceptions to the situation 

posed by the member. 

 

So that in the case of a farmer who gets elected to this 

Assembly and is participating in decisions that are of a general 

public application like the crop insurance or GRIP and that 

affects the member but only as one of a broad class of persons, 

namely farmers in Saskatchewan, then that decision would not 

be considered one that would further the member's private 

interest.  That's how we got around that. 

 

Now you could think of other analogies, too, but certainly 

farmers are the predominant one because there are so many 

farmers in this Assembly.  And if we asked all of the farmers to 

step aside when we're making some decisions, we would have a 

hard time making decisions in this Assembly.  So we have 

sought to get around it in that way. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Chairman, 



2588 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 1993 

Mr. Minister, I guess when it comes to people with an 

agricultural background, and we're waiting with a belated 

breath for the Boundaries Commission to drop their 

boundaries, and we're just wondering how many people from 

the agricultural field will still be involved in the Legislative 

Assembly to maybe form a conflict regarding agricultural 

issues.  But time will tell. 

 

What I'm wondering is, what are you specifically meaning by 

broad class of person.  You say that affects a person as one of a 

broad class of persons.  What specifically are you referring to 

in that . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well the best example I can give I've 

already given.  Obviously farmers are a broad class of persons.  

And you could say in connection with my own situation, 

lawyers are a broad class of persons, and doctors and, you 

know, I could dredge up other ones.  But the words themselves 

I think point the way.  It's very difficult to be precise about 

these things and specifically exclude certain occupations or 

classifications. 

 

But if you read the two ideas together there, a general public 

application or one of a broad class of persons, I think that the 

commissioner will get the drift that this is intended to cover 

programs that are available generally to the public that is 

eligible.  Crop insurance available to farmers who are eligible 

because they're farmers.  Or members of the Law Society who 

are covered because they are lawyers and not as individuals.  

The program is not intended to be for the benefit of specific 

individuals, but rather for a broad class.  Then I think the 

member would get an understanding at what we're trying to 

arrive at here. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Chairman, I 

understand the Bill is also proposing that we have a 

commissioner put in place.  And if I read it carefully, the 

commissioner will be appointed by the Legislative Assembly. 

 

The responsibility of this commissioner is to, I guess, be a 

contact for members to . . . first of all, I guess, if I understand it 

correctly, the commissioner is going to have the responsibility 

of administering the Act and knowing in detail what the 

questions and the type of material that a member would have to 

submit in his conflict of interest form. 

 

It would seem to me just from what we've been reviewing and 

discussing right now and looking at the Bill that there's going 

to be a number of areas that I think it's going to be fairly . . . 

take a fair bit of work for the commissioner to really come up 

with some of the guidelines and understanding so that they can 

relate their understanding of what the Bill means to members 

so that at the end of the day we can be comfortable that we 

have certainly laid out ourselves as clearly as we can and as 

comfortably. 

 

And the other thing I'm just wondering about, this 

commissioner is available or is going to be there to provide 

assistance.  The commissioner also will be making decisions as 

to whether members have fulfilled their responsibilities to the 

code to provide the proper information and if indeed they've 

followed the guidelines. 

 

Is that correct?  Actually there's about three questions there, 

about the appointment of the commissioner and the 

responsibilities and the areas of jurisdiction that they will 

cover. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, Mr. Chair, the member understands 

the office quite clearly.  It will be a difficult job, particularly 

when the Act is being implemented, and it will also be difficult 

following each general election because there'll be a new flood 

of members into the House after each election -- at least that's 

our general experience in this province.  So there'll be quite a 

process that will have to be gone through. 

 

We think it will take some time before we will be ready to 

proclaim this Act.  We will need a commissioner working with 

all of us individually to sort out these questions before we will 

be in a position to proclaim the Act.  So it will be a very 

complex matter.  But the answer to each of the member's 

questions is yes, your understanding is correct. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, is there a process whereby if -- I 

guess I'll use the term conflict; not conflict of interest, but a 

person, whether they be a member or . . . I'll use the term 

member -- if the member feels that maybe there's more being 

required of them than they really feel is necessary and they feel 

that the commissioner is being a little more demanding, is there 

a process in place that is set up to help clarify some of the 

matters where there's a conflict between the commissioner and 

a member?  Or is the member just subject to whatever the 

commissioner's interpretation of the Bill is? 

 

Because I think at the end of the day, the commissioner will be 

. . . it'll be a challenge to take this Bill and really get a sound 

understanding so that everyone is aware of the demands and 

the principles of the Bill before us, this conflict of interest. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, and to the member, there 

is no procedure in the Bill for appealing or reviewing any 

position that the commissioner takes.  We will be in the hands 

of the commissioner with respect to these questions.  This is 

the approach taken in other provinces where this legislation is 

in effect and it has worked in those provinces, and so we're 

optimistic here. 

 

As the member knows, the selection of the commissioner is one 

that requires some care and some considerable thought because 

we need someone in whom we all have confidence in this 

House. 

 

And let me answer it this way, Mr. Chair.  If we got into a 

situation where the commissioner was, in the view of the 

members of this House, not interpreting the Bill correctly, we 

have the main option.  We have the main alternative of 

amending the Bill so that it will accurately reflect what we 

meant.  And ultimately of 



June 16, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2589 

course, although you'd probably never get in this situation, we 

do have the power to remove the commissioner and substitute 

another one.  But there is no appeal mechanism as such. 

 

(1700) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, I guess another question that I 

would like to just bring to your attention is the fact of . . . and I 

think you touched upon it a bit in your last response when you 

mentioned that there will be a process of time. 

 

And it's certainly . . . just even just passing this Bill and 

receiving Royal Assent, and I think it is . . . some of the 

discussion with some of your officials as well as to when this 

Bill will be implemented because it seems to me there are a 

number of complicated matters to bring forward here.  And I 

would just wonder if we have a time period we're looking at as 

to when members are going to be forced -- I shouldn't use the 

the word forced because I think we all want to be as open and 

forward with the public -- to be put in a position of complying 

with the conflict of interest form we have today. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 59 -- An Act to amend The Education Act (No. 2) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now 

be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:04 p.m. 

 

 


