




















































Hansard: May 31, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN  

 May 31, 1993 

 

2037 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, today 

I have petitions to present on behalf of Saskatchewan people.  

And because this is a brand-new petition to the Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, I will read the entire petition, prayer first: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 The petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 

 

 That the NDP government of the province of Saskatchewan 

intends to table legislation that unilaterally changes the 

provisions of the agreement relating to the corporate 

governance of NewGrade Energy Inc. and the financing of 

cash flow deficiencies that NewGrade may experience; 

 

 And that the NDP government's intention to unilaterally 

change legally binding agreements regarding NewGrade 

Energy Inc. represents a threat to democracy in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And today, Mr. Speaker, I present this on behalf of a number of 

people from the city of Saskatoon who take issue with the 

government's moves on FCL (Federated Co-operatives Ltd.).  I 

so petition. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My petition today, 

the prayer says: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements; 

 

 And that the NDP government of the province of 

Saskatchewan intends to table legislation that unilaterally 

changes the provisions of the agreements relating to the 

corporate governance of NewGrade Energy Inc. and the 

financing of cash flow deficiencies that NewGrade may 

experience; 

 

 And that the NDP government's intention to unilaterally 

change legally binding agreements regarding NewGrade 

Energy Inc. represents a threat to democracy in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These people are petitioning the government from Saskatoon 

today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I, too, 

have petitions I would like to put on the Table today on behalf 

of the citizens of this province.  I will read the prayer on this 

one, Mr. Speaker.  And that simply says that: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the names of these citizens are mostly from 

Saskatoon but also from Warman, Mr. Speaker.  And it is my 

pleasure now to lay these upon the Table. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have petitions on 

behalf of people from the Saskatoon area. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements; 

 

 That the NDP government of the province of Saskatchewan 

intends to table legislation that unilaterally changes the 

provisions of the agreement relating to the corporate 

governance of NewGrade Energy Inc. and the financing of 

cash flow deficiencies that NewGrade may experience; 

 

 And that the NDP government's intention to unilaterally 

change legally binding agreements regarding NewGrade 

Energy Inc. represents a threat to democracy in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have 

petitions to present today: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements; 

 

 That the NDP government of the province of Saskatchewan 

intends to table legislation that unilaterally changes the 

provisions of the agreement relating to the corporate 

governance of NewGrade Energy Inc. and the financing of 

cash flow deficiencies that 

  



2038 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1993 

NewGrade may experience; 

 

 And that the NDP government's intention to unilaterally 

change legally binding agreements regarding NewGrade 

Energy Inc. represents a threat to democracy in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

 And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I too 

have some petitions I'd like to lay on the Table.  I'll read the 

prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements; 

 

 That the NDP government of the province of Saskatchewan 

intends to table legislation that unilaterally changes the 

provisions of the agreements relating to the corporate 

governance of the NewGrade Energy Inc. and the financing 

of cash flow deficiencies that NewGrade may experience; 

 

 And that the NDP government's intention to unilaterally 

change legally binding agreements regarding NewGrade 

Energy Inc. represents a threat to the democracy of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I would like to table these, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I have 

petitions here as well that I would like to present today: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And in duty bound your petitioners humbly pray. 

 

I present those petitions now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a different 

petition that says: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the government's 

decision to close hospital facilities with 10 beds or less which 

will reduce the emergency health care required in rural 

Saskatchewan; 

 

 And that the government plans to close hospital facilities with 

10 beds or less average daily census; 

 And that the government has already contradicted other 

promises made to seniors by raising several taxes and 

cancelling the senior heritage fund, increasing the 

prescription drug plan, and has made many other harmful 

decisions that have caused undue hardship to Saskatchewan 

senior citizens; 

 

 And that the decision to close these hospital facilities is being 

made without consultation with boards, families, and 

communities. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 

received: 

 

 Of citizens of the province humbly praying that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to reverse 

its decision to single out diabetics in the drug plan; 

 

 And of citizens of the province humbly praying that your 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to reverse 

its decision to eliminate full coverage and universal access to 

chiropractic treatment. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

I want to introduce to you and through you to all members of 

the Assembly, a number of members and representatives of the 

RWDSU (Retail Wholesale & Department Store Union) which 

are seated in the east gallery.  They are here today to dramatize 

their concern about the difficulties they are having with 

Westfair Foods. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my privilege to introduce 

to you and through you to the other members of the Assembly, 

36 grade 8 students from a school in my constituency in 

Saskatoon, Lawson Heights School.  They are accompanied 

today by their teachers, Diane Selby and Don Bates; and 

chaperons, Susan Eva and Leslie Hudson.  And I know all 

members will want to join me in welcoming them to the 

Assembly and wish them a good tour of Regina and a safe trip 

home. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you.  It's a great pleasure for me, Mr. 

Speaker, to introduce to you and through you to members of 

the Assembly, grade 5 students from Wilfrid Walker School, 

just around the corner from my constituency office in our 

constituency, Wascana Plains. 

  



May 31, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2039 

They're here today with their teacher Anca Toma, who now 

that Mosaic is coming up will also have double duties and be 

extra busy with some of the activities of the Romanian 

Pavilion; her whole family becomes involved. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'll be meeting with the group to have pictures and 

answer their questions after question period.  And I would 

encourage all members to join with me and give a warm 

welcome to the members of the grade 5 class from Wilfrid 

Walker School. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure 

today to introduce to you and to members of the Assembly, 28 

grade 4 students seated in the Speaker's gallery from St. Angela 

Merici School in my constituency.  Members may recall that 

we had some grade 8 students here just last Thursday. 

 

I would like to introduce their teachers and chaperons: 

Laurianne Jacques, Marion Podborochynski, Michelle Payette, 

Joanne Fehr.  I look forward to meeting with these students and 

their teachers and chaperons, Mr. Speaker, after the question 

period.  And I would ask all members of the Assembly to join 

with me in welcoming this fine group of students from St. 

Angela School in north-west Regina. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Johnson: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to the 

Assembly through you, 21 grade 8 students in the west gallery.  

They are visiting the city of Regina and are spending an hour 

and a half or so here in the Assembly and the Legislative 

Building.  And I would like everyone to welcome them here 

this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- I would like to at this time introduce to you a 

special guest who is seated in the Speaker's gallery in the front 

row, the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly of Alberta, David 

McNeil. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Bingo Licensing 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I have 

a question for the Premier.  Mr. Premier, I received some 

disturbing information over the weekend that I'm going to ask 

you to think very carefully about in answering my questions.  

Mr. Premier, at any time during the past few weeks have you 

personally intervened in the licensing of a bingo hall? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- No.  No. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, have 

you met with any officials of the 

Gaming Commission over the last few weeks to discuss the 

licensing of a particular bingo hall? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- No. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, I'll then ask the minister of the 

Gaming Commission.  Mr. Minister, can you confirm that the 

Gaming Commission recently conducted an investigation into 

the operations of the Bingo Country bingo hall in Moose Jaw?  

And can you confirm that Bingo Country had its licence 

suspended by the Gaming Commission due to irregularities in 

its operations, questions about its accounting methods, and the 

amount of prize money paid out to individuals?  Could you 

confirm that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, I can 

confirm that there have been some difficulties with respect to 

prize pay-outs in Moose Jaw.  I can also confirm that the 

Gaming Commission has been trying to, with great diligence, 

have the bingo halls operate within the purview of the 

guidelines that are set out with respect to the prize pay-outs.  

As members opposite will know, it's our goal to achieve a 

maximum amount of bingo revenue for charities back into the 

communities, and that's the reason the guidelines were set out.  

And I am aware that there were some concerns with respect to 

the operation of a bingo hall in Moose Jaw. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

would you confirm that the licence for that particular hall was 

lifted? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I can confirm that the 

Gaming Commission had some difficulty over the past months 

with respect to that particular hall.  And I am led to believe that 

they were considering whether or not the hall was going to be 

allowed to operate.  It's my understanding that there were some 

discussions with the operators, with the charities who were 

associated with that bingo operation.  And to my knowledge, 

they are still operating.  But I can certainly get an update for 

the member opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, my 

information is that that licence was indeed revoked, and that 

that licence was then reinstated a short few days later with 

certain conditions being changed. 

 

Mr. Minister, would you confirm that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, what I can is I can 

confirm that there was some difficulty with respect to the 

pay-outs and the percentage of pay-outs with that bingo hall.  I 

know that the Gaming Commission was quite concerned with 

respect to the charities and the ability of those charities to fund 

some of the operations in that particular area.  And I know that 

they were very concerned in terms of getting them to operate 

within the purview of the policy. 

  



2040 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1993 

I am led to believe that they met . . . that the Gaming 

Commission met and had reviewed the operations of the bingo 

halls and were going to be having further discussions with the 

charities or with the operators in that particular bingo hall. 

 

I haven't got a final result of what that might be, but I can only 

say this:  the Gaming Commission is set up as a quasi-judicial 

body to enforce policy in the regulations of bingo.  I know that 

they also understand and are very sensitive in terms of the 

operations of the charities who receive revenues from them, 

and I would assume that in looking at all matters that the 

Gaming Commission will do what is right with respect to the 

operation of that hall. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, why 

will you not confirm to the Assembly today that the licence was 

lifted and then reinstated a couple of days later?  Was that 

because, Mr. Minister, that there was a call placed to the 

Premier's office in regard to this particular bingo hall?  Is that 

why you won't tell the Assembly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say just a 

couple of things with respect to the operation of the Gaming 

Commission.  They set down policy and they enforce the 

regulations and I can say to you this:  that the member opposite 

is looking in closets, in closets for skeletons that aren't there. 

 

I want to remind him that there was an election in October of 

1991 and that this government doesn't operate the way the 

former administration did under the leadership of the member 

from Estevan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, can 

you tell the House today if any members of the Gaming 

Commission have resigned in the last week to 10 days? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, not to my knowledge. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, have any members of the 

Gaming Commission threatened to resign because of outside 

interference, outside interference and calls placed to the 

Gaming Commission by other members of the government than 

yourself? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, not to my knowledge. 

 

Effect of Human Rights Commission Rulings 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.   My question is to 

the Minister of Justice. 

 

Mr. Minister, a recent ruling by the human . . . 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Would the member from 

Humboldt please come to order. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Minister, a recent ruling by the Human 

Rights Commission has created a huge problem which 

jeopardizes thousands of small businesses in Saskatchewan.  

Mr. Minister, last week the Human Rights Commission fined 

the Collections Fine Art Gallery even though the gallery owner 

was in compliance with the provincial building code. 

 

Mr. Minister, I would suggest that the owner of that business 

and other businesses and owners in Saskatchewan want to 

follow the law.  The problem is giving this ruling . . . or in 

giving this, this ruling, it's impossible to know what the law is. 

 

Mr. Minister, what are you doing about this completely 

unacceptable situation?  And can you give us the assurance that 

no other business will be penalized in a similar manner until 

they are given clarification of exactly what the law is with 

regards to these problems? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I thank the 

member for that very important question. 

 

My understanding is that the ruling that he speaks of was a 

ruling by an adjudicator appointed pursuant to the Act.  And 

my understanding also is that that award is the subject of an 

appeal.  So I feel a bit constrained about going into any detail 

about it. 

 

But I will say to the member this: it is my understanding that 

there are discussions going on within government to try and 

meld the requirements of the building standards with the 

requirements for access of the Human Rights Commission 

because obviously this is a situation that is most unfortunate for 

Mr. Ripplinger, and something is necessary to be done about it. 

 

And talks are going on to try and make those two sets of 

regulations or two approaches compatible. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, the 

inquiry officer for this particular case ruled that the 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Code takes precedence over 

every other municipal and provincial law.  Mr. Minister, surely 

you can understand the serious implications of this ruling and 

the effect that it may have on businesses in the province. 

 

First of all it makes the Human Rights Commission the most 

powerful regulatory body in the province, able to overrule the 

decisions of any other body.  And second, it means that 

thousands of business owners who believe they are following 

the letter and intent of the law may be in serious jeopardy. 

 

Mr. Minister, do you believe that the Human Rights 

Commission should be the most powerful regulatory 

  



May 31, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2041 

body in the province?  And since the Human Rights Code takes 

precedence over every other law, would you provide the 

legislature and all Saskatchewan business owners with a list of 

all the provincial laws that may be in conflict with the Human 

Rights Code? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I want to say to the member, Mr. 

Speaker, that I am not aware of any other conflicts that exist.  If 

the member is aware of any I would appreciate knowing about 

it.  I want to also say that the matter of human rights laws 

having precedence over other laws has been the law in this 

country . . . in this province since the late 1970s and has been 

the law in other jurisdictions for at least that long.  It's a 

common approach.  We're talking about the right of access to 

public services.  That is the common approach taken across 

Canada. 

 

But I must say that unless the member has some other situation 

to draw to my attention, I'm not aware of any other conflicts. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 

Minister, for that answer.  I hope that you will put that into 

your memory bank and recall it as time goes by. 

 

Mr. Minister, the point is it would probably be impossible for 

you to provide me with a list such as I've just asked for because 

there are so many examples.  So it is impossible for the 

government, with all of its resources, to know the certainty, or 

with certainty, whether or not someone is breaking the law.  

How in the world would small-business owners be able to 

know and understand what the laws are then? 

 

Once again, Mr. Minister, I would suggest that the 

Saskatchewan business people are good corporate citizens and 

they want to follow the law.  But that may not be possible 

given the climate of uncertainty that this ruling has created. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you take immediate action to end this 

uncertainty?  Will you immediately get to work standardizing 

regulations in this province so that the Human Rights Code is 

consistent with the other laws and regulations?  And until that 

process is completed, will you give small-business owners the 

assurance that they will not be fined under similar 

circumstances where, to the best of their knowledge, they are 

following the law? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I say to the hon. member, I do not know 

of any other situations where there is this kind of a conflict.  

And I invited the member earlier to draw to my attention if 

there are any, and I'll await to hear from him in that respect. 

 

I also draw to the member's attention the answer to his first 

question, namely that we realize that there is a conflict -- that's 

been pointed out by the Human Rights Commission -- and that 

processes are under 

way within government to try and meld those two together so 

that we don't have that unfortunate conflict. 

 

It's a situation that should not exist.  It does because you have 

general building standards on the one hand and particular 

requirements for access by disabled people on the other.  And 

apparently when these things were being put together, nobody 

thought to try and align them up so they exactly fit together.  

That I think will happen now. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  A supplementary 

to the minister.  Mr. Minister, this type of regulatory 

uncertainty is one of the many reasons that Saskatchewan 

business coalition has been calling for an economic summit 

meeting with the Premier and your government.  Such a 

meeting would be an excellent opportunity to get this type of 

problem straightened out and ensure that businesses have a 

consistent regulatory environment in which to operate. 

 

Mr. Minister, given the difficulties caused by this ruling, will 

you be recommending to the Premier that he should hold a 

meeting with the business coalition and hold that meeting with 

the people that are calling for it so that these problems and 

problems like it can be discussed and resolved? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

member that I had looked at the advertisement placed in papers 

by the coalition, and I had not seen this particular item on their 

agenda.  I say to the member again that this problem of the two 

sets of regulations not lining up properly has been under 

consideration and discussion, and in the end, there will be a 

resolution of the matter.  Because of course you can't have two 

sets of regulations that conflict in this fashion. 

 

If the member knows of any other one . . . one other example, 

I'll be glad to hear about it.  Because we're certainly not going 

to go into some huge summit discussion on the basis of one set 

of regulations where we're working to end that conflict.  If the 

member has others, I invite him to stand up and tell me about it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A supplementary to 

the minister.  Are you suggesting, Minister, that the only thing 

that you will consider, in terms of what's being asked by the 

business community, is those things that are in an 

advertisement in a newspaper? That you won't listen to what 

they tell you on the telephone or in private interviews? 

 

And there is one other thing, Mr. Minister. There is one more 

area where this ruling raises serious concerns among 

Saskatchewan people.  Over the past few weeks the minister 

has repeatedly tried to assure the House that the scope of Bill 

38 is very limited, that the 

  



2042 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1993 

Human Rights Commission will have no opportunity to extend 

the scope of that legislation beyond housing and employment.  

The opposition has always maintained, Mr. Minister, that those 

assurances are very, very tenuous.  And now, since the Human 

Rights Code takes precedence over every other law in the 

province, your assurance seems that much shakier. 

 

Mr. Minister, how can you be certain that provisions of Bill 38 

will not be applied in a similar manner?  How can you be 

certain that provisions of Bill 38 will not be used to override 

other legislation, thereby going beyond the stated intent of the 

Bill?  And since I don't think you can give us any assurance of 

this, will you immediately withdraw Bill 38 from the order 

paper? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I was wondering 

what this line of questioning was all about, and now I finally 

understand.  The answer is no, we do not intend to withdraw 

Bill 38. 

 

The assurances that I gave to the House were assurances based 

upon legal opinions and based upon experiences in the other 

jurisdictions of this country -- most of the other jurisdictions of 

this country where this is already the law and where there has 

been a considerable body of jurisprudence grown up around 

those laws. 

 

So when I give the House assurances as to what this Bill does, 

Bill 38, and what it does not, it is based upon legal opinions, 

based upon those . . . the jurisprudence that has grown out of 

the other provinces and the experience of those other provinces.  

And that is the answer to the member's question. 

 

But it is interesting to finally find out where these questions 

about access were actually headed towards. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Minister, 

this is a two-edged sword.  Because while you stab the business 

community in the back on one hand and refuse to negotiate 

with them and attempt to provide a clear consensus of how the 

laws should apply, as to which one should have jurisdiction and 

which one they should be protected under, at the same time you 

ask me for one clear example and I give you one clear example.  

And right away you're off on a tangent saying that that's the 

only thing in the world that matters.  It isn't.  They all matter.  

They're very important. 

 

You have to remember, Mr. Minister, that there are legal 

opinions that go against what you have just said.  They say that 

Bill 38 in fact will be ruled upon the same way that the case 

that I previously mentioned has been with the arts gallery. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, knowing this and thinking about it for a 

minute and knowing that you've trapped yourself 

into a foolhardy position, will you now reconsider and 

withdraw Bill 38 in an act of good faith for this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm going to take 

advantage of Hansard first thing tomorrow to find out all the 

nuances of that particular question.  Because I must admit that 

most of them just slipped right past me here today. 

 

I want to say that I still don't understand that the member has 

one other example of any conflict between the human rights 

laws and any other laws.  I am simply not aware of it.  So 

perhaps the member and I can speak privately about it later and 

he can finally let me know clearly what is that other example. 

 

So far as Bill 38 is concerned, I say again in this House: there 

has been a lot of experience with this kind of provision across 

this country.  Seven of the other provinces already have the 

law.  They've had it in existence for some time.  It has never 

had the effect in any of those jurisdictions that the member is 

concerned about.  Now how much more proof do we need? 

 

We also have a large quantity of very carefully researched legal 

opinions on the matter.  I am not aware of legal opinions to the 

contrary that the member has referred to.  And if he has any of 

those, I'd appreciate being provided with those as well. 

 

But as of this case, I think the member might consider 

attending the dinosaur exhibition at the Science Centre that's 

going on right now to see what inspiration he can get from that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Co-op Upgrader Review 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, I hope this weekend 

gave you a good opportunity to think about just how badly you 

are mistreating 240,000 co-op members in this province. 

 

Mr. Premier, when Federated Co-op starts telling 240,000 

members that the NDP (New Democratic Party) Premier of 

Saskatchewan is a threat to democracy, that you run a 

totalitarian government, that you haven't told the truth, that you 

abuse power, and people should be frightened of you, I think, 

Mr. Premier, it's time you recognize that maybe you are not 

handling this in the best manner. 

 

Mr. Premier, after giving some thought to this situation over 

the weekend, will you today remove the threat of legislation 

that you and your government is holding over the Co-op and 

enter into meaningful discussions with them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



May 31, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2043 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, after question period, as 

the rules dictate, I'll be tabling a copy of a letter which was 

written on October 14, 1986 to the former premier, now 

member from Estevan, on the NewGrade upgrader, written by 

Mr. Philip Gordon, of Philip Gordon Industrial Consultants Inc.  

Time does not permit me in question period to read all of it, but 

on the date of October 14, Mr. Gordon wrote to the former 

premier and said the following: 

 

 While I have not seen the final form of these agreements, I 

am aware that up to 3:00 p.m. Thursday October 9th -- when 

Federated abruptly broke off negotiations -- there were a 

number of important issues which remained unresolved 

between the parties. 

 

He goes on to write: 

 

 On each of the outstanding issues affecting this Agreement, 

the positions being taken by Federated as of last Thursday 

were, in my opinion, unreasonably disadvantageous to New 

Grade Energy Corp., and inconsistent with the underlying 

understandings between Saskatchewan and Federated.  I 

could not recommend their acceptance by Saskatchewan and 

in fact advised against such acceptance. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I give you that letter because what it 

indicates, as Mr. Gordon has described, is that this is a bad 

deal.  We want to renegotiate it but we have not been given a 

chance, in fact even a willingness by Federated to renegotiate.  

Under the circumstances we have no other option but to do 

what we're doing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Premier, over the weekend the Co-op people have said they 

want a negotiated settlement.  That's exactly what they're 

asking for, an opportunity to meet with you folks to negotiate a 

settlement.  They're asking that you lift the threat of legislation 

so that meaningful discussions can take place. 

 

Mr. Premier, if you're not willing to do that, at least will you do 

one other thing and remove another roadblock that's in the way 

of this agreement.  Mr. Premier, it has become painfully 

obvious that your friend Don Ching has become a major 

obstacle to any meaningful discussions and negotiations. 

 

The entire process is being dominated by Mr. Ching's 

vindictive personal agenda and not in the best interests of co-op 

members or the people of this province.  Mr. Premier, will you 

do that now for the people of Saskatchewan and remove that 

obstacle?  Will you remove Mr. Ching from the negotiations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- The answer to that question, Mr. 

Speaker, is a simple and clear no.  And I want to refer to the 

letter of Mr. Gordon, dated October 14, 1986, as another reason 

why I say no.  In that letter to the premier, the former premier, 

Mr. Gordon writes as 

follows, quote: 

 

 Throughout the negotiations over the past two and one half 

years, I have been witness to numerous demands presented 

by Federated which I believe to be unreasonable and 

inconsistent with any standard of normal business 

arrangements and incompatible with sound commercial terms 

as between the owner (New Grade) and operator (CCRL).  

Some of these demands were subsequently modified or 

withdrawn.  Others remained on the table as of last Thursday 

(October 9, 1986), including several which I believe to have 

substantial potential negative effects on the economic 

viability of the project. 

 

Now what Mr. Gordon was saying at that time was that the 

Government of Saskatchewan of the day ought not to have 

succumbed to the repeated requests and the personal attacks of 

FCL and the members opposite, as they're continuing today, 

with respect to negotiations and the substance of the deal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that government gave in every step of the way.  

We intend to support and protect the interests of the taxpayers 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Premier, Mr. Ching is still bitter about being removed from 

control of the Saskatoon Co-op by Federated . . . by your 

government.  Mr. Ching is still bitter about the 1986 election 

and the fact that Federated Co-ops ever did a deal with the 

former administration in the first place. 

 

And that's just not us saying that, Mr. Premier.  Ask the 

minister of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation).  On Friday 

he heard Harold Crossman, the president of the Stoughton 

Co-op and a well-known member of your party, say Don Ching 

is impossible to negotiate with. 

 

Mr. Premier, if you're really interested in negotiating a 

settlement, why don't you remove that obstacle?  Or is your 

political agenda getting in the way of this?  Mr. Premier, will 

you do the right thing and remove Mr. Ching from the 

negotiations so that meaningful discussions can take place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the right thing to do is 

something that the opposition parties, both Liberal and 

Conservative, have failed to do in this debate so far, and that is 

to stand up for the taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The hon. member prefaces his question on Mr. Ching being a 

member of the Saskatoon Co-op, based on a fabricated story 

which I saw in the Leader-Post on Saturday.  I want to tell you, 

Mr. Ching joined the Saskatoon Co-op board of directors long 

after that dispute had already come to a successful conclusion.  

Those are the facts of the circumstances. 

 

But it's a story that's propagated by one or two of the 

  



2044 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1993 

FCL senior management, and which you have picked up, and 

the two of you being in bed together on this particular issue, 

continue to pursue a personal attack which you know, sir, to be 

absolutely false. 

 

I say to you, the answer to this problem is the principles of 

Estey.  We're prepared to accept Estey.  Are you prepared to 

accept the principles of Estey?  If not Estey, we're prepared to 

sell it for $1, lock, stock, and barrel.  Where do you stand? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Royal Bank Payroll Centre 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am 

pleased to provide the House with another example of a major 

Canadian corporation locating in our province when they could 

have chosen locations anywhere from Winnipeg to Victoria. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you may recall that a major goal of the 

Partnership for Renewal economic strategy we released last 

fall was to enhance the business environment in Saskatchewan 

to enable companies to locate here, to be globally competitive.  

This is being accomplished through a partnership using 

government, business, labour, communities, all working 

together, and by the kind of fiscal responsibility that creates 

confidence in the future of our province. 

 

We've already seen some of those results: Sears Canada 

announcing that they were locating a western Canada call 

centre in Regina, with a total employment of 900 people 

expected by 1995; $20 million in Atomic Energy of Canada 

Ltd. with the province, announced December 21, '92, bringing 

140 high quality research and development jobs to Saskatoon.  

Recently Price Club announced its facility and is currently 

under construction in Regina with more than 100 workers 

working on-site and 150 full- and part-time employees required 

when the store is operating. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on Saturday I announced and represented, along 

with the Plant Genetic Systems (Can.) in Saskatoon, the 

opening of their facility in the city of Saskatoon.  PGS, as it is 

usually known, is a Belgian establishment, widely considered 

to be one of the world's leading agricultural plant 

biotechnology companies and has selected Saskatoon as its 

location for its North American research and development 

headquarters. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this morning the Royal Bank announced it will 

establish its western Canada telephone payroll centre here in 

Regina.  This new centre will be one of only three in Canada; 

the other two being in Toronto and Montreal, Mr. Speaker.  

And this will service clients from Thunder Bay to Vancouver 

Island.  The company will be adding this important facility to 

its processing centre located here in Regina, already a 

state-of-art facility employing about 200 people.  The 

additional new 60 full- and part-time positions are expected to 

be in place by the end of 1994, will be a welcome addition to 

our community and to our province. 

 

And they made their choice because locating here is a sound 

business decision, made more sound because of the 

government's policy to create a positive, competitive business 

atmosphere.  Once again, one of the deciding factors was 

SaskTel communications expertise and our well-established 

advanced technology in that industry. 

 

The Royal Bank's western Canadian telephone payroll centre 

will result in significant spin-offs for Saskatchewan companies 

involved in computer systems and land specialists for 

installation and servicing office equipment and computer 

capabilities required for the centre. 

 

The Royal Bank demonstrates the initiative and the 

entrepreneurial spirit that has helped build Saskatchewan's 

private business sector into a strong productive element in our 

provincial market-place.  The business sector is a powerful 

force in creating jobs and we are doing whatever we can to 

assist in this area. 

 

Most of Saskatchewan's economic growth comes from small 

and medium-sized business.  This sector and the cooperatives 

are in many ways, the backbone of our economy and they offer 

tremendous potential for growth.  The Royal Bank will give 

these businesses the opportunity to benefit as a result of this 

announcement today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in 

congratulating the Royal Bank on their decision to locate this 

centre here in our province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we would 

join with the government in welcoming the Royal Bank to their 

expansion into Saskatchewan with this new undertaking.  The 

Royal Bank has a long-standing business association in this 

province. 

 

One of the largest lenders for example, in the agricultural sector 

is the Royal Bank.  They have proven to be an excellent 

corporate citizen in the past and we expect that to continue well 

into the future.  Saskatchewan welcomes the new jobs and 

investment and we would join with the minister in welcoming 

them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1445) 

 

The Speaker: -- Does the member from Saskatoon Greystone 

have leave to make her reply? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I too wish to join with all the 

  



May 31, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2045 

colleagues in the House in congratulating the Royal Bank in 

bringing their western Canadian telephone payroll centre to 

Saskatchewan.  We shouldn't . . . in fact we couldn't be more 

delighted than to have some 200-and-plus people have the 

opportunity for employment.  That is just a small number in 

comparison to the 44,000 people in Saskatchewan who do need 

employment. 

 

So we have to commend the Royal Bank and as well 

acknowledge, again, that SaskTel really is a leader in 

telecommunications.  And I was very fortunate just recently to 

hear some of the expertise that they had taken to Britain. 

 

So we're very, very pleased, and the Liberal Party joins with 

the official opposition in congratulating the government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 90 -- An Act to protect the financial viability of 

NewGrade Energy Inc. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

move that An Act to protect the financial viability of 

NewGrade Energy Inc. be now introduced and read for the first 

time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 2:47 p.m. until 2:57 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Romanow Lorje 

Van Mulligen Lyons 

Thompson Lautermilch 

Wiens Murray 

Simard Trew 

Tchorzewski Serby 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Shillington Sonntag 

Koskie Flavel 

Solomon Scott 

Goulet McPherson 

Atkinson Wormsbecker 

Kowalsky Crofford 

Carson Stanger 

Mitchell Knezacek 

Penner Harper 

Cunningham Keeping 

Upshall Carlson 

Hagel Renaud 

Bradley Langford 

Koenker  

-- 41 

Nays 

 

Swenson Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

Boyd Haverstock t 

-- 8 

 

The Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 

 

At 3:01 p.m. Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 

to the following Bills: 

 

Bill No. 82 -- An Act to amend The Change of Name Act 

Bill No. 84 -- An Act to amend The Litter Control Act 

Bill No. 81 -- An Act to amend The Alcohol Control Act and 

to make certain Consequential amendments to 

certain Acts as a result of the enactment of this 

Act 

Bill No. 41 -- An Act respecting the Financial 

Administration of the Government of 

Saskatchewan 

Bill No. 74 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Farm 

Security Act 

Bill No. 73 -- An Act to amend The Crop Insurance Act 

Bill No. 20 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Superannuation Act 

Bill No. 80 -- An Act to amend The Tobacco Tax Act and to 

make certain Consequential Amendments 

resulting from the enactment of this Act 

Bill No. 63 -- An Act to amend The Fuel Tax Act, 1987 

Bill No. 64 -- An Act to amend The Education and Health 

Tax Act 

 

Her Honour: -- In Her Majesty's name I assent to these Bills. 

 

Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 3:03 p.m. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on Point of Privilege 

 

The Speaker: -- Before orders of the day, I wish to inform 

members of my decision on the privilege motion asked by the 

member of . . . or raised by the member . . . Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

On Friday, May 28, 1993, the Leader of the Opposition raised a 

question of privilege concerning the release to the media of a 

Bill concerning NewGrade Energy Inc. before it was 

introduced in this Assembly.  I heard the advice of members 

from both sides of the House about the circumstances of its 

release and the appropriateness of such action. 

 

From the commentary of members on this issue, I think the 

Assembly is aware that the grievance of the Leader of the 

Opposition is one that has been raised each time the usual 

courtesies to the Assembly are not maintained in this respect.  

While neither the rules nor the precedents require that Bills 

must be kept confidential until introduced in the Assembly, it is 

not 

  



2046 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1993 

customary for a Bill to be distributed to the public before it is 

introduced in this Assembly. 

 

Notwithstanding that custom, at no time has the advance 

release of a Bill been found to be breach . . . or found to breach 

any privilege.  I refer members to rulings of the Chair dated 

December 4, 1975, June 2, 1988, and April 22, 1991. 

 

Therefore, I must rule that the Leader of the Opposition does 

not have a point of privilege, although he does have a 

legitimate grievance. 

 

Before ending this matter I do want to point out that in a ruling 

of March 22, 1967, the Speaker commented on the 

parliamentary principle that members of the Assembly should 

be advised of new policies before the public generally. 

 

In future, I ask that ministers consider this principle carefully 

so that this Assembly does not further develop what is an 

undesirable practice. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 38 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 38 -- An Act to 

amend The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I want 

to speak briefly on this Bill, An Act to amend The 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Code.  And one of the reasons, 

Mr. Speaker, that I will be brief today is because I don't think 

this Bill can be fixed by any amendments, I don't think it can be 

made right, and I don't think it should have been proposed in 

the manner in which it has been proposed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, going by the letters and the phone calls that I've 

been getting, lets me, Mr. Speaker, know that my constituents 

feel the same as I do about this Bill.  Mr. Speaker, my 

constituents feel the same way about this legislation as I do and 

I would like to point out to the minister some of the concerns 

that they have when they write letters to me. 

 

The constituents I talk to, Mr. Speaker, are concerned that 

whether the minister in good faith or not feels that he has a Bill 

that will only look after the concerns of the homosexuals and 

lesbians in jobs and housing, they don't believe it can be done 

with this Bill.  They don't trust the minister any more. 

 

They keep referring back to the GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) situation where you unilaterally broke a contract with 

. . . that people believed was a fair and legal contract.  Mr. 

Minister, they don't trust 

you any more.  I'm sorry to say that but that is what's happening 

in the letters and phone calls that I'm getting.  They know how I 

feel about this Bill. 

 

I don't feel that we, with amendments, could even help you fix 

this Bill.  There is no way amendments can make this Bill right.  

However, Mr. Speaker, I do feel I should speak out about this 

Bill even though I think it's a bad Bill and it cannot be fixed.  I 

don't think we will get any cooperation from the other side of 

the House in trying to make this into a Bill that is workable. 

 

This Bill was not really needed in the first place in my opinion.  

From what I can find out and from the legal opinions that we 

get is that everyone is equally covered under the constitution 

and the Bill of Rights.  The only reason that this Bill would be 

desirable is to give someone rights that others don't have, and I 

don't agree with that.  I am fully prepared and willing to see 

that every person living in Saskatchewan and indeed Canada 

has equal rights.  And I am of the opinion that they have that. 

 

Now whether there are people out there that do discriminate 

against certain people in society does not mean that the 

protection is not there.  Mr. Speaker, we have, by law, lots of 

protection in many ways that people will break the law even 

though the law is there. 

 

So if someone was to argue with me that people do 

discriminate against homosexuals and lesbians, I wouldn't 

argue the point.  But I don't think this Bill fixes it.  I believe all 

that we have to do is encourage people to live by the 

constitution and by the Bill of Rights and there will be no 

discrimination.  You cannot legislate morality. 

 

I don't believe this Bill should have been presented in this 

manner in the first place.  If the Bill had been presented and 

just zeroed in on the two subjects that the minister talks about 

and made it completely clear in a manner that lay people could 

understand, it might have been all right. 

 

I don't think this Bill does what the minister thinks it will do.  If 

the minister can stand in his place and unequivocally guarantee 

that if this Bill went to the Supreme Court of Canada it would 

stand up . . . I don't think you can do that.  Legislation that's 

made on the floor of this House is not necessarily . . . will not 

necessarily stand up in court every time. 

 

And I think the minister knows that.  And that is the fear that I 

feel coming from my constituents.  Mr. Speaker, there are 

people out there that suggest to me that if this Bill . . . There's 

only two reasons that this Bill could be put forward. 

 

And in fairness to the minister, there are some who say it's just 

a bad Bill; that he made a bad Bill, very badly flawed.  There 

are those that tell me that they are trying to do something under 

the table that they don't want to do above-board.  That is the 

things that I'm hearing.  And I leave that up to each and every 

one of you to make up your own decision as to whether . . . 

which one of those is right -- one or the other. 

  



May 31, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2047 

I sincerely believe it's a bad piece of legislation.  I believe it 

can . . . and I believe that the minister could bring a piece of 

legislation that would be much better than this one, would 

cover off what he tells us he's trying to do in a manner that all 

people could understand and would stand up in a court of law.  

And that is to just address the two subjects that's in there. 

 

We already saw in Ontario where a gay couple have adopted a 

child.  I heard today that the commissioner for the Human 

Rights says that that law supersedes all other laws, that it is 

paramount.  Mr. Speaker, it makes us very nervous. 

 

The very moment that this Bill was presented in this House, the 

controversy started and it was loud and it was clear.  People 

were immediately concerned about this Bill.  Mr. Speaker, the 

petitions that are coming in, names, phone calls, letters . . . and 

these are coming from all walks of life.  We have people who 

identify themselves as being supporters of the government but 

not supporters of this Bill. 

 

So it would be not fair to suggest that the opposition are only 

doing this . . . are only talking against this Bill for political 

reasons.  That simply is not the case.  People are genuinely 

concerned about this Bill, Mr. Speaker, and even on the 

weekend they're continuing to be concerned about it; there is no 

let-up in the concern. 

 

And I'm sure the minister is getting letters and phone calls and 

petitions and stuff.  And it would seem to me that the first thing 

he would do is to either withdraw this Bill, or at the very least, 

withhold the Bill until he can satisfy those people who are very, 

very concerned about where we're going with this Bill.  They 

need to be sure, they need to be absolutely sure, sir, that what 

you say you're doing is all that this Bill can or will do. 

 

And you can't do that; you cannot guarantee that.  You cannot 

guarantee, sir, that the legislation that you're putting forward 

will stand up before the Human Rights Code or before a 

Supreme Court of Canada challenge; you can't give that 

assurance.  People want that assurance, Mr. Speaker.  They 

want the assurance that this legislation is not going to allow 

homosexual couples to adopt children in Saskatchewan, and 

they want the legislation to say they will not enforce education 

programs in our schools . . . 

 

(1515) 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I'll guarantee that. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- The minister says he guarantees that with an 

absolute, unequivocal guarantee.  Unbelievable.  He nods his 

head, Mr. Speaker.  And I just heard today on the radio coming 

in that the Human Rights Commission supersedes all law.  And 

you can stand here and tell us that?  Mr. Minister, they don't 

trust you any more. 

 

In other words, Mr. Speaker, nothing . . . If he can say that 

nothing in this Bill will give gay and lesbians any more rights 

than anyone else. 

It's unbelievable.  In this Bill a person with one suite to rent can 

deny, on the basis of the Bill, can deny a homosexual or a 

lesbian a room. But if you have more than that, you can't deny 

that. 

 

Well in the first instance that's got to be discrimination.  So 

how are you taking away discrimination when you say on one 

hand, you can rent to this person, and if you got three rooms or 

more, you can't refuse them.  It's a bad Bill. 

 

And these are the elements that people are concerned about.  

These are the things that people think will be enforced by this 

legislation.  They don't trust the Department of Justice any 

more.  They don't trust the minister any more after what you've 

done to GRIP and what is in the . . . right now you're doing to 

the upgrader Bill.  How can you expect people to trust you any 

more?  They just will not trust you. 

 

I know that the minister has assured the people that this will not 

be of the fact.  But his word will not hold up in a court of law.  

Court decisions, Mr. Minister, are not made on the floor of the 

Assembly.  They're made in the court-house.  And there is no 

way that you can give an absolute assurance that some lawyer 

will not read your Bill in a different manner than what you 

profess to be putting it forward.  And I know the minister 

knows that, and that's what bothers people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if this Bill will ensure that homosexuals will not 

be discriminated against in regard to employment and housing, 

then the Bill should say so.  And that's all it should have to say.  

That's all it should have to say -- those two things. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, the minister, this legislation, and this 

House is on thin ice with this Bill.  How can you say to a 

person with one room, I won't rent to you, and someone with 

three rooms you say, I can rent to you. If that isn't 

discrimination, I don't know what it is.  And that's how I feel 

about it, Mr. Minister, and I think it can be construed as such. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like the minister to amend this Bill before 

us today, if he can find the amendments that will make this Bill 

do what he says it will do, or withdraw it.  Or at least will you 

withhold it until it can be brought forward in another form that 

all people can support -- not only us, but the homosexuals and 

lesbians as well.  They should be able to support this Bill 

without fear or favour. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm not sure that this Bill can be salvaged even 

with the amendments, but I think the minister should attempt to 

make these additions.  My constituents, those that speak to me 

about this Bill, are totally, firmly and totally, against this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said, I will be very brief about this.  I have no 

intention of trying to convince the minister or any of the other 

people on that side of the House.  I believe you have got your 

mind closed, but, Mr. Speaker, I really and truly would like the 

minister to take another look at this Bill. 

  



2048 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1993 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- I'm very pleased to be able to rise and speak in 

favour of Bill 38.  And I have been sitting in this House 

throughout this spring session listening in amazement to the 

debate that has gone on about this Bill.  It is amazing how 

much misinformation has been perpetuated or how much 

debate there has been all over two words and a comma.  It just 

amazes me that we should have this kind of visible and audible 

demonstration of the fact that there really is discrimination 

against gay people in this province. 

 

The kinds of performances turned in by the members of the 

opposition, I think, clearly demonstrate the need for 

introducing this Bill.  So in that sense I would like to thank the 

opposition for clearly demonstrating that there is discrimination 

against homosexual people in this society. 

 

I would point out that at least the Conservative opposition to 

this Bill is very clear.  It seems to be based on a 

misunderstanding of the scope and the nature of the Bill.  It 

seems to be based on opposition to homosexual behaviour and 

to a lack of understanding of what homosexuality is and isn't 

and what it's caused by and not caused by. 

 

But I cannot understand the opposition by the member from 

Greystone, the Liberal opposition.  It seems to me I would best 

sum up as being self-serving, inconsistent, and 

incomprehensible.  We have a member who flip-flops from one 

month to the next with respect to what her position is on Bill 

38; who seems to be saying that what we need to do is have 

government by polls.  That if we get enough people in polling 

results opposing something, therefore it must axiomatically be 

bad. 

 

I cannot understand just exactly what the member from 

Saskatoon Greystone would want us to believe.  She says, in 

June 15, 1992 in the Leader-Post, that to prohibit 

discrimination on the basis of homosexuality is an important 

step towards a more tolerant society.  She says, we can't simply 

respect those people who agree with us.  She also says, June 17, 

1992, that she knows some gay couples who would make 

excellent parents and that she's appalled that some people are 

left out in society, and she appeals to them to join the Liberal 

Party. 

 

And then she gets up in the House, May 18, 1993, and says, the 

majority of my constituents do not want this Bill to include the 

rights for homosexuals to adopt children when she knows quite 

clearly that isn't even in the Bill.  But what she is doing is 

flip-flopping on the issue, saying that there's no limit on what 

program the Human Rights Commission might introduce, that 

there is every reason to believe that this Bill could lead 

to additional rights and so forth. 

 

It is very difficult to figure out just exactly what she's saying 

and what she's wanting.  Is she opposed to discrimination or 

not?  She says that she has personally experienced 

discrimination and by golly folks, it really hurts; it's hard.  But 

on the other hand we should allow a situation to continue 

whereby we can discriminate against some people because the 

people in her constituency, on the basis of a poll, have decided 

that this discrimination is all right.  It's not fair to discriminate 

against someone who might have to go into a restaurant in a 

wheelchair, but it certainly is fair to discriminate against 

someone who happens to have a sexual orientation that is not 

the dominant one in this society. 

 

I would ask the member from Saskatoon Greystone whether or 

not there are any principles she believes in, other than the 

principle of following slavishly the results of a poll.  She's 

called herself the moral opposition to the government, and now 

when she's faced with having to make a real decision that 

affects real people's lives, for the first time she's hiding behind 

the legal smokescreen so thick that not even Solomon could see 

through it. 

 

You know, it does amaze me.  I do have to say the 

Conservative opposition at least on this has been clear and 

consistent.  I can tell where you're coming from.  I do not not 

agree with it, but at least it is consistent and I can respect your 

opposition. 

 

But I cannot respect the opposition that flip-flops and says one 

thing to the media and one thing to a group of people when 

she's trying to get them to join her party, and then another thing 

when she's trying to appeal to some nameless people in a poll. 

 

She says she wants equality, but not too much and only of the 

right kind.  She says she wants to do the right thing, but only if 

enough people agree with her.  She says she wants progress, 

but only if we can guarantee that nothing will change.  She says 

she wants access to information, but only if we can guarantee 

that it's going to be the right kind of information.  In essence 

what she is saying is that she wants to continue the rule of fear 

that gay people have lived under for so many years in this 

province. 

 

In 1956 Dag Hammarskjld said: freedom from fear could be 

said to sum up the whole philosophy of human rights.  And that 

basically is what Bill 38 will do, is give gay people an avenue 

for complaint when they are feeling that fear from 

discrimination.  They will be able to have some place they can 

go and say, excuse me, but I am fearful that I am being 

discriminated against. 

 

This Bill, I think, is very clear.  It's very straightforward.  It is 

not the kind of disaster and catastrophe that members of the 

opposition would have us believe.  Very clearly the Bill does 

three things and three things only:  it prohibits unwarranted and 

unjust discrimination and intolerance for people on the basis of 

their family status, their receipt of public assistance, 

  



May 31, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2049 

or sexual orientation. 

 

And what is it going to do?  It's going to prevent discrimination 

with respect to housing, employment, and public services.  

That's all, full stop, end of the piece.  It is not -- as members of 

the opposition would have us believe - 

_ an attack on family values. 

 

And quite frankly, I would like to know what kind of family 

values we are promoting here.  Are we saying that a great 

family value that we want to have in this society is unjust and 

unwarranted discrimination?  Surely what the family is all 

about is love and compassion and tolerance, and that's the kind 

of family value that we should be passing on to our children.  

And love and compassion and tolerance do not simply stop 

with heterosexual people. 

 

The Bill does not condone homosexuality.  That is a scare 

tactic that is simply inappropriate for members of the 

legislature to be promulgating.  It does not confer special rights 

on gay people.  It merely prohibits discrimination, as I have 

said, with respect to housing, employment, and receipt of 

public services. 

 

Gay people are not already protected, as some members of the 

opposition would have us believe, by the Bill of Rights.  This 

Bill -- Bill 38 -- clearly is needed to provide a very clear, very 

straightforward statement of the fact that as a society we will 

not tolerate unjust and unwarranted discrimination for people. 

 

And finally it is not, as members of the opposition would have 

us believe, a compulsion that people who have deeply held 

religious convictions that homosexuality is wrong or a sin, it is 

not a compulsion that they will then have to hire people who 

are homosexual to be teachers in their fundamental Christian 

schools. 

 

(1530) 

 

Christian schools are not compelled to hire homosexuals.  The 

existing provisions in the Human Rights Code already, as 

members of the opposition clearly know, provide that 

organizations of a particular creed are not compelled to hire 

people who do not endorse this creed. 

 

We see this already with separate schools.  They do not have to 

hire people who are not Catholic or people who are divorced or 

people who are living common law.  The same thing applies for 

fundamentalist Christian schools.  If disapproval of 

homosexuality is part of the fundamental Christian school 

creed, they would not have to hire homosexual teachers in their 

schools. 

 

You know, with the exception of four jurisdictions and soon 

only to be three jurisdictions in the whole of the Dominion of 

Canada, all other provinces have passed legislation to prohibit 

the kind of discrimination that we're talking about with respect 

to gay people.  The sky hasn't fallen in in the rest of Canada 

and it will not fall in in Saskatchewan when we finally pass Bill 

38. 

Now I've received a lot of letters on this.  A lot of the letters are 

either totally misinformed or are about a bunch of scare tactics 

or they're genuinely concerned in seeking answers.  I have also 

received though, letters from people who are homosexual who 

are saying to me, it is time that we got on with this very fair 

and very reasonable Bill, and that we pass it so that people who 

are homosexual do not have to live in fear in our society. 

 

I want to quote very briefly from one of the letters that I 

received.  This gentleman writes me: 

 

 There has been a lot of talk about a homosexual agenda.  The 

only items (he says) that he considers that the gay 

community has come to a consensus as even being on the 

so-called homosexual agenda are the need for inclusion in 

the Human Rights Code and the desire for acceptance. 

 

 It is very difficult (he writes) for gays to discuss their lives 

with their friends, families, and co-workers when revealing 

their sexual orientation can mean losing your job.  Even 

with inclusion in the code, it is not easy for gays to live 

openly.  Human rights legislation does not protect workers 

from hatred or glass ceilings. 

 

 Even gays and lesbians (he writes) are not in consensus 

about the appropriateness of spousal benefits, marriage, or 

adoption.  Gays and lesbians are quite capable of having 

children without inclusion in the Human Rights Code.  

Consensus on anything is very difficult to achieve in a 

group as diverse as the gay community. 

 

 With Christian gays, Jewish gays, first nation gays, gays of 

colour, gay athletes, gay academics, gay activists, and those 

who choose not to reveal their sexual orientation, the gay 

community is indeed diverse.  This diversity is what defines 

a minority.  Gays and lesbians must be included in the 

Human Rights Code in the same manner as any minority 

group subject to discrimination and (he concludes) through 

the same legislation.  They must be included through the 

same legislation that protects other groups, otherwise the 

signal goes out that hatred against gays is still acceptable. 

 

And what we will be doing with Bill 38 is sending out a very 

clear, very strong signal that hatred against gays is no longer 

acceptable in this province. 

 

Unlike other groups -- women, some first nations people, 

people of colour, for instance, in which one's identity is very 

clear for the whole world to see.  And so it's very clear when 

you can . . . and you can tell when there's discrimination and so 

forth. 

 

Most gay men and most lesbian women have the  

  



2050 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1993 

option to remain invisible.  I certainly can't fault people for 

choosing that path.  But I do have to say that the price of 

always having to conceal your identity can be very high.  It 

leads people to doubt their self-worth, to doubt their dignity.  It 

encourages people to remain isolated from others and detached 

from their colleagues, from their peers, and from their families.  

Because if they get too close to people, then they might be 

exposed and people will find out their secret -- that they are 

closeted, that they are gay. 

 

And so therefore what happens is you tend to see habitual 

patterns developing of mistrust and defensiveness.  Because 

anyone potentially could cause a person's downfall, could cause 

them to be put in a position where they might potentially be 

fired from their job or told that they have to leave their 

apartment. 

 

Speaking about gay oppression involves not only addressing 

injustice in the abstract, but it also means acknowledging the 

emotional toll that it leaves on individuals and families and the 

society of which they're a part. 

 

I have to ask myself, as I listen in the House and listen to the 

opposition to Bill 38, just exactly why might people be 

opposing this Bill.  Because to me it seems to be something 

that just really strikes at the heart of common sense and 

tolerance and compassion.  I cannot see why we would have 

such a great amount of opposition to what basically is a very 

forward-looking, progressive Bill that will legislate our desire 

to move towards a non-discriminatory society. 

 

And so I sat down the other day and I wrote out some of the 

reasons why I thought people might be opposed to Bill 38.  

And one of them is I think the very fact that as human beings 

we have an ambiguous sexual nature.  And I think that a lot of 

people are uncomfortable with that ambiguity in our sexual 

nature. 

 

Many of us know very clearly that we are heterosexual in 

nature.  Some people have some questions about their own 

sexual orientation.  And rather than deal with those questions 

straightforwardly, they would prefer to continue to deny and 

repress.  I think that's very sad that we have the kind of society 

that will not allow people to ask those very basic questions 

about their sexual nature without having at the same time to 

feel a sense of hatred and revulsion about what might be some 

very basic parts of themselves. 

 

I think also part of the opposition to Bill 38 might be -- and 

here I speak as a person who is trained as a clinical 

psychologist -- it seems to me that we have a confusion of the 

terms sexual pathology and sexual orientation. 

 

Now very clearly there are certain pathological expressions of 

sex that any just and reasonable society would clearly oppose.  

I am talking here of things like pedophilia.  That is clearly an 

unwarranted, totally inappropriate, improper expression of 

one's sexuality. 

 It is criminal; indeed it is criminal. 

 

That though, it seems to me, is totally different from sexual 

orientation which is the innate natural expression of our sexual 

behaviour towards another person.  Some of us tend to be 

attracted as adults to adults of the opposite sex.  Others of us as 

adults are attracted to adults of the same sex.  That does not 

mean that we are pathological; it means we have a different 

orientation from the dominant society. 

 

And indeed I think that our thinking has come a fair distance on 

this.  We used to talk about sexual lifestyle rather than sexual 

orientation, as if it were something that we chose.  I think we 

are now starting to recognize more and more clearly that our 

orientation is a part of our basic, innate nature. 

 

Another part of the reason for opposing Bill 38, I would 

suggest, might have to do with some broader notions of power 

and control.  If we can keep certain people quiet, if we can keep 

them oppressed, then we can keep everybody else worried 

about whether or not they might at some point be subject to that 

same kind of oppression.  And it keeps the dominant society 

clicking along the way many people want to see it click along. 

 

Personally, as a social democrat, I want to see us create a 

society where everyone can share power equally and where we 

do not have dominant groups controlling and oppressing other 

people. 

 

Another part of the reason that people might oppose Bill 38 is 

probably very deep religious beliefs, which I certainly can 

respect; but I think that going along with some of those deep 

religious beliefs is a very strict interpretation of the Scriptures 

that I would suggest is only conveniently strictly interpreted 

when it has to do with homosexuals and is not so conveniently 

interpreted when it has to do with warmongering, for instance.  

It seems to me that the larger Christian values of tolerance and 

love and charity should take precedence over very strict 

interpretations of one or two isolated verses out of the 

Scriptures. 

 

Jonathan Swift in the 17th century said: 

 

 We have just enough religion to make us hate, but not 

enough to make us love one another. 

 

And there is a quote, a passage in the Bible that says, what you 

do unto these, the least of my brethren, ye do unto me.  And it 

seems to me that that is the scripture that Christian people 

ought to be hanging on to and quoting rather than some of the 

more arcane verses that they picked out of the Bible. 

 

Respect is what people are asking for -- compassion and 

respect -- and those I would suggest are the underpinning 

values of the world's major religion and those are the values 

that we ought to be promoting when we're promoting so-called 

Christian values or Muslim or Jewish or Hindu values. 

 

Another part of the reason that people might be 

  



May 31, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2051 

opposed to Bill 38 is straightforward homophobia.  Well I have 

to tell you, folks, homosexuality -- according to all the 

literature I've read -- isn't contagious.  You don't pick it up off a 

toilet seat.  It's not something you're going to catch.  It's not 

something you're going to learn.  So I really cannot understand 

why people feel this overwhelming need to be so concerned 

and so afraid of homosexual people. 

 

Homosexuality is not a learned behaviour.  And I want to 

emphasize that.  I want to talk a bit about my personal 

experience as a psychologist, as a therapist, who has seen many 

people coming to me saying, I am concerned about my sexual 

orientation.  Can you give me therapy to therapize me out of it? 

 

And when I first started as a psychologist, I was quite 

optimistic that, oh well if somebody comes and presents with a 

problem and we mutually agree that it's a problem, we can 

work on it and find some solution to it.  Well quite frankly, 

trying to therapize people out of their sexual orientation is a 

fool's game.  And therapists all over Canada, United States, and 

Europe will agree that it is not the sort of condition, a 

pathological condition, that one can train people or therapize 

people into a different response with . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . That's correct. 

 

As a matter of fact in 1973, the American Psychiatric 

Association removed homosexuality from the DSM, the 

diagnostic and statistical manual.  That was the end of 

homosexuality's official status as a disease, because it is not a 

disease.  It is an innate orientation. 

 

I think of some of the people that I have worked with, that I 

have met over the years, people who are gay, people who have 

struggled with the oppression and discrimination that being gay 

unfortunately almost inevitably leads to.  I think of a young 

man named Ross, came from a small town in Saskatchewan 

and went to San Francisco when he realized that he was gay 

and he thought that his small town could not accept his sexual 

orientation. 

 

He moved to San Francisco just at the height of the times when 

people were being very, supposedly, liberated in their sexual 

behaviour.  And this young man unfortunately contracted the 

AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome) virus.  He is no 

longer alive.  But he did come home to his small town. 

 

(1545) 

 

And it was interesting the reaction of the people in the small 

town.  They were concerned that he was ill.  They were not 

concerned that he was gay.  And I learned a lot about human 

beings at that point when I realized that a town can pull 

together when someone is facing a personal tragedy. And they 

do not have to hate people.  They do not have to discriminate 

against gays.  Their overriding concern was that this young 

man was ill.  That was the concern -- not that he was gay. 

 

I think of another friend of mine who is very outrageous, funny.  

He's the kind of person that one would almost say fits almost 

all the stereotypes of 

outrageous behaviour.  The problem that he has though is that 

he is continuously feeling like he is going to be rejected 

because he is gay, and so he drinks an awful lot.  And he's 

always running away from himself because he does not want to 

have to deal with some of the basic issues that confront him on 

an almost a daily basis as a gay man in our society. 

 

Another good friend of mine, a person with the same profession 

as me, unfortunately was picked up one night by a couple of 

men and he was taken out into a field and he was beaten there.  

The reason he was beaten was because he was gay and he'd 

been downtown cruising, and he was picked up by a couple of 

guys who thought it would be really fun to bash him.  Well 

they bashed him all right and they left him tied up, hog-tied, in 

a field in late winter.  He had been almost stripped naked.  And 

so he was left in that field and he died from exposure. 

 

Now I don't think that that's the kind of thing that we want to 

see happen to people in Saskatchewan.  That kind of gay 

bashing, any kind of gay bashing, is absolutely unacceptable.  

And if we can send out through Bill 38 a strong and clear signal 

that it is unacceptable, I think we will have moved a long 

distance towards making a more tolerant and just and fair 

society for all people and most particularly for gay people. 

 

The crux of the issue as I looked at why people might oppose 

Bill 38 seemed to me to be that many people genuinely believe 

that people choose to be gay, that it is a choice behaviour rather 

than an innate behaviour.  And you know, the very notion that 

one would choose to be gay is so ludicrous that I can almost not 

even give it any credence.  Why would anyone choose to be the 

object of hatred and choose to be oppressed the way gay people 

are in our society? 

 

Homosexuality is not a personal choice.  It's not chosen and it 

certainly is not changeable.  For the past hundred years we 

have seem many, many shameful attempts to treat 

homosexuals, assuming that homosexual orientation is not a 

biological thing.  We've seen lesbians who've been given 

hysterectomies, given estrogen injections, all in an attempt to 

change their sexual orientation.  We've seen gay men subject to 

transorbital lobotomies or electro-shock therapy -- again, all in 

an attempt to change their sexual orientation. 

 

But what we found, basically, is that people cannot be 

converted from homosexuality to heterosexuality by therapy.  

Psychiatry has consistently failed to show that homosexuality is 

a preference, a malleable thing subject to reversal. 

 

And I think that is an important thing for members of the 

opposition to be aware of when they say, of course we don't 

want to see discrimination, but these people choose to do this.  

It is important for you to understand that homosexuality is not a 

choice; it is an innate thing. 

 

We are now seeing more and more scientific 

  



2052 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1993 

evidence, and in the next 5 and 10 years, we will see much 

more.  This debate will be meaningless 10 years from now, I 

would suggest, because there will be a preponderance of 

scientific evidence that will clearly demonstrate that 

homosexuality is not a choice, it is an innate thing -- something 

that we are born with. 

 

We found in 1985 the start of many of the scientific studies that 

are clearly demonstrating this point.  Dr. Swaab found evidence 

of sexual dimorphisim in human brains.  In other words, he 

found just by looking at certain aspects of the brain that you 

can tell the difference between male and female brains. 

 

And then in 1990, he found that the suprachiasmatic nucleus is 

dimorphic, or different, according to sexual orientation rather 

than only according to sex.  It's twice as large in gay men as 

heterosexuals. 

 

Those findings have been replicated; there's been other studies 

of biochemistry that provide more data.  There is clearly an 

anatomical difference in certain parts of the brain between 

homosexuals and heterosexuals. 

 

Genetically, too, we're seeing more and more evidence coming 

in that demonstrates very clearly that homosexuality is not a 

choice; it's not a preference.  It is an innate orientation. 

 

There's a study done by Bailey and Pillard called, A Genetic 

Study of Male Sexual Orientation, and what they did there was 

to compare 56 monozygotic, or identical twins, with 54 

fraternal twins, and 57 genetically unrelated, adopted brothers.  

Now if homosexuality is largely genetic in orientation, then the 

more closely related the people are, the greater should be the 

concordance of their sexual orientation. 

 

And indeed, that's what they found.  They found gay 

concordance of 11 per cent for adoptive brothers, people who 

aren't related genetically at all; 22 per cent for dizygotic or 

fraternal twins; and 52 per cent for identical twins.  This is very 

strong genetic evidence that homosexuality is an innate thing.  

Homosexuality is highly attributable to genetics.  Indeed there 

are some studies I've read that say it's up to 70 per cent 

attributable.  And these studies are not only dealing with 

homosexual men; there have also been studies of lesbian twins, 

and they have the same findings. 

 

So what we're seeing is that after five decades of psychiatric 

evidence, we've clearly demonstrated that homosexuality is 

immutable and non-pathological.  And we're seeing a growing 

body of evidence that implicates biology in the development of 

our basic sexual orientation. 

 

So we have to ask ourselves:  how can we justify 

discriminating against people on the basis of a characteristic 

that's so fundamental?  We do not allow discrimination on the 

basis of skin colour or on the basis of sex.  We certainly 

obviously should not allow discrimination on the basis of yet 

another characteristic that is so basic to human beings, that 

being our sexual orientation. 

 

And the answer is we cannot justify that discrimination.  We 

need to resolve the discrimination.  That is not going to come 

from scientific studies; that is only going to come from political 

initiatives such as Bill 38.  We need the political and social will 

to move to having a more just and compassionate and caring 

society that does not tolerate discrimination. 

 

It is now almost 50 years since the Holocaust in Nazi Germany.  

And many people, I think, when they go to ceremonies marking 

the Holocaust are very much aware that during the '40s -- 

during the '30s and '40s -- Jews in Germany were compelled to 

wear yellow stars so they would be easily identifiable.  What I 

think many people do not recognize or do not realize is that 

also during that same period of time, homosexuals were 

compelled to wear pink triangles so that they would be easily 

identifiable and could be picked up and shipped off to the same 

concentration camps that the Jews were sent to. 

 

The symbol that many organizations concerned about 

discrimination and oppression of gays use is the same pink 

triangle that homosexuals in Nazi Germany were compelled to 

wear. 

 

And I want to close off having reminded people of what I think 

the basic links are and the importance of understanding the 

heavy toll that homosexual people pay because of the 

discrimination that they suffer.  I'd like to close off with a quote 

by a gentleman who was very concerned in Nazi Germany 

about discrimination.  And he said -- and I think this should be 

our guideline for all of us as legislators: 

 

 In Germany they came first for the Communists, and I didn't 

speak up because I wasn't a Communist (said Martin 

Niemller).  Then they came for the Jews, and I didn't 

speak up because I wasn't a Jew.  Then they came for the 

trade unionists, and I didn't speak up because I wasn't a 

trade unionist.  Then they came for the Catholics, and I 

didn't speak up because I was a Protestant.  Then they came 

for me and by that time no one was left to speak up. 

 

That man isn't alive.  He didn't survive the Second World War. 

 

But hopefully with the passage of this Bill, and the creation of 

an attitude and of the necessity for a juster, more 

compassionate society, gay people in Saskatchewan will 

survive.  And we as a society will survive and will thrive, 

knowing that we have done the just and the proper thing in 

Saskatchewan in 1993. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, since 

being elected to the legislature here, I have received more calls 

and more letters on this issue than 

  



May 31, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2053 

any other issue, and I suspect than any other issue likely in the 

future as well. 

 

The people in my constituency have raised a whole host of 

concerns about this legislation.  And we are being told by the 

minister and by government members that the Bill is very, very 

closely defined and that the people that have those concerns 

throughout Saskatchewan need not worry about those concerns.  

And yet the concern still is there, Mr. Speaker, and the people 

of my constituency are and continue to be uncomfortable with 

the minister's assurances about this Bill. 

 

When you look at it, when you look at the content of the Bill, it 

seems relatively straightforward.  But yet, Mr. Speaker, upon 

closer examination people are feeling, have the distinct feeling, 

that there is concern about certain aspects of the Bill that they 

cannot agree with.  The government members continue to say 

that it is narrowly defined and therefore we shouldn't have any 

concern about it.  And the concern is not just based . . . a 

religious base or anything whatsoever.  It's based on a number 

of concerns about the issue itself of homosexuality and 

discrimination, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The previous speaker went into great lengths to talk about 

discrimination, Mr. Speaker.  And she went and used examples 

of how a former colleague of hers was beaten and left to freeze 

and how somehow or another anyone who is opposed to this 

legislation would condone that.  Mr. Speaker, no one -- no one 

-- in official opposition or hopefully the entire province of 

Saskatchewan would think that that type of action is acceptable 

in anyway whatsoever.  No one would think that, Mr. Speaker, 

and least of all freethinking people in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, discrimination is abhorrent.  The people of this 

province don't believe in discrimination.  They don't want 

discrimination.  They don't think that discrimination has any 

place in society whatsoever.  And this Bill, Mr. Speaker, speaks 

to discrimination, but it also speaks to the other side of 

discrimination.  Why then are you discriminating against 

people in this Bill that want to have same-sex adoptions if you 

are so concerned about discrimination?  Why then are you not 

concerned about people who would prefer this homosexuality 

to be taught as an alternate, acceptable lifestyle in schools?  

Why are you discriminating against them if you're so 

concerned about discrimination?  Why are you so concerned 

about the word discrimination and yet you are willing to 

discriminate against those types of things in society? 

 

(1600) 

 

If you are truly in favour of eliminating discrimination in this 

province, the Bill shouldn't have any restrictions on it.  That's 

what the previous member spoke.  And she was against 

discrimination in every way, shape, or form and yet she's 

willing to discriminate in certain areas because I suggest, Mr. 

Speaker, they feel that that's as far as this Bill can go at this 

time. 

Discrimination takes place, and we all realize it takes place in 

society.  We see discrimination based on skin colour, race, 

creed, all kinds of discrimination in society, and yet I think 

most people deep down realize that it's wrong.  They're 

opposed to it.  They wish it wasn't there but unfortunately it is, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The concern in my constituency is based on a few fundamental 

things.  One of it's religious based; there's no question about 

that.  I represent a constituency that has a very strong 

fundamental religious base.  There's more to it than that though.  

The opposition and concern from this Bill not only comes from 

religious circles in my constituency, it comes from honest, 

hard-working people all over the place.  Their concern is about 

same-sex adoptions.  Their concern is about same-sex 

marriages.  Their concern is about same-sex spousal benefits 

being extended to gay people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And yet with all of the assurances that the minister has given, 

those concerns still are there and they haven't gone away.  They 

haven't subsided one little bit since the minister has introduced 

this Bill and even previous to that.  If anything, I think the 

opposition to this legislation is increasing, Mr. Speaker.  And 

one has to wonder, Mr. Speaker, why the government is 

wanting to put forward this agenda at this time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We've asked . . . Our Leader of the Opposition has suggested 

that the people in this legislature should be allowed the 

opportunity for a free vote, Mr. Speaker.  And I think that that 

is an excellent suggestion on an issue of this type.  I think the 

people of our constituencies elected us for basically a couple of 

reasons.  And the most fundamental of those reasons is because 

they wanted someone in this legislature in Saskatchewan to 

represent them and represent their views. 

 

And I think free votes are becoming the type of way that 

governments and opposition parties can come to some sort of 

agreement, some sort of opportunity for people, members of 

this legislature, to stand in their place and voice the concerns of 

their constituents and not their party's line. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that that is one thing that a lot of 

people in Saskatchewan feel that is an important step in society 

these days.  I think they feel that that should be the overriding 

and fundamental issue, fundamental thing that should be done 

to reform the legislatures in Saskatchewan and right across this 

country, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government talks about discrimination.  The 

government talks about opposition to this Bill as if it is 

somehow based on some kind of base instinct that people have 

that are opposed to a homosexual's lifestyle, Mr. Speaker.  And 

we all realize that there's a significant portion of society that 

engages in homosexual style of life.  Mr. Speaker, we all 

realize that.  I don't think it's any big secret. 

 

I think the fact is, Mr. Speaker, recent surveys in the 

  



2054 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1993 

United States -- there was one in Time magazine not too long 

ago, less than a month, I believe it was, indicated the gay 

community makes up something in the order of 1 per cent of 

the population of any given community, Mr. Speaker.  And I 

think people recognize all over Saskatchewan that that is about 

probably where the numbers come in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in other provinces they've dealt with it in different 

ways.  Some have passed legislation; some have not passed 

legislation; some have gone the route of a plebiscite; some have 

gone the route of different ways to address this issue.  In 

Alberta recently the government decided, because of the fact 

that they didn't believe there was a great deal of support for 

amending legislation in that province, not to go ahead with it. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, if the government is so sure that this 

type of legislation is so important, why not ask the people of 

Saskatchewan.  There is a group in Saskatchewan right now 

that is trying to assemble enough names on petitions to force 

the government to go the plebiscite route and yet the 

government has said that they wouldn't do it.  They wouldn't 

abide by the results of that plebiscite even if it went against the 

government, Mr. Speaker.  And yet we all, I think, were elected 

feeling that we should try and represent the views of our 

constituents to the best of our ability, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The opposition is based on a number of concerns, as I've 

outlined, and the minister says those concerns are invalid.  And 

yet we see legislation in Ontario that pretty much parallels the 

legislation in Saskatchewan, pretty much parallels it.  And now 

recently there was an opportunity down in Ontario for a gay 

couple to adopt a young, young boy, I believe it was.  And that 

was seen as acceptable under that legislation. 

 

And the minister though stands in his place and says that that 

will not happen in Saskatchewan.  And yet, and yet how can 

that be, Mr. Speaker, when we see the Ontario legislation and 

the Saskatchewan legislation as almost parallel -- pretty well 

exactly the same in fact, Mr. Speaker.  And yet they say that 

those kinds of same-sex adoptions in Saskatchewan will never 

happen, that we have to believe that the minister is correct in 

his legal interpretation of this Bill.  We have to simply submit 

to his idea that he is correct on this issue, and all other legal 

opinion is invalid. 

 

And yet, Mr. Speaker, I don't think I can accept that.  I think 

that all people have to have their say on this.  I think there is a 

growing body of evidence to suggest that people in 

Saskatchewan don't believe that this legislation is necessary, 

that don't believe that there is . . . The types of things that the 

minister is saying cannot happen will indeed happen or could 

happen under this legislation, Mr. Speaker.  And therefore the 

people, I believe, are opposed to it for those very reasons, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice, I think tried to 

bring in -- largely I believe -- tried to bring in a piece of 

legislation that would deal with 

discrimination.  But I think in doing so he brought forward a 

piece of legislation that essentially opened the door to a number 

of concerns and has not, has not, Mr. Speaker, addressed those 

concerns adequately. 

 

The minister says that the concerns are not valid, and other 

legal opinion says they are valid.  Who are we to believe, Mr. 

Speaker? Who are the members of this legislature supposed to 

believe in all of this when we see differing legal opinions? 

 

I'm not sure, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill can be amended to 

adequately address the concerns that people have throughout 

this province and indeed in my constituency.  I think that as 

legislators we were called to the floor of this legislature to 

voice the concerns of our constituents and not the concern or 

the invalid reasons that the government has put forward for this 

legislation, Mr. Speaker.  I don't think the government wants to 

listen on this issue.  I think they have an agenda that they want 

to meet on this issue, Mr. Speaker.  One can only wonder what 

that complete agenda is, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think that there are so many significant concerns that people 

have raised about this legislation, that this legislation should be 

withdrawn, Mr. Speaker.  I think it should be taken back to the 

drafting table and try to address the concerns that people have 

put forward and come back to this legislature at a later date if 

those concerns can be adequately dealt with -- and I'm not sure 

they can, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, we're not in favour of 

discrimination.  The opposition feels that discrimination is 

wrong, the same as I believe people in all of society feel that 

discrimination is wrong.  But this Bill is also wrong, Mr. 

Speaker.  It doesn't address the concerns adequately.  It doesn't 

address, I believe, the homosexual community's concerns 

adequately. 

 

Mr. Minister, I believe this legislation should be withdrawn.  I 

think, Mr. Speaker, that there are other folks that would like an 

opportunity to speak to this at a future date, Mr. Speaker, and I 

would ask to adjourn debate on this Bill. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 88 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 88 -- An Act to 

amend The Provincial Court Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, in looking at this particular Bill, we have consulted 

with a fair number of people in the legal community and find 

that the particular piece of legislation is simply a long-term . . . 

it's an outgrowth of a long-term discussion that has been going 

on to put in the hands of the legal community and of judges' 

salaries . . . that in their own hands. 

 

And certainly I think it is good, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

  



May 31, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2055 

when this Assembly can put into the hands of various 

professional organizations in the province of Saskatchewan the 

rights and the responsibilities to do their particular job and 

endeavour in a fair and reasoned way. 

 

And certainly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, no one has to tell members 

of this Assembly that whenever one deals with remuneration 

and how you deal with it as far as yourself, that that is a very 

touchy subject as far as the public is concerned today. 

 

And I think that having provincial court judges take this issue 

on in a way that has to be reasoned, has to appear to be fair, and 

has to be in the best interests of taxpayers, is something that 

members of this Assembly should not, I think, condemn 

outright. 

 

And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am prepared to let this Bill 

move on to the next stage. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

(1615) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 53 -- An Act respecting Natural Resources 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'm joined here 

for consideration of this Bill by Bruce Smith, the director of 

policy and partnerships; David Beckwermert, the director of 

legislative services; Glen Rolles, the director of regional 

operations; and Bob Blackwell, the assistant deputy minister. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. 

Minister.  We meet again.  And today we're going to take a 

look at An Act respecting Natural Resources. 

 

Now I understand that in times past we had a perhaps more 

wide-ranging Act which was called The Renewable Resources, 

Recreation and Culture Act.  And I'm just wondering if you 

could explain to the committee what portions of that previous 

Act have been deleted, what areas are no longer covered by 

The Natural Resources Act, and perhaps where those portions 

have gone, where we would find recreation, where we would 

find the cultural components of that Act if we were to want to 

look for more information on those aspects of it. 

 

So perhaps what you could do to start off with is giving us the 

parameters of what this Act entails and where the previous 

portions of the old Act have gone. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, this Act, as the member 

opposite correctly points out, deals with all the amendments 

with respect to parks and natural resources. 

 

The other pieces have been shifted to reflect the 

change in responsibility that we effected through change in 

government organization at the last budget.  I don't have a 

detail-by-detail description for the member, but I could get that 

and make sure the member is apprised of the detailed 

reallocation of the other pieces of the original Act. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Yes, I guess one of the unfortunate things of 

government is that just as soon as you begin to think that you 

know and understand how the operation is working, then 

somebody comes along and for good and valid reasons many 

times, obviously, changes it and does the thing under their own 

best consideration. 

 

And I would appreciate if you could give me that.  I know I 

could find it perhaps elsewhere, but if that's within your 

capability, Mr. Minister, I would appreciate it if you would do 

that. 

 

One of the intentions and objectives of doing this 

rearrangement that you have undertaken in your department 

was, I imagine, so that you could come up with your own 

concept what management resources, management 

philosophies that you wanted to bring into natural resources.  

And that is in your second reading speech where you indicate 

that the new Act does incorporate new resource management 

philosophies. 

 

And because of my particular interest in our natural 

environment and so on, I would appreciate it if you could 

outline for me some of these new philosophies that you intend 

to incorporate under this new Act, and perhaps any new 

directions that your department will be undertaking in the 

implementation of these new philosophies.  Could you expound 

on that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the changes in spirit that 

have been introduced into the Act without requiring a great 

deal of rewriting are introducing the commitment to sustainable 

development that grew out of the round table that produced for 

the province a conservation strategy. 

 

But . . . (inaudible) . . . is also consistent with the discussions at 

Rio at the Earth Summit last year when there were two 

agreements reached there, one of which has particular 

application to our department more directly.  Well I guess both 

do when you look at the environment side -- one on climate 

change and the other on biodiversity. 

 

The spirit which is introduced into this Act is a recognition that 

we should be managing our natural resources in a sustainable 

fashion which includes paying attention to the distribution of 

the . . . or the maintenance of our natural lands in a state that 

does not put at risk species which we have not yet lost from our 

ecosystem and introduces a third principle besides sustainable 

development and the maintenance of biological diversity, the 

ability and the recommendation to work in a joint manner with 

other agencies in support of the principle of co-management. 

  



2056 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1993 

Mr. Neudorf: -- How do you envisage this principle of 

co-management and the . . . how will this Act allow you to 

work better with other agencies in the promulgation of the 

various objectives that you may have in mind? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Most of the, Mr. Chairman, most of the 

aspects of co-management which we are pursuing presently 

within departmental policy can be achieved within the existing 

mandate.  However the Act now explicitly states that we can 

enter into agreements with Canada to join with them in 

management as well. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- So this co-management that you're talking 

about, is there different levels of . . . provincial, federal, or 

what other agencies out there are you going to be working 

together with to achieve those objectives? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Co-management as a principle really 

suggests a consensual approach to the management of 

resources which in turn suggests that all interested parties have 

an opportunity to contribute towards policy development in 

those areas where one is trying to maintain and develop new 

policies that more appropriately reflect everyone's interest. 

 

And if you look at for example forest resources, there are often 

interests of local communities, Indian people, where they are 

their treaty lands.  There are the interests of the business 

community and sometimes wildlife organizations, sometimes 

provincial authorities, sometimes municipal authorities, 

sometimes federal authorities.  The Act explicitly allows us to 

enter into agreements so that we can pursue the goal of a more 

consensual approach to managing our resources with all 

interested parties. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- So what potential problems do you see in 

attaining that particular goal?  What about budgetary 

implications, for example?  Is that going to be a restraint?  

Have you budgeted for this?  Is there a potential of spending 

more money, less money because of coordinated approach and 

a harmonized approach, if we may say it, to some of the 

problems that exist? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the question of 

the member opposite.  In general, I'd anticipate that a 

cooperative approach to management would result in greater 

efficiencies, I think, because there are many areas in which 

resource management requires the participation of many people 

who may not always have had a voice in joint management 

exercises. 

 

If we wanted to pursue it most broadly, immediately, we would 

probably tax the resources of the departments and the other 

people we were working to a point that is impractical.  So we 

hope to build on a base of cooperative decision making on a 

priority basis within the existing committed resource of the 

department. 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Let's be pragmatic for a moment, Mr. 

Minister.  The philosophical approach is good when we say that 

we want to have a sustainable development committee at work 

and so on. 

 

Let's pick on the forestry as an example.  How do you perceive 

this new philosophy impacting on our forest products? 

 

Now I know that in the North, and I think your officials would 

agree as well, that sometimes we tend to take out more than the 

recovery rate can possibly be because of logging and forestry 

and the harvesting of the forest.  Now if we're going to have a 

sustainable resource, how do you envisage this new philosophy 

being brought into focus and into play, accepting the fact that 

we have many mills up there, many people who need 

employment, and there's always this conflicting pressure from 

the people who need the jobs, and yet the forest that is 

questionable whether it can sustain that economic activity over 

a long period of time. 

 

And then we have some of the forest supply management . . . 

not supply management in that sense, but rather managing the 

supply in terms of clear-cut.  Now when you talk about 

sustainable resources, how would this new philosophy come 

into effect?  And let's use forestry and some of the problems 

that are inherent within the forestry sector as such, and how do 

you envisage this impacting on that particular area and sector? 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the question 

and the opportunity to answer, as briefly as possible, the issue 

that the member opposite raised.  It is something that can't be 

answered in a few words, but I'll try to keep the number of 

words to a minimum. 

 

Forestry is an excellent example to choose with respect to the 

challenge in sustainable management.  In the notion of 

sustainable development is the notion of respect for the 

environment, respect for the condition . . . the impact that your 

environmental considerations have on the development of a 

resource, and the impact on the communities that are there. 

 

With respect to the forest resource, the member opposite will 

be aware that there have been some tensions and some 

difficulties in the north-west in Saskatchewan for example.  

What we have done recently in response to that -- and a lot of 

the work has actually been done by Mistik Management and 

the business communities around the pulp mill and the lumber 

operation in the area -- is that on a band-by-band, 

community-by-community basis the industry that's there has 

been working together to identify acceptable cutting practices, 

identify the camping grounds for example in an area, the 

trapping areas, the various pieces of resource that impact on the 

local community and that respond to, firstly, the maintenance 

of a sustainable forest which is already written into the forest 

management lease agreement, 

  



May 31, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2057 

but also an understanding of the other resources that are part of 

the forest, which include the impacts on water and therefore 

fisheries and hunting and all the other species that are native to 

the forest. 

 

So there are . . . that discussion is going on within the northern 

communities.  The province is engaged in dialogue with them, 

and we hope to have agreements in a number of those areas 

before long.  There's certainly a lot of progress being made on 

identifying the issues that need to be dealt with concretely 

between the communities, industry, and also respect the 

long-term environmental sustainability of the forest and the 

resource. 

 

There are other examples of agreements that we've recently 

signed.  We signed an agreement with the Canadian Wildlife 

Federation, the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, 

only about 10 days ago.  With respect to joint management of 

our wildlife resources in Saskatchewan, there have previously 

been a number of regional agreements like the Sipanok 

agreement.  We have signed a forestry agreement with northern 

groups and the federal government with respect to the model 

forest development. 

 

So we have been pursuing on a practical basis the joint 

management of a number of resources that include the forest, 

but other resources that are in the forest as well. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well thank you for that dissertation, Mr. 

Minister.  I realize that it's very difficult . . . and you've actually 

posed more questions and answers to me, but perhaps in some 

other forum.  It would be just too lengthy for us to go into 

details into some of the areas that I would like to. 

 

I want to be a little bit more specific, Mr. Minister, now.  And 

what I would like you to do is to outline the changes that this 

Bill purports to give to the minister as opposed to the previous 

Bill.  Are there powers . . . when I go through certain sections, 

section 4, for example, it says "The minister may" and goes 

into quite a bit of detail in terms of an expos onto the powers 

that have been given to you as minister in the implementation 

of this Act.  I tend to feel that some of those powers are 

somewhat broad, Mr. Minister, but I'll give you an opportunity 

to first of all to point out any differences from this Act as 

opposed to the previous Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, sorry for taking much time.  

I asked my officials to review the Bill. Hopefully they haven't 

missed any significant changes in authority of the minister. 

 

There, I think, are two of a substantially different nature.  The 

first one is very much in keeping with the first question the 

member from Rosthern asked with respect to the change in the 

philosophy of the Act to deal with, to impart a spirit of 

sustainable development to the management of our resources. 

 

And the consequence then is under the definitions in 

the Act, added to the traditional commercial resources that 

would have been managed under this Act.  It now says: ". . . 

other living components of ecosystems . . ." so that if there 

were, for example, a non-commercial plant or a 

non-commercial animal whose survival was at risk, it becomes 

the responsibility of the department and therefore the minister 

to manage in such a way that we not lose from our ecosystem, 

particular species.  So that's one broadening of responsibility. 

 

The other I think is a fairly specific matter which was raised by 

members opposite with respect to The Wildlife Act.  What this 

Act does is it introduces the same rules for search of facilities, 

of commercial facilities, as are in The Wildlife Act that the 

members asked about with respect to the revision of The 

Wildlife Act which are, however, the same rules that were put 

into The Wildlife Act by the members opposite in 1988. 

 

I would say to the members that the revision of the rules under 

this Act have been approved by the guides and outfitters who 

are affected by these conditions in this Act.  Those are two 

most substantive changes in authority for the minister in this 

Act. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- So what you're telling me, Mr. Minister, on 

that second new power attributed to you . . . and we had a 

discussion on that during The Wildlife Act and I expressed my 

concerns to you at that time on that particular issue.  But what 

you're telling me now is that the guides and the outfitters in the 

North have said yes, come on in any time if you suspect us of 

any wrongdoing or if an officer has any indication at all that he 

should come in and check the validity of what we're doing.  

Can you confirm that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes.  The guides and outfitters are 

concerned about their industry and the reputation of it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- And indeed we are all, Mr. Minister, on that.  

As a further step on the powers that you have received is that 

you established programs to encourage and promote the 

commercial development of natural resources.  Now I'm just 

wondering, Mr. Minister, to what degree does this mean that 

you're going to encourage commercial development? 

 

Does this mean that your personnel will be a resource for 

entrepreneurs to access?  Does it mean that you're actually 

going to put investment in?  Does this mean that you're going 

to be spending money to assist commercial entrepreneurs 

setting up for whatever reason?  Does that mean that you're in a 

position to go with the economic minister and put in equity 

positions?  Just exactly what precisely does that article mean? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, while this clause is not new 

in this Act, neither is it intended to be a replacement for 

economic development initiatives, 

  



2058 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1993 

which while they may happen through other departments of 

government, most often will be driven by independent business 

of one sort or the other.  What this does is recognizes our 

co-responsibility with others who are developing resources, 

either others in government or privately, to properly manage 

that resource, and this is the use of our resources to jointly plan 

for sustainable resource use. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, to come back to the previous 

point.  I know that you just told me that you have a section 

there where officers can without a warrant, go ahead and 

confiscate material, go into a person's place of business and 

confiscate whatever evidence they may deem necessary in a 

court case. 

 

But there's also another section in there which I personally feel 

is more appropriate.  And that is the course of a peace officer 

being allowed, when he has evidence before him that a person 

has committed a felony, has committed a crime, has the 

authority to act as a peace officer and actually make an arrest.  

Is this correct?  And if so, to what degree?  There are no 

firearms carried by these individuals.  How do these peace 

officers or these resource officers carry out the functions of 

peace officers and actually make arrests? 

 

What assurances are there that these officers will not be in fact 

endangering themselves, because they are not the RCM Police 

(Royal Canadian Mounted Police) or of that stature.  So could 

you inform me a little bit about that process. 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, just to clarify the role of 

these officers who have the rights of peace officers, it is not the 

regular activity of the officers that enforce this Act to act in the 

capacity of peace officers even though they are empowered to 

do that and to enforce some elements of other Acts. 

 

The only time that they would get engaged in even the 

intervention without a warrant with respect to items in this Act 

-- and it's also stated in the Act to clarify that -- is the case 

where they would need to stop a crime from continuing, or in a 

case where the evidence with respect to a crime that they know 

about would disappear if they were not to act. 

 

In every other case they are required to go to a justice of the 

peace, get a search warrant, and use other officers, other peace 

officers, often in the carrying out of the peace work. 

 

I asked my officials about the record of safety for our officers, 

and it's very good.  They said they don't recollect a case where 

there was a firearm involved in a dispute.  There have been 

several cases of minor assaults, but generally the respect has 

been shown for our officers dealing within those parameters. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, dealing with the fulfilling of the 

duties of a resource officer, there are occasions when they will 

work within the parameters of a search warrant.  And what I'm 

asking you now is 

under what conditions is a search warrant obtained?  What are 

the conditions of a search warrant?  And why would you have a 

search warrant procedure -- but then again something that we 

just finished talking about a little while ago -- where officers 

can actually go into commercial activities without a search 

warrant and confiscate equipment and records and so on? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the question 

of the member opposite, I'll try not to be too repetitive here, but 

it's . . . the search warrant will be used in the application of this 

Act as it would be in every other case under other law with the 

same conditions, in all cases except where they need to 

intervene on the basis of stopping a crime or on the basis of 

making sure that evidence from a crime is not removed from 

the scene. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I want to talk a 

little bit about money, revolving fund.  The revolving fund will 

continue.  The Act explicitly states that.  How much money is 

involved in the course of a year through this revolving fund?  

Where is the source of funds for the revolving fund -- through 

fees and so on?  Just explain that for us. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, there are two revolving 

funds.  There are four special-purpose funds within the 

department, but there are two revolving funds -- the 

commercial revolving fund which is really the larger one out of 

which the parks and the activities around parks are managed, 

and the other is the resource production development revolving 

fund which basically collects money for and spends money on 

the heavy equipment program, radio communications, and staff 

housing for a number of activities in our resource management 

sector. 

 

I wonder if the member could clarify what particular parts he 

would like more information on. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Is all of the money within the Parks and 

Renewable Resources or the Natural Resources under the new 

Act, is all of that money that goes through your hands, does it 

go through one of these four revolving funds? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the only funds that go 

through the revolving funds that are used in resource 

management are funds which result from fees and charges and 

rentals and those kinds of things.  The basic departmental 

structure, management, those things that are funded directly 

from the provincial government, operate out of the regular 

budget of the department, and matters that relate to collections 

of money from sources other than government then are put 

through the revolving funds. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Okay, so just to make this clear.  Let's say 

we're talking about parks, some of the provincial parks.  Fees 

and so on . . . the provincial parks are funded through the fees . 

. . Is that from cost recovery of operating the parks? 

 

Now, are there enough fees charged to cover the 

  



May 31, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2059 

operating costs or do you have to dip into the Consolidated 

Fund portion of your appropriation in order to cover the costs?  

Would you explain that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, there are substantial 

amounts of money that are used to fund the parks program that 

come out of the Consolidated Fund.  From an estimated 

expenditure in this year's budget of about $10 million, three 

and a half approximately will be coming directly out of the 

Consolidated Fund.  So recovery from operations will be about 

$6 million, six to six and a half. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Okay thank you, Mr. Minister, and that brings 

me to my next question and my next theme, which is 

accountability as far as revolving funds are concerned.  I take it 

now from your answer that if you have a revolving fund and 

you charge . . . parks charge fees to get in or fees for services -- 

camping sights and so on -- that money is turned into this 

revolving fund and also paid out of that revolving fund.  Could 

you confirm that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, the statement of the 

member opposite is accurate.  The money is spent from the 

fund and paid into the fund, and that fund is then audited 

annually. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- The way I understand the auditor's concern 

about this is that there is . . . first of all, the auditor doesn't have 

enough being supplied by this legislature so that he can do his 

job.  The auditor has 40 per cent of the spending of your 

government's money that is not accounted for because he 

doesn't have the resources to go out and audit these. 

 

And the first thing that he lets go . . . Because he can't do the 

whole job, he has to let some of these jobs go unfinished.  And 

the revolving funds are very often the victim of not having 

sufficient funds to address all of those things that he's supposed 

to, according to the auditor's Act. 

 

Now there is another philosophy that the auditor has.  And he 

simply states that in order for correct accountability to run its 

course, monies taken in through fees and collections should be 

put into the Consolidated Fund directly.  And then to achieve 

true accountability, the money that is necessary to operate 

parks, like you were just saying, should be appropriated out of 

this legislature, so that in fact members of this legislature have 

a say as to how that money is going to be spent.  Otherwise 

you're bypassing this legislature. 

 

(1700) 

 

What you're doing is you're taking money out of the people's 

pockets for whatever reason, putting it into the revolving fund, 

and taking it directly out.  And we have no say as to how that's 

happening.  The auditor has a concern about that.  And this 

may have been something that's been an ongoing issue.  And 

I'm just drawing it to your attention as well that the auditor says 

that's not true and direct accountability, and he wants that 

changed. 

I want your reaction from that, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the comments 

of the member opposite.  This fund is being audited by the 

Provincial Auditor and has always been audited by the 

Provincial Auditor and I believe is of no major concern to the 

Provincial Auditor, partly because the subsidy -- the deficit for 

expenditures in the parks area -- is part of the regular 

examination of expenditures from this government. 

 

And therefore in discussing the additional money taken from 

the Consolidated Fund to pay for the management of our parks 

and our park areas, those other discussions become drawn into 

that discussion.  So there is certainly extensive examination and 

opportunity for discussion.  But I appreciate the concern and 

we will continue to monitor to make sure that we have the best 

management and the best accountability for public funds. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Just to throw some figures back at you that 

you gave me a little while ago, we're talking about $10 million.  

Three and a half of that comes out of the Consolidated Fund 

that goes through this area; six and a half million is the amount 

that the auditors are expressing concern about. 

 

One further question dealing with revolving funds and that is 

this:  we all know that we have the fish and wildlife revolving 

fund and there was quite a disturbance a few months ago when 

it sounded and felt . . . it seemed like the money that was 

voluntarily . . . in fact the Wildlife Federation had requested 

that this check-off be put into place -- and it looked for a long 

period of time that this was going to be put at risk and actually 

be put into the Consolidated Fund to be used for whatever other 

purpose your government may decide to use. 

 

Now what I would ask you to do is this, Mr. Minister, is to 

make the commitment . . . and I know that this Act says 

somewhere that that particular fish and wildlife fund is going to 

continue, but that in fact it will be continued to be used for the 

purpose for which the funds were intended.  But not only this 

fund but all corresponding funds as well.  So you don't take 

from Peter to pay Paul and this kind of cross-reference.  Would 

you make that commitment, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Well I don't want to comment too 

extensively on the question of the member opposite, Mr. 

Chairman, but there is in some sense a dissidence between the 

nature of the question on the first fund and the nature of the 

question on the second in that the member opposite is 

suggesting in the very criticism . . . or not criticism but 

question of the first fund suggesting that the reaction to any 

suggestion of treating the second fund in the manner that the 

member opposite would like the first fund to possibly be 

treated was responded to negatively by the people in the fish 

and wildlife area. 

 

But I think does point out the need for two principles in the 

management of these funds.  One is the proper 

  



2060 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1993 

collection of the funds with respect to balancing the budgets in 

the various areas.  And the second is the appropriate 

expenditure so that the public interest in accountability are met.  

What I commit to is confirming those two principles in the 

management of these funds. 

 

And with respect to the specific question on the fish and 

wildlife development fund, we have committed not to make 

any changes in the nature of that fund in spite of the 

suggestions of the auditor and that the fish and wildlife people 

will be involved in discussions around the accountability of 

those funds during this year. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Basically two questions, Mr. Chairman, and 

Mr. Minister.  On the . . . Could you explain the difference to 

me on the money that is made available to the fish and wildlife 

fund?  Does that go to purchase land?  And then can you tell 

me whether the land that the Wildlife Federation buys, whether 

that is held in the hands of the Wildlife Federation on the same 

basis as private property would be by yourself or anyone else.  

Those two questions I'd like to have an observation of. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I thank the member 

opposite for the question of clarification.  The funds from the 

fish and wildlife development fund are used to buy land.  That's 

one kind of expenditure from that fund.  The other kind of 

expenditure is actually the enhancement of lands for wildlife on 

existing lands, for wildlife and fish kinds of developments. 

 

Then separately from those lands purchased or enhanced 

through that source, are independent lands that would be 

purchased by the fish and wildlife sectors independently of 

government -- the Wildlife Federation -- and they would buy 

those lands.  And those are like privately held lands.  The funds 

. . . the land or improvements bought through the fish and 

wildlife development fund are Crown . . . become treated as 

Crown land. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I have one other question.  And that is, I've 

asked the minister responsible for SGI (Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance) to provide for me the volume of 

road-kill on wildlife, and I'd like to have an answer.  I haven't 

received a response and I have serious concerns raised by 

individuals who have a lot of deer injured and killed, and I 

want to know the volume of that for the past year.  I think it's 

significant in my area and I'd like to have that information. 

 

If you could get that, and then the cost of the insurance in 

relation to that and see whether it would be advantageous 

maybe to put out more hunting so that they could be utilized in 

a proper fashion, in a normal fashion, or to allow the slaughter 

by vehicles going down the highways.  If you wouldn't mind 

getting that for me at some later date.  It doesn't have to be 

now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure how 

much of that information is within our department, how much 

is in Highways, but we'll commit to getting that information for 

you and passing 

it on. 

 

The Chair: -- Would leave be granted to vote on Clauses 1 

through 24 simultaneously? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 25 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I'd like to take this 

opportunity to once again thank the minister for his answering 

of the questions, the officials for their help. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I would also like to thank 

my officials for their attention to their duties here and thank the 

members opposite for the cooperative nature of the questions 

and the quality of the questions they've asked. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


