


















































Hansard: May 13, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1681 

 May 13, 1993 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Justice 

Vote 3 

 

The Chair: -- I will ask the Minister of Justice to introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I have with me 

tonight Mr. Brent Cotter who is the deputy minister, sitting on 

my left.  Behind Brent is Ms. Twyla Meredith who is the 

director of the administrative services branch.  Beside Twyla is 

Keith Laxdal, the associate deputy minister of the finance and 

administration division.  Terry Thompson is here somewhere; 

everybody knows Terry.  Terry Thompson who is the assistant 

deputy minister of the solicitor general division.  And on my 

right is Doug Moen who is the coordinator of legislative 

services.  There are other officials here but those are the ones 

that I'll introduce to the House. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I 

welcome the minister and his officials to our deliberations 

tonight. 

 

I want to thank the minister for sending over a copy of answers.  

I just received them so I haven't had a chance to really go 

through them with any diligence to see indeed if . . . The 

minister's assured me he's answered them to the best of his 

ability, which I take there's a lot of ability there and that they 

probably have been answered as well as we could expect any of 

the questions to be answered. 

 

Mr. Minister, there's a number of case areas that I want to 

address tonight and they're in light of proceedings of this 

House.  The area of Justice is an area that has attracted the 

attention of folks not only in this province but across the 

nation, especially in this past year with a number of 

circumstances that have taken place. 

 

And one of the major things that happened -- and it happened 

roughly about a year ago -- was a community in my area was 

really jolted in the violent death of an individual by the name 

of Mr. Dove.  A number of questions have risen.  And as we've 

had discussion over the past . . . on numerous occasions over 

the past number of years I think, Mr. Minister, we're all aware 

of the fact that even though there was a lot of anger and people 

were really annoyed at how the case was handled . . . Then 

there are other cases that transpired across this country with 

similar circumstances -- maybe not totally the same, but similar 

circumstances -- and the outcome of trials, what had taken 

place. 

 

The thing that really cropped up in our area . . . and I think it 

cropped up across the province of Saskatchewan, and it's 

evident by the number of 

petitions that I'd like to table before the Assembly tonight.  I 

believe, Mr. Minister, you may have received a copy of a 

number of these.  But due to the fact that they aren't official or 

don't have the official format to them, I wasn't able to table 

them before, but I'd like to table them tonight.  Mr. Minister, 

the petitions that I'm tabling were signed by individuals from 

right across the province and not just across this province, but 

across our dominion in fact, many communities outside of the 

province. 

 

As I said earlier, as we discussed it, even the community of 

Whitewood and the town of Whitewood, town council, sent a 

letter and asked you and your department to bring forward 

some of the concerns they have.  And I realize some of the 

concerns that they raised may not be totally within your 

jurisdiction.  I think some of the issues fall within federal 

jurisdiction.  But I think it would be appropriate, Mr. Minister, 

to at least take a moment tonight and address the issues such as 

plea bargaining.  And we've had an argument back and forth as 

to whether there was plea bargaining or the bargaining process.  

So the arguments that took place and the specific Dove case 

can be termed plea bargaining. 

 

But I think it would be appropriate, Mr. Minister, to take a 

moment to describe in some detail or give us a bit of an 

overview of the process of bargaining and how people are 

charged in this province, how sentencing occurs, how you go to 

court, and the whole format.  So for people's information . . . 

because I know a lot of people are not totally familiar.  And the 

only reason I've been given a little bit of an idea of the format 

that takes place is just through the involvement of this special 

case. 

 

So I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could give us a moment 

to lay out that process.  And I believe your officials have talked 

to individuals in the Whitewood area.  I'm sure there's probably 

discussion has taken place with individuals in the Kamsack 

area.  There's a couple of circumstances or deaths in that area 

somewhat almost similar. 

 

And I'm sure that your department has had a lot of these 

questions that have been raised over the past year and have had 

-- I don't know if you'd want to call it -- had the privilege of 

going out to a lot of communities to discuss formats of how the 

law works in Saskatchewan. 

 

So I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if you would take a minute 

just to explain that process.  And also a while back I did ask 

you for the number of plea bargainings that may have been 

entered into in the province, and maybe you could release those 

figures as well, in the province or even across Canada, if you 

wouldn't mind, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, and to the member, I 

want to thank you for that question.  I think it's a natural 

subject to raise in light of recent events.  And of course it's a 

very, very complex question. 



1682 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1993 

I want to begin by saying a few words about the Dove case.  It 

was a tragic situation and a very regrettable one and a senseless 

killing of Mr. Dove.  It presented a difficult situation for the 

prosecutors in the department, and I believe the member 

understands why. 

 

Everyone in our country who is charged with an offence is 

presumed to be innocent until they are proven guilty beyond a 

reasonable doubt.  That's a high standard of proof for 

prosecutors to establish.  And it is the rule in all criminal 

offences, whether it is a murder or whether it is a minor 

criminal offence.  The presumption of innocence applies and 

the standard of proof is proof beyond a reasonable doubt. 

 

And I just might take a moment to contrast that to a different 

kind of a court case, a civil case in which one citizen is suing 

another for a sum of money or for a breach of contract where 

the standard of proof is proof on a balance of probabilities.  So 

it's sufficient in those cases for a court to say, the answer is 

probably this, therefore the judge says, I will make this order. 

 

In a criminal case, the standard is higher, the proof has to be 

beyond a reasonable doubt.  If there is any doubt that can be 

categorized legally as being reasonable then the accused is 

entitled to the benefit of that doubt. 

 

I know the member knows this, but I just think it's worth saying 

that for readers of this record as who may be interested in the 

situation like the Dove case. 

 

But bringing that to the facts of the Dove situation, the 

prosecutors were in a position of not having . . . of having only 

a certain amount of admissible evidence.  And the problem was 

that it appeared, in the judgement of the prosecutors, that that 

evidence would not be sufficient to satisfy the standard.  And 

we were in the middle of a preliminary hearing when certain 

events that I'll describe in a moment occurred. 

 

The department was in the middle of a preliminary hearing and 

they were sort of acutely conscious of the fact that there were 

shortcomings in the evidence, and the prospect was real and 

immediate that the accused may be . . . the charges may be 

dismissed at the preliminary hearing, and the accused people 

free to walk out of that hearing.  And in this context came an 

approach from the accused people that they were prepared to 

plead guilty to a reduced charge of manslaughter. 

 

The department carefully reviewed that and decided that in the 

circumstances, namely the lack of evidence, the absence of 

enough evidence to be of the opinion that we could prove the 

case beyond a reasonable doubt, it was an offer that really had 

to be accepted.  Not to accept it would have meant we would 

go ahead with the murder charges and the prospect was real 

and immediate that the accused people might walk away, might 

just walk free. 

 

And I say to the member that if we thought we had an uproar 

over the kind of sentences given in respect to 

the manslaughter charges, you can imagine the kind of uproar 

there would have been if they had walked free from the 

courtroom at the end of the preliminary hearing. 

 

So the prosecutors who make the decisions in these matters -- 

these are not political decisions, I'm not involved in that 

process at all -- the prosecutors made the professional 

judgement that in all these circumstances they should accept 

the offer of a guilty plea to manslaughter, and they did. 

 

Then the question became one of sentence, and as the member 

knows, the court has established by a long series of cases, 

ranges within which various offences will be punished.  And it 

all depends on the circumstances of the case and the 

circumstances of the accused and the number of times they've 

been convicted of related offences. 

 

But to make a long story short, there is a range, and the judge 

in the cases connected to the death of Mr. Dove handed down a 

sentence which was well within the range.  It wasn't at the top 

of the range, wasn't at the bottom of the range, but it was 

clearly in the range and that was the sentence that was handed 

down, and it was a sentence that we simply have to accept as 

being within the range. 

 

In our system the courts are charged with the responsibility of 

determining what the sentence will be.  It's not a political 

decision; it's not a professional decision.  It's a judicial one and 

the judiciary are, of course, central and key to the operation of 

the whole system of criminal justice.  And they determined . . . 

the judge, appropriate judge determined that this was the 

appropriate sentence.  As I say, it was within the range so it 

wasn't the kind of thing you could race off to the Court of 

Appeal with.  You just simply have to accept the judgement of 

the judge in the circumstances and so it was. 

 

Now the community reacted in the way that it did and I know 

that.  You've made me aware of that and I've had a lot of direct 

mail myself and I can understand that because a respected and 

valued member of the community was the subject of this 

outrage, and that of course roused the ire of a lot of people, and 

I understand it and I sympathize with them.  But the system 

operated in such a way throughout, I think, that was in 

accordance with the highest standards of integrity  

_- both as far as the court is concerned, certainly as far as the 

prosecutors are concerned, certainly as far as defence counsel 

is concerned.  And while we may not like the result, and while 

the citizens of Whitewood and your constituency certainly 

don't like the result, it is the system operating within its normal 

boundaries.  And so at the end of the day, what I say to myself 

is that we have to accept that. 

 

(1915) 

 

Just one more word before I sit down, and I'm sorry to take so 

much time.  I think we're limited in our time tonight.  But I . . . 

The time has long passed since statutes set out ranges.  At one 

time our laws used to 



May 13, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1683 

say a minimum of so many years and a maximum of so many 

years.  That was the legislature or parliament legislating a 

range.  Now for many years we have moved away from that 

system.  Many years ago the country moved away from it.  And 

we provide the maximum range.  So in the case of murder the 

maximum sentence is life and in the case of certain other 

serious offences, the maximum is 14 years.  It means that the 

court has the jurisdiction to impose a sentence anywhere up to 

that maximum.  No minimum is prescribed, but of course over 

the years ranges have been established by virtue of a string of 

decisions, a line of decisions.  And that establishes a range 

which is present in the case of manslaughter convictions, and 

the sentences in the charges relating to the death of Mr. Dove 

were within that range. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, I would 

like to think that our judicial system does indeed give the view 

to the population in general that indeed a person is indeed 

innocent until proven guilty; but we know that as soon as 

something hits the public limelight that the public in their mind 

makes a decision and they kind of decide exactly where they 

stand on a certain issue. 

 

And a lot of times people's lives can be really challenged by 

some of the circumstances thrown at them when in fact at the 

end of the day they may be proven certainly not guilty -- may 

be totally innocent.  I'll maybe bring that up just a little later as 

I think of some of the accusations that, because of the way our 

society is going on the cases of sexual assault charges, or 

family assault charges . . . and some ways of maybe addressing 

it to be a little firmer so that we're not dragging people through 

the mire to prove their innocence when they may be innocent 

all the time. 

 

But I want to . . . Another question regarding the sentencing 

here, and, Mr. Minister, you laid out the facts regarding the 

Dove trial . . . or not the trial but the circumstances that led up 

to the sentencing of the individuals who I guess pleaded . . . I 

take it they must have pled guilty to manslaughter in order to 

receive that because we didn't have a trial take place here. 

 

What I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, and in light of the fact that 

there was a real lack of evidence here to really proceed further 

or to even push for a greater sentence, the public in general 

feels that . . . and I personally at times too think that in a lot of 

cases there's a lot of leniency regarding sentencing.  And to be 

honest with you I really wouldn't want to be the judge sitting 

on the bench to hit the hammer and say, I sentence you to 10, 

15, or 20 years.  Even if the person is as guilty as guilty can be, 

we're still all human. 

 

But in this case what I would like to know, Mr. Minister, is the 

individuals that have pleaded guilty, have accepted a 

manslaughter charge, have been given sentences, and what I 

would consider possibly could be minor, but at the end of the 

day if facts come out -- and we've seen that in some other 

recent examples, the facts come out to indicate that there was 

indeed possibly the individuals charged were indeed guilty, if 

you will, of murder in the first degree 

or whatever the circumstances is -- do I take it that the sentence 

is agreed to, that's it, the case is closed?  Or can it be opened up 

or would it have been better in the long run to have allowed, if 

there wasn't sufficient evidence, to bring that out in a 

courtroom or at a hearing to indicate there isn't the evidence, 

it's kind of kiboshed. 

 

And I know the public may not have accepted it, but it seemed 

to me from people I talked to, they would have felt more 

comfortable if indeed the evidence wasn't strong enough, if 

there is a possibility that the sentences if meted out today if 

indeed . . . if at the end of the day the accused are found to have 

been guilty as guilty as can be, and then I don't know if they 

can be brought to trial again or if indeed this case is now closed 

totally. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- People can only be tried once in respect 

of a particular fact situation.  So that when the manslaughter 

charges were brought into court and guilty pleas entered to 

them and the sentence imposed in respect of those, that is the 

end of the matter so far as criminality for the death of Mr. 

Dove is concerned. 

 

Later, as you say, it may turn out that other evidence comes to 

light; there may have been an eyewitness that nobody ever has 

heard of to this point who comes forward.  And so, as you say, 

that may prove that it was in fact a murder.  We couldn't do 

anything about that because the case is over; it's closed, 

finished, done with.  It's referred to as double jeopardy and 

there just cannot be any double jeopardy so far as our criminal 

law is concerned.  So that would be the end of the matter. 

 

It is also a fact that trials have to proceed in a timely way.  You 

have these prisoners in custody and they're subject to a charge 

and they are entitled to have their cases heard within a 

reasonable time.  If you don't proceed with the trial within a 

reasonable time, you stand the distinct possibility of having the 

charges dismissed because the Charter of Rights and Freedoms 

does require that these cases be dealt with in a reasonable time. 

 

So it was not an option for us to just wait and wait and wait, 

and hope that something came to light.  The obligation was on 

the Crown to move these cases along.  We did, although we 

were concerned about the standard, you know, the amount of 

evidence before the court and we were trying very hard to 

make sure that all the evidence that there was had been brought 

forward and we were . . . in other words, just to put it plainly, 

bluntly, sir, we were trying to prove the case.  So we're trying 

to ensure that the police had brought in all the evidence that 

there was to bring in and that sort of thing.  And we were very 

fearful that the charges would be dismissed when the offer for a 

guilty plea was made.  That was the circumstance. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, I guess 

another question that arises here is what about victim's rights?  

Is the department . . . do they have a position or, if you will, a 

program in place that kind of deals with or addresses the 

concerns of the victim, the 



1684 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1993 

victim's families, or has a way of . . . Because when you look at 

it, like we can look at the case of Mr. Dove's case, certainly as 

a victim his life has been taken and he's not around any more, 

but certainly he's got a wife and he's got family that have . . . 

their lives have been tremendously hurt by the circumstances. 

 

And this is just one.  There are many other circumstances 

where there are innocent victims out there become victimized 

by the whole crime scene. 

 

Is there a process the department has, or are we looking at a 

way in which we can deal with victims of crime and maybe 

address the concerns, not only the concerns they have, but it 

seems to me in a lot of instances there may be some monetary 

factors come into play as well that could be affected.  And I'm 

wondering if the department has anything to address those 

concerns. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, and to the member, I'm glad 

that you raised the point because it's a very, very important one.  

In the particular circumstances of the Dove case, I would like 

to say a few things in connection with the question that you 

raised. 

 

It's an example of how I think the system should proceed.  The 

RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) had a relatively 

senior officer in direct and immediate touch with her, and that 

officer remained in touch with her as this investigation went 

along, and in touch with other members of the Dove family 

because it is a common experience that victims are . . . after 

they've . . . after the initial contact with the police are just left 

out of the whole process. 

 

As a result they often don't know what's happening.  They don't 

know what progress the police are making, or how the 

investigation is going, or whether there are going to be charges, 

and perhaps only learn of charges if it is published in the 

newspaper.  And that is quite beside any of the emotional 

trauma, and the great stress placed upon individuals who are 

the victims of crime. 

 

I want to say to the member that in the life of the previous 

government a legislation was brought before this House to 

establish the victim's fund.  And that is a very important 

development, exactly along the line that the member has raised, 

where a fund of money has been accumulating specifically to 

provide for services or . . . services in respect of victims to ease 

their plight, to help them over the bad time, to assist them in 

coming to terms with the situation that faces them. 

 

And that fund continues.  The fund is built up by a surcharge 

on fines.  And it . . . the money has been accumulating in that 

fund since it was established.  The level now is . . . it's been 

coming in at the rate of $1.8 million per year and the present 

level is about $5.3 million.  I'm indebted to my officials for 

helping me out as I go along here.  And we have been working 

quite diligently at assessing possible uses for that fund.  And I 

just want to take advantage of the member's question to just 

cite a few of these because I think it's 

very interesting. 

 

There have been victims' assistance units developed in the 

police offices in Regina, Saskatoon and Yorkton.  I think the 

member knows I was in Saskatoon just the other day officially 

opening, with Chief Maguire, the victims' assistance unit in that 

city.  And that's staffed entirely by volunteers other than a 

supervisor.  And we used the victims' fund to set the office up 

within the police department and provided assistance for the 

hiring of the staff person. 

 

And then there are volunteers from the community who are 

volunteering their own time to assist in the actual program 

which consists of getting in touch with the victims of a crime 

committed in Saskatoon at the earliest possible moment.  As 

soon as the police are involved, the victims' assistance unit is 

also involved.  And the unit focuses on the victim immediately 

and provides whatever help is appropriate in the circumstance, 

whether it's to be referred to some agency that exists out there 

for the purpose, say a transition house or a sexual assault 

service or whatever it happens to be and providing the victim 

with information and staying in touch with the victim and 

referring to counselling or some of the family service bureaus, 

and whatever is appropriate so that the victim is provided with 

all the information we can possibly provide to him or her, and 

stay with them until the trauma is passed, you know, whatever 

that consists of.  This operates outside the police process 

because it's not concerned with the detection of the crime or the 

laying of a charge or the proving of the case, but is dedicated 

solely to the needs of the victims of crime. 

 

(1930) 

 

I just want to briefly mention other projects that have been 

approved.  A child witness coordinator has been hired to assist 

child victims in relation to the Martensville cases. 

 

There have been waiting-rooms furnished so far in Regina, 

Saskatoon, and Melfort -- and other similar facilities are 

planned -- a waiting-room where certain witnesses can go 

while they're waiting to be called at the trial.  And in particular 

this is intended for young children rather than having them wait 

in the courtroom or outside the courtroom.  We have a special 

room for them away from everybody involved in the case, 

away from the accused -- you know who I mean, the person 

who the child is going to give evidence in respect of.  They're 

inexpensive rooms but they're nicely furnished so that the child 

can have some comfort and not be frightened by the whole 

process. 

 

We have purchased closed-circuit and video equipment for the 

Saskatoon court-house to be used in trials involving child 

victims so that they don't have to give their evidence in the 

scary atmosphere of a big courtroom filled with people, 

including the accused person. 

 

We have provided funding for mediation programs in 



May 13, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1685 

Saskatoon and North Battleford.  We provided a grant to a new 

program for victims of spousal assaults in Regina, and we have 

extended a grant to the Saskatoon sexual assault program to 

expand services to victims of sexual assault. 

 

Those are some of the ways in which we've used the fund to 

respond to the needs of victims.  I just want to say to the 

member, as I take my seat, that he made a good point by his 

question.  We are very concerned about the victims of crime.  

Often the system is accused of being more attentive to the 

rights of accused people than it is for the situation in which 

victims find themselves, the rights of victims.  I accept the 

point and we are trying to move in that direction as best we 

can. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, would 

there be, say, monetary compensation from this fund to 

victims?  Say, the circumstances that could be arising where 

the major income earner to a home where family . . . his life 

has suddenly been snatched away and this family has been left 

in kind of a limbo.  They don't have any income coming in.  

Would that be circumstances that would be looked at by this 

fund or a way of maybe trying to help victims at the time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The member will recall that we had a 

crimes compensation program in this province from the early 

'70s onwards. There was a board set up to hear applications 

from victims of crime to be compensated for the crime. 

 

For one reason or another through the '70s and the '80s and into 

the '90s, that program was little known -- incredibly.  No matter 

all the efforts that were made over the years to publicize its 

existence, it didn't seem to be known to the people who 

suffered from . . . who became the victim of crime, who were a 

victim. 

 

The program was accessed by only a relatively few people.  

I've no idea why that was the case.  I've no idea why.  In certain 

areas it would be known and there'd be a lot of claims from the 

area.  Some crimes seem to attach more . . . or attract more 

applications.  But generally it just didn't work anything like the 

drafters of the program in the 1970s had imagined that it 

would. 

 

None the less, the cost of delivering that program in its last 

year was something like $900,000 -- $900,000.  We looked at 

it, as I believe your administration had, and felt that it just 

wasn't doing the job because it didn't . . . most people didn't 

know about it and there didn't seem to be any way of getting 

the information out. 

 

And we were making . . . we were cutting all over the place at 

the time anyway in connection with the budgetary process, so 

we decided to eliminate that . . . I was going to say eliminate 

that program -- to drastically reduce that program, which we 

did.  And it is now budgeted, as you'll notice, at $450,000.  We 

still will compensate the victims of crime for a lot of things: for 

their out-of-pocket expenses, for their wage loss, for 

counselling.  What we have stopped doing is 

to compensate them for pain and suffering, for sort of the 

general damages head of it.  So we compensate them for their 

real out-of-pocket expenses but we don't compensate them for 

pain and suffering. 

 

Take the victim of an assault for example.  We will compensate 

them for any direct expenses that they incur.  We will 

compensate them for any loss of wages.  We will compensate 

them if they need any counselling.  I don't know if they would 

or not but in some kinds of assault clearly they would.  But we 

don't give them that lump sum damages like they could get if 

they went to the court system and sued for damages. 

 

So there is a program still there but it's reduced in the way that 

I described.  It's administered now out of the department rather 

than by a separate board.  But the member will recall this 

because we passed that legislation last year.  That's our effort 

as far as compensating the victims of crime are concerned. 

 

Mr. Toth: --  Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  Possibly, Mr. 

Minister, as well though, maybe when you've got counselling 

services available there and it would seem to me that a 

counsellor would have a fairly sound or positive idea on 

whether a person or not is in circumstances that they might 

require some financial assistance.  And maybe through that 

source we could have at least informed them and give them . . . 

given them the details or the particulars how they could at least 

contact the board, or in this case now the department, to make 

their case and apply for any monetary help.  And that might be 

something that could be looked at. 

 

Another question I would like to ask.  In general, how many 

charges that appear before the courts may start out or end up in 

the preliminary process as being possibly charged with murder 

and then over the stages of preliminary hearings and what have 

you, how many of those charges would, say, have turned from 

say murder to manslaughter pleas or bargains, or just through 

the courts even have been assessed as manslaughter rather than 

murder charges. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- There are 26, 27 murders a year usually, 

and in 1992 about half of those wound up being a manslaughter 

conviction.  So if we say that there were 26 murders in 1992, 

that means about 13 of them would have wound up as 

manslaughter convictions.  And it's about half and half whether 

the charges are reduced before or during the trial, or the jury 

finds the accused guilty of manslaughter but not murder. 

 

Now going back to 1991, there were 26 murder charges in that 

year and 9 of them wound up as manslaughter convictions.  

And again it would be split about half between reduced charges 

before or during the trial and convictions for manslaughter 

instead of murder. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, another 

question that arises -- and I'm not exactly sure whether this falls 

in the jurisdictional powers of the province or your department 

-- is early release 



1686 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1993 

and early release programs.  And I'm just wondering what 

format the department has taken, whether we've made some 

recommendations; if it's not really in our jurisdiction or our 

area to follow up on, that if we've made recommendations, say, 

to the federal Justice department regarding this because we've . 

. . 

 

Here again, there's been a number of concerns have been 

raised, circumstances that have taken place, and I think we're 

fortunate in this province that we really haven't had significant 

crimes committed due to early release.  But in Canada in the 

last year or so, there have been a number of crimes that have 

been committed by individuals who were given an early release 

because possibly the courts felt or it was felt that they had 

reformed, individuals had reformed, and had paid their due 

sentence or penalty. 

 

And I'm wondering if the Saskatchewan Department of Justice 

has discussed the issue and made any recommendations 

regarding the early release program because, Mr. Minister, 

quite frankly, I'm not really standing here suggesting that we 

should just firm it up for everybody. 

 

I think there has to be some real sound guidelines in place 

because there's no doubt that there have been individuals over 

the years have been charged, have been sentenced, and over the 

period of paying their penalty for the crime they've committed 

have reached a point of being sorry for their crime and could 

become very productive individuals of the community. 

 

In other cases, individuals have no regrets at all; they're not 

sorry at all.  They may appear on the outside or on the top 

surface to look as if they've really reconformed and would be 

model citizens to be released out to work in the public.  And it 

would seem to me that we probably should have a stricter code 

of release that really looks at the whole case in general, the 

circumstances in general where a person applies for parole or 

early release. 

 

And at the same time, it would seem to me, Mr. Minister, that 

maybe one of the problems that people run into, even receiving 

an early release, is the fact that if an individual has been 

incarcerated for some five or ten years, it may be difficult for 

that person or persons to get back into the mainstream of life.  

And through the psychological anguish of not being able to 

really get back in the mainstream, of not being able to find a 

steady job, or not being able to find a location where they're 

accepted as normal human beings, they end up possibly back 

into some of the crimes that they entered prison in the first 

place. 

 

So I'm wondering what recommendations you would make, 

that the department has made, where we're going in this area. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, in answer to the 

member's questions, I wrote to the Hon. Doug Lewis, the 

Solicitor General of Canada, in March of this year and said to 

him that I had concerns about the early release by means of 

parole or otherwise, of offenders 

who have been convicted of offences involving extreme 

violence.  I supported his initiatives to ensure that dangerous 

offenders are not released prematurely and I also assured him 

that we were anxious, that is Saskatchewan was anxious, to 

participate in consultations regarding parole and early release, 

and the development of new programs which will assist in the 

rehabilitation of offenders while at the same time ensuring that 

society is protected from violent persons. 

 

Coincidentally I am meeting with Mr. Lewis in Saskatoon on 

Monday . . . Tuesday, pardon me, Tuesday of next week, and 

one of the items on our agenda is this same question.  The 

member and I have discussed this matter in this House before 

on the record and off the record, and I know his thinking and I 

share the substantial points that he makes. 

 

(1945) 

 

We of course have jurisdiction with respect to people sentenced 

to the correctional centre and that involves people who are 

sentenced for less than two years.  And we have an early 

release program and we have been very meticulous about that 

program over the years.  We have established a criteria that had 

been in effect for some time concerning early release, and 

generally speaking, we try to be careful not to release anyone 

into the community who is going to be a risk to the life and 

limb of people. 

 

We, for example, would not consider for early release anyone 

who had caused the death of a person in the commission of a 

crime within the last two years; or anyone who had attempted 

murder; anyone involved in a significant prison breach of 

conduct, you know, who wasn't a good prisoner; anyone who 

was serving a long sentence who was . . . happened to be in the 

correctional centre, and that sometimes occurs.  No one is 

eligible until they have served at least one-sixth of their total 

sentence length before becoming eligible.  And generally 

speaking, we give favourable consideration to people who we 

don't think will pose any threat to the life and limb of people on 

the outside. 

 

It's always a tough call, because I can appreciate the difficulty 

that the administrators of the correctional centres have in 

assessing whether a person is likely to commit a crime if 

they're back out on the street early.  And if there is a danger of 

doing that, then we don't do it.  If, though, the judgement of the 

correctional people is that this person has learned his lesson -- 

or her lesson in the case of Pine Grove -- then an early release, 

the prospect of an early release can be a very beneficial thing.  

The prisoners in effect earn it and work towards it and 

appreciate it.  And we believe it makes a significant difference 

in their attitude when they are out, that they have gotten out 

early and they are impressed by that and are less likely to 

commit another crime and go back into jail.  If they go back a 

second time, their chances of getting out early are dim, slim. 

 

We worry a lot about it and when something happens where a 

person on an early release commits another 



May 13, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1687 

crime, it's a great embarrassment to the correctional service, to 

the department, to the government.  And it always is, of course, 

properly so, picked up by the media and publicized because the 

public are interested in that sort of thing.  So we try and be as 

careful as we can.  Sometimes we miss but mostly we don't. 

 

The federal government has a more serious problem there 

because they've got the hard cases in the penitentiary, people 

who are convicted of more serious crimes.  And as I indicated 

to the member, I wrote to Mr. Lewis and I have a meeting with 

him again next week to discuss this very point. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, when we talk about sentencing and 

talk about young offenders . . . and I believe last year we raised 

the question as well as to how we treat individuals who have a 

minor crime. Maybe it's a minor sentence, whether it's minors 

or whether it's an individual, say -- well, just throwing an age 

out, even in their 20's or 30's -- never really been involved in a 

crime before, and involved in, say, a crime of minor 

proportions, which a lot of times you'll probably find people 

regret that they even allowed themselves into those 

circumstances. 

 

And as I mentioned, I believe last year too I brought out the 

fact that I don't necessarily believe or personally believe that 

people should always be incarcerated for some of their crimes 

that maybe we should . . . could do more for society by having 

people pay for their crimes in other forms, maybe of services to 

communities or repayment to individuals that . . . or 

compensation to individuals that have been hurt through the 

crime.  I'm wondering what has the department done, or had 

any further discussion through this past year regarding 

circumstances in that area, what's been done and where are we 

today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I think that the member's question 

contains many of the elements that will be important . . . I insist 

the member listen to the answer to the very interesting question 

that he asked me.  You can read about it tomorrow if you miss 

it tonight. 

 

I was saying that some of the elements of the member's 

question will, I think, be prominent features in the way in 

which crime is treated for the future, in the future.  It is the case 

now with respect to many of the points that you raise.  Our 

prosecutors are very interested in the matter of how convicted 

people are sentenced or how convicted people are handled by 

the court and they try hard to gauge in each particular case 

what we think would be an appropriate way of handling the 

case and include that in our submissions to the court when the 

judge is deciding what sentence should be opposed or what 

disposition should be made of the case before him or her that 

will frequently involve a recommendation for a probation or an 

agreement with a submission for probation.  At any given 

moment there are probably 3,000 people in this province who 

have been convicted of a crime or pleaded guilty to a crime and 

who have been allowed to remain free on probation. 

We try and cooperate with that because it is a fact that very 

often the worst thing you can do with a particular offender is to 

send them off to jail.  People learn bad things in jail.  And I 

won't say in all cases, by any means, but in many cases one of 

the . . . probably the worst thing you could do in relation to that 

particular accused is to send that person off to the correctional 

centre for any period of time.  Sometimes it's the only thing to 

do.  Each case has to be judged on its own merits. 

 

We also have a developing program with respect to electronic 

monitoring, and some of the judges are quite interested in this.  

You'll be aware that Judge Vancise of the Court of Appeal 

voluntarily submitted to electronic monitoring experience one 

weekend just to get a sense of how it worked. 

 

So obviously the courts are interested in it, and it would seem 

to have a good deal of prospect for the treatment or the 

disposition of a number of cases where the court wants to limit 

the subject's freedom in punishment for the behaviour that led 

to the offence or led to the conviction while at the same time 

not wanting to send the accused off to the correctional centre to 

serve time behind bars.  So the accused can have their freedom 

limited by being in their own home and not free to get out and 

move about the community and thereby suffer some significant 

penalty while not being in the correctional centre.  And we like 

that program; we like what we know of it, and we think that the 

system will move in that direction. 

 

We also are very interested in diversion projects.  This is a 

subject that has been discussed often in recent years and 

particularly recent months in connection with predominantly 

aboriginal communities where an effort will be made to deal 

with an offence in some way other than through the regular 

court system.  And aboriginal communities have very often set 

up circles of elders and community leaders to try and deal with 

deviant behaviour, bad behaviour, criminal activities of a 

relatively minor nature without actually having to involve the 

judges and the prosecutors and the defence and the court, the 

correctional centres, but to deal with it on a sort of 

human-to-human basis right in the community. 

 

And I think that has a lot of prospects, and we're trying some of 

that in connection with the mainstream community as well as 

the aboriginal communities and seeing if we can't make a little 

better progress rather than just automatically drag everybody 

into court and handle them without regard to their own 

situation and the circumstances, the particular circumstances of 

that case.  So I think that we're going to see a lot of 

developments in this area over the next few years. 

 

The member will know that in the United States in recent years 

they decided that what they needed to do in order to rid the 

U.S. (United States) of crime was to build more prisons and 

send more people to jail.  And they've done that, but nothing 

good has happened to the crime rate and the program hasn't 

produced the kind of result that they thought it would.  So I 

believe 



1688 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1993 

that that's not the future. 

 

I believe the future lies in being more . . . in the court system, 

in the justice system acting in more appropriate ways as far as 

individual accused are concerned.  And some of those ideas the 

member has mentioned, and I think the future lies in that 

direction. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, I was 

wondering for a minute if you were thinking of volunteering 

for that surveillance program. 

 

Mr. Minister, there's no doubt that the penal system is a costly 

system.  And no matter how we work it out, it costs a fair bit to 

try and rehabilitate criminals -- I shouldn't use the word 

criminals because maybe not everybody could be . . . yes, 

they've committed a crime but there are certain degrees of 

criminality I guess, if you want to put it that way.  But just to 

put everybody and incarcerate them behind bars is not 

necessarily the appropriate form of trying to make productive 

citizens out of individuals.  And I appreciate your comments. 

 

And I also want to commend you for the fact that we're looking 

at ways of dealing with certain groups in communities, and I 

think you're quite well aware of the healing lodge proposed -- 

or I believe it's already in the process of being constructed in 

the Maple Creek area.  And it's much to my chagrin, and the 

chagrin of a number of people out in the Moose Mountain area, 

who may have submitted a proposal as well.  Certainly the 

unfortunate part when . . . it's a costly . . . Penal systems are 

costly but they're also good economic generators to the 

communities that they're part of. 

 

What I'm wondering right now, Mr. Minister, is at present we 

have a young offenders' camp at Kenosee, and I've been 

informed it hasn't been utilized.  There haven't been as many 

young people have been sent out to work in the camp or be 

involved in the camp.  And I don't know how many other 

camps we have around the province.  Now I'm not sure if that's 

exactly true, or what's being done, or if the department is 

looking seriously at maybe closing down camps like this where 

we give young offenders an opportunity to at least be involved 

and do something.  And that's a way of partly paying off their 

crime and getting them out of the behind-bars routine more so 

into more of a I guess a more homey type of atmosphere.  I 

wonder if the minister could respond? 

 

(2000) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Member, I'm not 

going to be able to be of much help to you on the question 

because the young offenders' program is not in the Department 

of Justice.  We know things about it but it's located in the 

Department of Social Services. 

 

With specific reference to the Kenosee camp, we just don't 

know the answer to your question.  We suspect that generally 

these are low-risk prisoners, offenders, who are in these camp 

situations, and there are diversion projects under way there 

also, and it may be 

connected to those too.  But I'm afraid I just don't know the 

precise answer to that situation. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So what you're saying then, Mr. Minister, is that 

the Department of Justice really isn't involved at all with that 

program.  And if you will it's what . . . am I to take it, to 

understand that person for a very minor crime who -- in most 

cases they would be considered minors -- are put in the hands 

of then the Social Services and they then provide a program for 

them?  Is that what you're saying?  That Social Services then 

provides a format to give them . . . to provide some work and to 

take care of them through a period of time while they're serving 

time for a crime committed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The young offenders are of course 

determined by age under the federal legislation.  And the court, 

in dealing with these young offender cases, will prescribe what 

kind of custody or what kind of situation the sentence is to be 

served. 

 

And there will be custody situations like a correctional centre, 

and there are those facilities of course around Saskatchewan.  

And then there are other kinds of facilities of which the 

Kenosee facility is one, where they are the low risk kind of 

offenders who can have fairly easy contact with the 

community. 

 

But beyond those sort of general statements about the young 

offenders' program, I just can't go into any detail because it is 

not and has never been our program in the Department of 

Justice. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  A question regarding . . 

. I mentioned it just a while back.  Sexual assault or sexual 

harassment, child abuse -- how many of these cases would 

come before the courts in a year?  The concern I have, and I'm 

just wondering, is what kind of a format does the department 

have in place when you're dealing with situations like this. 

 

And there again I come to the point of an individual being 

innocent until proven guilty.  And certainly I'm aware of a 

couple of situations in particular where people, specifically 

parents, have had accusations made, and teachers have had 

accusations made against them which in the end have been 

proven to be totally false.  But the fact is, once an accusation is 

made, once it becomes public, it creates a major problem for 

the individual.  It creates a problem for a family.  It creates a 

problem whether it's in the school, whether it's in a business. 

 

It would seem to me, Mr. Minister . . . I'm not trying to put 

such restrictions on it that people are fearful to come forward if 

they do have a complaint to lay, that we have a process in place 

that indeed addresses the concerns of making sure that people 

do have the ability to come forward with charges of assault that 

are looked at appropriately, and yet at the same time protecting 

the victim until indeed guilt or innocence is proven.  And as 

well, Mr. Minister, as I indicated earlier, how many of those 

would you see in any given year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, and to the 



May 13, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1689 

member, we don't have numbers for you. We don't keep track 

of numbers in a way that would enable us to answer the 

question of how many sexual assaults and child abuse cases 

and, as you say, harassment cases, that there have been.  We 

just . . . we can't answer that question. 

 

I have the impression -- and I think you do too -- that there are 

a lot of them, particularly with respect to child abuse.  

Sometimes it just seems like there's an epidemic out there and I 

am unable to understand why.  But it certainly is a huge 

problem for our society, I think, in light of what we hear in the 

media and what we experience in the department. 

 

The presumption of innocence applies in all of these cases. As I 

was saying earlier, every offender or every alleged offender 

with respect to these offences must be proven guilty beyond a 

reasonable doubt.  We have no policies that there be 100 per 

cent prosecutions, let's say.  You know, we retain the practice 

-- quite properly so, I think -- of assessing each case as to 

whether there is a reasonable likelihood of being able to obtain 

a prosecution. 

 

That is pursuant to the simple idea that you would not 

unnecessarily put any citizen through the trouble and expense 

and trauma of a trial if you did not believe that you had a 

reasonable likelihood of convicting that person, and I think 

that's fair.  I think it would be irresponsible of the Crown just to 

prosecute for the sake of looking good, or prosecute for the 

sake of prosecuting. 

 

I think that this kind of assessment is a desirable thing.  It's a 

very difficult thing, a very difficult thing, because the 

prosecutors are working from statements and evidence that has 

been gathered by someone else and are trying to assess the 

impact that that will have on the judge or the jury when that 

evidence is heard in open court.  And that's very, very difficult.  

Sometimes the assessments don't turn out to be correct; 

sometimes they do. 

 

We try in this way to avoid situations where the charges are 

false.  But it's very difficult, and as I said, sometimes the 

assessments don't . . . turn out not to be correct.  But we do our 

best. 

 

The member asked about efforts to protect the victim and that 

also is difficult.  Let me take the Martensville case though, 

where the evidence is going into court now, you know; some of 

it's already in.  One of these cases has been tried.  A young 

offender has been tried.  The evidence is of a nature where the 

department felt that it should apply for an order from the court 

that the evidence not be publicized, not be published. 

 

That was in an effort to protect the victims who are giving 

evidence and who don't want to see their evidence spread out 

all over the media with all of the implications from that.  And 

that's an example of some of the things that we can do to 

protect victims and save them from all sorts of grief as a result 

of their evidence being public. 

 

The last thing I want to say in respect to that question is that 

the whole system is set up in such a way to ensure that innocent 

people aren't convicted.  That's been the thrust of the English 

common law with respect to the handling of criminal cases for 

hundreds of years.  Better that any number of guilty people 

should go free than one innocent person is convicted and jailed.  

And so the presumption of innocence applies and the burden of 

proof applies as I've explained to the member already. 

 

And there will be cases where the evidence isn't up to the mark 

and the citizen is quite properly acquitted.  There are other 

cases where the evidence that's given in court doesn't match the 

evidence that was given in a statement, and in those 

circumstances it looks like the person has been improperly 

charged or falsely charged, as the member . . . falsely accused, 

I think was the term the member used, and it may appear that 

way. 

 

I can say to the member though that it did not appear that way 

to the prosecutors as they were assessing whether or not to 

proceed with the case.  It's just that the evidence doesn't turn 

out to be as the statements indicated it would be, and so you 

have those cases that occur.  It's unfortunate.  And we try to 

ensure that they don't happen, but they do.  And I guess we just 

have to put up with that. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, how many lawsuits have been filed 

by individuals against the province this past year?  And what 

cost would that be to the province? 

 

(2015) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Again I can't answer the member's 

question.  But I can more than answer it in another sense. 

 

What I have sent across to the hon. member is a list of all of the 

litigation that is outstanding against the government.  We don't 

keep track of when it comes in, of when the actions are started.  

And then the files come in and they're handed out to solicitors 

in the department and we just simply have no record of the 

actions that have been started with this year or last year or any 

particular year. 

 

But all of the actions that are outstanding against the 

Government of Saskatchewan are included in the document 

that I sent across to the member.  And the listing covers some 

13 pages, so those are all of them.  And I cannot talk about the 

cost. I'm not sure what the member means by cost, whether it's 

how much we're sued for, or what had been the cost of 

defending these claims, or what the situation is.  But this is all 

the information that I can give you tonight. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  It seems to me that 

certainly when files are brought before lawsuits are raised that 

there is a cost in following through and going to court, carrying 

the cases and what have you that . . . And I can appreciate the 

fact when I look at the list you've given me here that it would 

be difficult to know exactly right now what the cost would be.  

I 



1690 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1993 

noticed on page 8 there's yes and no's here, Mr. Minister.  

Would I take it that yes would indicate that case had been 

completed; no is an indication that those cases are still 

ongoing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The right-hand column, activity in the 

last 12 months, it means that there has been some step taken or 

something happened on that file in the last year.  Some of these 

files are very old, and they're still open because they haven't 

gone to trial and haven't been concluded, haven't been settled.  

And if nothing has happened on them in the last 12 months, 

then we've put a no opposite the claim.  And if something has 

happened, we put a yes.  It gives you some rough idea of 

whether or not they're active. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- I notice on page no. 8 we have Messer v. 

Government of Saskatchewan.  Would that be the former 

minister of . . . On page no. 8 we have one case, agricultural 

case, Messer v. the Government of Saskatchewan.  Is that the 

present chief executive officer of the Power Corporation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes.  Just while I'm on my feet I might 

mention that this listing does not include any of the 

constitutional cases.  We'll provide those to you separately. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well I sure hope with all this hot weather that he 

gets his fly problem under control for your sake. 

 

Another thing, Mr. Minister. Regarding the GRIP (gross 

revenue insurance program) question and the major changes 

that were made to the GRIP last year -- and I know there were 

a number of trials or cases that were brought before the courts 

in Saskatchewan against the government on this issue -- and I 

wonder if you could kind of . . . or let us know exactly where 

proceedings are to date, whether there are still ongoing 

litigations against the province regarding GRIP.  I'm 

wondering, Mr. Chairman, if we could just have . . . it's a little 

hard to hear with some of the discussion that's taking place. 

 

The Chair: -- The member makes a good point, and I would 

ask the cooperation of the other members of the House so that 

the proceedings can carry on uninterrupted, and specially 

would address my remarks to those who are behind the rail and 

insist on carry on conversations.  Perhaps they could do so 

outside the Chamber. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Let me try and summarize the note I 

have on this subject.  An action was commenced by a group of 

five farmers, represented by your friend and mine, Grant 

Schmidt, claiming specific performance of their original GRIP 

1991 contract, and they obtained an interim injunction from the 

Court of Queen's Bench prohibiting the Crop Insurance from 

requiring any of the participating farmers to make an election 

whether they would participate in the 1992 program.  Then the 

matter was taken to the Court of Appeal and the Court of 

Appeal agreed to hear the application. 

 

The legislation then that went through this House, was passed 

in, I think, the month of August 1992.  The matter then went to 

the Court of Appeal and was argued in front of the Court of 

Appeal.  The Court of Appeal declined to make an order, 

declined to . . . the matter -- I'm being instructed as I go here -- 

the matter was argued last week and the decision was reserved.  

So the appeal has been argued in the Court of Appeal.  And 

that brings up right up to date on it. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Are there any other actions against the 

government regarding the GRIP program other than the one 

that you've raised that's being presently represented by counsel 

from the former minister of Labour in the province of 

Saskatchewan?  Are there any other actions by any other 

groups on the GRIP question as well? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, and to the member, there 

are four or five actions that have been commenced with respect 

to the GRIP program.  There has been no action beyond the 

starting of the action.  They've been awaiting the result of the 

case that we've just discussed where Mr. Grant Schmidt is the 

lawyer.  I can't tell you on this which ones they are, but they're 

included on this list. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, you're 

aware of the debate that took place in the legislature last year 

regarding that very question of the government's ability to 

change a contract well after the fact.  And maybe it would be 

fairer to ask the minister as the Minister of Justice and as a 

person, an MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) in this 

Assembly who the people of Saskatchewan have put their trust 

in, whether or not the government's actions last year were fair, 

whether they dealt with individuals fairly, whether they were 

justified. 

 

And in light of the fact that I think at the end of the day, even 

just the actions being taken in the courts, certainly there is a 

fair bit of time that's going to be taken up.  There's going to be 

a lot of costs: the time of your judges, your court costs, a lot of 

. . . I'd like to know as well what type of monetary values we're 

going to be looking at at the end of the day regarding these 

actions that have been taken due to the government decision. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The issue that the hon. member raises is 

an issue in these actions that we've been talking about, that is 

the effect on the contracts, the effect that the legislation had on 

the contracts.  And the member asks whether that's fair, and I 

cannot comment on that because it is at issue in these actions.  

Similarly I don't know what they may be entitled to if they're 

successful.  We're defending these actions.  As we explained 

during the debate on that Bill, the government is confident that 

what it did was legal and appropriate.  But it's for the courts to 

determine, and it would not be appropriate at all for me to 

comment on it. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, one question I had kind of given 

just before I sat down, I'm wondering: has the department given 

consideration to the type of costs 



May 13, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1691 

that you might face at the end and by the time we've reached 

the end of all the litigations that are taking place regarding the 

GRIP question, are you anticipating . . . do you have any kind 

of monetary figure that you might be facing.  I know it could 

be, depending on the case is arrived at, that the resolve of the 

case, whether if there's certainly a resolve in favour of the 

farmers, it could be millions of dollars, I would imagine, could 

be involved.  But I'm wondering if there's any thought has been 

given as to the cost to the taxpayer because of these actions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, and to the member, these 

are actions for damages.  These are actions where the plaintiffs 

are claiming damages against the government in respect of the 

GRIP situation. 

 

I just can't possibly answer the member's question.  I mean it 

would potentially prejudice the proceedings, and it would be 

inappropriate for any minister of the Crown, and particularly 

for me, to even try to answer your question.  And I think I just 

have to leave it on that basis. 

 

We are defending these actions, we intend to continue 

defending them, and we will just simply have to wait and see 

what the courts decide. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Minister, if I, after having watched 

Perry Mason over the years . . . it would be nice to kind of 

stand here and just bring points forward and being able to say 

at the end of the day, I told you so, and turn around, someone 

pops up and says they're guilty.  Yes, right, we assume 

responsibility. 

 

But when we look at the circumstances here, and as the 

minister has indicated, he doesn't really want to maybe 

prejudice the case.  I guess in some ways, it's certainly a 

comment -- and I didn't really expect that you would indicate 

how you really felt in certain circumstances because I 

appreciate the fact that even suggestions or comments made in 

here will make their way outside and could . . . although the 

farmers in Saskatchewan need all the help they can get at the 

present time. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, who's handling the case for the department?  

To what law firm is defending it? 

 

(2030) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- There are two defendants in these 

actions.  One is the Crop Insurance Corporation who retain 

their own counsel on it, and I'm afraid I don't know who that is. 

 

So far as the government is concerned, it's represented by the 

Department of Justice and one of our law officers, Don 

McKillop, is handling all of these cases. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, moving on.  How many lawsuits 

has the government entered into this year itself, actions against 

individuals or corporations in the province of Saskatchewan? 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- We have some such actions; they are all 

collection actions where money is owed to the Crown.  I think 

there are three of them on this list.  I think there are three of 

them on this list, and I just can't put my hand on them right 

now, but they would be actions where the government is shown 

as the plaintiff.  And if the member likes, we could dig those 

out for you. 

 

Now these are cases where the amount is over $20,000.  There 

are other collections -- I don't know how many -- where we're 

suing for lesser amounts.  And I think we could dig those out if 

we . . . I am advised there are hundreds of those where the 

collection involves less than that amount.  Some of them are 

being handled by collection agencies, some of them are subject 

to action in the courts.  And just to repeat myself, the actions 

that have been begun are all in respect of money owing to the 

Crown. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, another 

area I'd like to move on to and I'd like to maybe get some 

responses on is another major question that has arisen.  And 

recently I've received . . . And it's unfortunate that I didn't get a 

hold of one of the secretaries in time to ask them for the file 

that we've developed on it.  But a number of individuals -- and 

I'm not sure if they're working out of a law school in Ontario -- 

have raised the question of Mr. Milgaard and whether he has 

been fairly treated in his case. 

 

And it's been an ongoing case, and it would seem to me that 

there are a lot of unanswered questions regarding the Milgaard 

file yet.  And certainly his mother has indicated that she feels 

there's a number of injustices that are still sitting there that 

haven't been addressed, haven't been answered.  And I'm 

wondering exactly where we are to date with the Milgaard file.  

We've been kind of waiting for . . . It seems to me that, I 

believe, there is a process or an appeal process that's taking 

place.  I'm not sure.  Is it on in Alberta, or is there some address 

being given to the file? 

 

I'm wondering what the situation regarding Mr. Milgaard is 

today, in light of some of the accusations he's laid, and the fact 

that after a number of years it would appear from evidence or 

just proceedings that have taken place over the past number of 

years, that for 23 years maybe indeed we're dealing with an 

individual whose real guilt or innocence wasn't really proven 

and he's given up a fair bit of his life. 

 

Certainly there is a portion of his life that he's lost completely 

where he wasn't a productive member in society; an area of 

time that he probably would've been more than happy to have 

been at a job or been raising a family or at least doing 

something to better his life.  And now he's in a position where 

it's very difficult for him to even at his age to find employment 

with the lack of education that he possibly has. 

 

And I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could bring us up to 

date as to what is transpiring regarding the Milgaard file. 



1692 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1993 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes.  Well here we are again one year 

later.  And I wonder if a year from now, if I'm still the Justice 

minister and the member is still the Justice critic, whether we'll 

be discussing the Milgaard case again.  I just want to very 

briefly talk about the general position and then I want to 

answer the member's question about what's happened recently 

on this matter. 

 

Our position is that this matter has been the subject of a very 

intensive public inquiry by the highest court in Canada, by the 

Supreme Court of Canada.  Five judges sat for a total of 14 

hearing days and heard all of the evidence that any interested 

party wanted to bring with respect to this matter. 

 

After 14 days of hearing in which all aspects of the case were 

examined into or where everybody including David Milgaard's 

counsel had the opportunity to bring any evidence that might 

have affected the court's decision, the Supreme Court of 

Canada said a number of things. 

 

First of all, it refused to find David Milgaard innocent, as they 

had been invited to find.  They refused to find him innocent.  

They refused to find him innocent either using the test of proof 

beyond a reasonable doubt, which I've mentioned earlier to the 

member; and further, they refused to find him innocent on the 

test of a balance of probabilities, the sort of civil law test that I 

was discussing earlier with the member. 

 

In short, the Supreme Court of Canada refused to find him 

innocent.  Now I have been asked by all kinds of people -- 

some in the media, some in the public, some in the Milgaard 

family -- to find him innocent.  And I don't know how I can do 

that when the Supreme Court of Canada, after 14 days of 

inquiry, can't find him innocent on either . . . using either of 

those tests.  Then how am . . . how is someone like me able to 

suddenly pronounce on the matter? 

 

The Supreme Court of Canada ordered a new trial.  The case 

had happened some 20 years previously with all of the 

evidentiary problems that that presents.  But more to the point, 

the Supreme Court said that if we did proceed with a new trial, 

and if he was convicted again, then they were recommending to 

the federal Minister of Justice that he be pardoned.  So what 

would be the point of going to a new trial?  And accordingly I 

decided, after due consideration, that we would not try him 

again. 

 

So we entered a stay of proceedings and the matter is over.  I 

say the matter is over because in a stay we would have a period 

of one year in which we could proceed with the charge and the 

year is expired.  So the matter is done.  He is entitled to 

whatever presumptions apply to his situation and I don't know 

what the legal result of all that is.  But in the result, Mr. 

Milgaard is out and free and able to conduct his life however 

he wishes. 

 

In this set of circumstances there is simply no basis on which 

we would order an inquiry.  It just simply is . . . it lies ill; it's 

not appropriate.  It lies ill in the mouth of the 

Milgaard lawyers to say there is other evidence that hasn't been 

looked at, considering that they had the opportunity to 

introduce that same evidence before the Supreme Court of 

Canada to prove the innocence of Mr. Milgaard. 

 

And for reasons that I can't possibly know, they decided not to 

do that.  Well I am not going to order another inquiry to look at 

evidence that they decided not to call before the Supreme 

Court.  And in light of all of that, it is just not, it is just not . . . 

it would not be responsible for us to consider paying taxpayers' 

money as some kind of compensation in those circumstances, 

and so I've refused to do that. 

 

Now I want to deal with recent events.  The member will know 

that I received in an indirect way from the Milgaard lawyers a 

one-page statement signed by someone who said that he had 

been employed in the Department of Justice back in the 1970s 

and making certain allegations that involved the Premier and 

the hon. member from Regina South.  I referred that statement 

to the RCMP. 

 

It is my understanding that the RCMP subsequently 

interviewed the Milgaards and I believe conferred with -- or at 

least interviewed -- the Milgaard lawyers, and they went away 

from those interviews with a longer list of other matters, of 

other things that the Milgaards felt should be looked into.  And 

it is my understanding that the RCMP continue with that 

investigation. 

 

We have not received the results of that investigation but we 

have arranged, we have arranged with the Alberta Attorney 

General's Department to be the instructing department -- 

receiving department -- with respect to that report.  So the 

RCMP are dealing with the Alberta Attorney General's 

Department in respect of those allegations. 

 

We did that because two members of this legislature were part 

of the investigation and in those circumstances it would not be 

appropriate that they would report . . . that the RCMP would 

report and confer with our department. 

 

So we await the result of that investigation and I have no idea 

-- I cannot tell the member -- when we will receive that report 

because we haven't been told. 

 

The member will also know that Milgaard has begun an action 

against the prosecutor at the trial, Mr. T.D.R. Caldwell, and 

against the member from Regina South, and against the 

Saskatoon . . . I think the Saskatoon City Police and the city of 

Saskatoon, in respect of some of their complaints.  The action 

is being defended by all defendants and I'm just not able to tell 

the member at what stage that is, whether defences have been 

filed or whether any further proceedings have been taken. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  Certainly it's a 

complicated file -- I guess if you would call it that.  When you 

look at an individual having spent 23 years behind bars, and at 

the end of the day there's still 



May 13, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1693 

. . . I think a lot of people would feel that there's still some 

reasonable doubt as to whether the verdict or the case as it was 

presented some, well it would be about 25 years ago now, 

indeed the decision that was arrived at at that time was maybe 

fair, and it's hard for us to really sit here today, 25 years later, 

when a lot of the individuals involved . . . I guess in some cases 

some people are no longer with us to confirm some of the 

actions that were taken.  But at the same time you can 

appreciate where an individual like Mr. Milgaard is as well 

when you look at the fact that some $619,000 have been spent 

just on that one case alone. 

 

And Mr. Milgaard today is out there and how he's existing to 

my knowledge, he's basically just living off social assistance.  

It appears to me that he really has no other recourse because it's 

been, I'm sure, awful difficult for him to have been incarcerated 

for some 23 years, come out into society, and no real 

opportunities, never really had any opportunities, hasn't got any 

real work experience.  With a criminal record on your back, it's 

quite difficult to get back into society and become part of 

society and involved and caring for yourself. 

 

I would imagine that Mr. Milgaard goes through some very 

difficult days mentally as he tries to get his life back together.  

So it would almost appear to me that at least there would have 

been some fairness if -- whether it was the federal court or 

through an inquiry on the provincial side -- we could have 

arrived at something that would have at least given some 

compensation for years lost.  But I guess if you can't arrive at 

the guilt or innocence, or we're not going anywhere with it, it's 

hard to just establish what would have been fair compensation. 

 

(2045) 

 

Mr. Minister, another question I'd like to get into for a few 

moments is the whole case that's before us regarding Bill 38.  

And the Human Rights Code, I believe, comes under your 

jurisdiction as well.  I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if any 

polling or any discussion with polling was done.  What 

consultations took place regarding the whole implementation or 

bringing forward of Bill 38? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The answer, Mr. Chairman, is no, the 

government has not done any polling with respect to any aspect 

of the matters contained in Bill 38. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, it would appear to me and appear to 

. . . I'm sure that your office, I'm sure many of your colleagues . 

. . as my colleagues have received requests from people all 

across the province regarding this issue.  They've raised a 

number of concerns.  Certainly we've had some discussions on 

it and I appreciate the time you've given.  A number of people 

have . . . would want to say that they've appreciated the time 

that you have given as well, to at least listen to the concerns 

they have. 

 

And one has to wonder about the real necessity . . . Now I 

know we're going to get into some of this 

argument as we get . . . proceed through Bill 38 and get into 

committee as well. 

 

But when you look at all the factors and if indeed the major 

concern before us is discrimination based on employment and 

housing, why, as a government, you wouldn't have looked at 

what other jurisdictions have done, such as the state of 

Massachusetts where they have brought in specific legislation 

that outlaws discrimination against certain sectors of our 

society, in this case the homosexual community, for housing 

and employment.  That basically what it did was strengthen 

their present Human Rights Code rather than opening up the 

Human Rights Code by adding to the Human Rights Code as 

we are doing in our province, Mr. Minister.  I wonder if you 

could respond. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I will indeed.  I just want to go back to 

the polling question for a moment.  I answered the member's 

question in categorical terms and that's the correct answer as 

far as I know.  I am not aware of any polling having been done 

or that is currently under way, and I . . . but I want to tell the 

member, I don't necessarily know of all the polling that is 

currently being done.  And if I learn otherwise, I will . . . if I 

learn otherwise I'll tell the member. 

 

I want to now come to the question of why these prohibitions 

against discrimination have been included in the Human Rights 

Code rather than in other statutes, and the answer is very 

simple.  This matter has been dealt with by most of the other 

jurisdictions in Canada and in each case this legislation has 

been included in their Human Rights Code.  And so when we 

made the decision to proceed with these prohibitions we put 

them in our Human Rights Code as has the other provinces.  I 

don't know what there would be about Saskatchewan that 

would lead us to do it in a different way.  And frankly it 

seemed to us to be appropriate to deal with it as a matter of 

human rights.  After all, we're talking here about a prohibition 

against discrimination.  And that's what the Human Rights 

Code is all about.  It's a prohibition against discrimination. 

 

So when we decided not to discriminate in employment on the 

basis of gender, that was put in the Human Rights Code.  It was 

not put in an employment code or an employment law or a 

labour standards Act or anything like that.  It was a matter of 

basic human rights.  That's how we view it as the member 

knows, and that's why we put it in . . . proposed it as an 

amendment to our Human Rights Code. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister,  I'd like to ask you a few 

questions too on Bill 38.  Could you tell me who drafted the 

Bill?  Was it your department officials?  Or outsiders?  Or 

whatever, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- It was drafted by the drafting people in 

the Department of Justice. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister, did you get 

advice from 



1694 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1993 

outsiders when you were drafting, or just directly all your 

advice just come from your own department officials?  Was 

there any advice from outsiders? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, and to the member.  It 

was all internal.  We didn't have any assistance in the drafting 

process from anybody else. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.   I heard your 

comments and read Hansard on your explanation on second 

reading.  I'd just like you to maybe -- we're not going to get 

into the Bill here, anything that we can talk about in committee 

or whatever on the Bill -- I'd just like to ask you, maybe just in 

your own words, to tell us your main objective, just in a few 

short words, your main objective of bringing this Bill to the 

House in the first place, the highlights of why. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- It's a very simple matter, very simple 

answer to that question, Mr. Chairman.  It is that we considered 

that it is necessary in this province to introduce a law that will 

prohibit discrimination in respect of the matters covered in the 

Human Rights Code on the basis of the three new matters that 

are being introduced.  It was simply a question of dealing with 

the question of discrimination -- no more, no less. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, thank you.  

Now any time any government brings any Bill to a legislature, 

pretty well all over America, there's some reason for it and 

there must be somebody asking or pressure or a request or 

whatever.  Now I never heard public . . . and I've been a 

politician for . . . well it's 21 years I believe since I was 

campaign manager for Doug Neil when he won the election in 

'71, so it's 22 years and I've been an MLA for 15 years -- I've 

never had a request or any discussions on such a thing. 

 

Where did you get this pressure from, or these requests from, 

and what information do you have to show us how . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  I've listened to the exchange between the 

member for Arm River and the minister, and the questions 

pertain specifically to Bill 38, in fact in a member's ultimate 

question, he referred to Bill 38.  And although it may be 

appropriate to ask questions of any expenditures that might be 

related to Bill 38 -- I suppose polling might be one -- to deal 

with the principles of the Bill, to deal with the antecedents of 

the Bill, seems to me at this point not to be an appropriate line 

of inquiry in the estimates that are before us. 

 

And I don't want to limit the member, but I would point out 

that Bill 38 is before the Assembly.  It is in adjourned debate 

stage.  It will, I assume, reach the stage of committee where 

there will be opportunity to ask the minister all manner and 

nature of questions.  And therefore would caution the member 

to not proceed with this line of questioning at this time. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, okay, thank you.  We'll just 

rephrase that question a little bit.  Let's forget about Bill 38 and 

let's just talk about requests from 

anyone pertaining to human rights.  You don't need to talk 

about Bill 38; forget about it's even happen then.  Where did 

you get any request talking about special rights for 

homosexuals . . . for human rights or for homosexual and 

lesbian people?  Where do you get that request from?  Forget 

about Bill 38. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well the answer, Mr. Chairman, is from 

many, many sources over many, many years.  I personally have 

had any number of people over many years talk to me about 

introducing the sexual orientation aspect to the Human Rights 

Code.  Some of these representations come from people who I 

am told are part of the homosexual community, and others 

come from people that are concerned with human rights.  

There's a human rights association, and some of the people that 

I know belong to that association.  I don't know them . . . as far 

as I know they're not members of our political party, but they're 

concerned with human rights. 

 

Within our party there are a lot of people who have been 

raising this issue over many years, and I've heard it in my own 

constituency association meetings as something that our party 

should do if we were to win an election.  This is discussions 

during the '80s.  The member will remember I was a candidate 

in 1982 in the same constituency that I now represent and then 

I ran again in '86 and was elected.  And during that time, just 

any number of people who have an interest in the human rights 

legislation . . . there are quite a few in our party that would 

raise this matter. 

 

I believe it has also been the subject of resolutions accepted at 

our annual conventions.  Now I have not checked that 

personally, but my recollection is that this matter has been 

debated on the floor of our conventions and has been passed.  I 

could confirm that for the member, but as I stand here, I 

believe that to be the case. 

 

I have also been involved in I think one meeting with one of 

the organizations of lesbians and gay men who have 

specifically requested that information.  I know there have been 

others, but I personally recall having been involved in one of 

them.  There may have been more.  Now that I mention it, I 

think there was second one years ago that I was at.  So that 

would be another source. 

 

In addition to that, we have been aware that this legislation has 

been passed in other provinces in Canada.  That's well known 

of course to us as it is to you.  And most recently it was 

introduced in the federal House of Commons by Kim Campbell 

when she was the Justice minister. 

 

So there's a lot of sources for this idea.  It's not something we 

just dreamed up or found lying on our desk one day.  It's been 

the subject of a lot of discussion over the years, and clearly 

something in our view that Saskatchewan must do.  It just 

doesn't make sense nor is it fair that the majority of Canadians 

enjoy this protection while people in our province do not.  That 

just doesn't seem reasonable. 



May 13, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1695 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, I guess that kind of throws it 

wide open for me to talk about the legislation because I said we 

won't talk about Bill 38 and the minister did refer to the 

legislation. 

 

But anyway, but having said that, I guess I'm proud that I'm not 

in the same groups of people as you're in because that just 

never happened to me.  You've only been a politician for a few 

years, Mr. Minister, and you've never knocked rural 

Saskatchewan like I have, and I've never had the requests, so I 

guess different types of people must come to you. 

 

You must have different types of people that your associate . . . 

that I do then.  And I'm proud that I don't have to have these 

kind of people come to me wanting special rights.  Now I don't 

want them to be discriminated upon below my level, but I don't 

want them to be above my level. 

 

And I think that is absolutely . . . I like, Mr. Minister . . . my 

question to you, Mr. Minister, is can you table in this House, in 

these estimates . . . it has nothing to do with Bill 38, it's doing 

with any request you've had for special rights for homosexual 

and lesbian people.  Can you table any legislation or any 

requests in writing that you've ever had, and how many or what 

because I doubt it's as many people as you say it is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I didn't say to the member, nor is it 

my recollection, that I have received a written request, although 

I may have.  I don't recall with these meetings whether they 

were a written brief or not.  I suppose I could check that.  So I 

can't do that. 

 

(2100) 

 

Further, and just my last comment on this particular question, I 

do not, nor does the government of which I am a part, view this 

as a case of special rights.  We simply view this as a question 

of protection from discrimination.  And with great respect -- 

and the member knows the respect that I have for him -- 

protecting someone from discrimination is not a special right.  

I've tried to make that clear in my speech, and I thought I was 

so persuasive in second reading that the member wouldn't raise 

the question again, but I do not view this Bill as conferring 

special rights on anybody. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, I appreciate your comments, 

and I do believe that that's what you believe.  But I don't agree 

with you, and I have my rights not to have to agree with you.  

And I'm going to give you that right that whatever you want to 

believe, that is your right.  But I believe it's wrong, absolutely 

wrong and I have my rights.  So there's no way, Mr. Minister, 

you can stand on your feet and say that you've said your 

statement and that I must put it to rest and not mention it to you 

again. 

 

Let's ask another question because if you haven't got mail piled 

up in your office, asking one way or another about this -- we 

won't mention the Bill as I've said -- just about protection of 

human rights for special people, homosexual, lesbian people . . 

. You must 

have lots of letters and lots of comments and lots of phone calls 

one way or another.  If you can't recall having any asking for it, 

I'm sure you've got a few thousand the other way or a few 

hundreds or whatever.  How many comments or how many 

letters are you getting saying we don't want this Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Oh, I've received many such letters.  I've 

also received letters supporting the Bill.  But I've certainly 

received more letters opposing it.  I've tried to answer each of 

those letters, and I believe I have. 

 

It seems to me that, with only a few exceptions, the basis of the 

opposition stated in the letters were based on a 

misunderstanding of the legislation as I interpret it.  And in my 

responses, I've tried to point that out.  In other words, the 

legislation doesn't confer any special rights.  I've just made that 

argument; that's my belief.  I said that to the member.  And it 

doesn't do anything like promote the lifestyle or anything like 

that.  It's just simply a matter of prohibiting discrimination, and 

that's how I've tried to respond to these letters. 

 

I might just mention before I take my seat that the public 

reaction, the reaction of individuals of the public to this 

proposal depends to a great extent upon how the matter is . . . 

what question is asked, how the matter is presented.  If it is a 

question of prohibiting discrimination, then in my experience, a 

large majority of people support it.  I venture to say that there 

are people sitting opposite me who support that idea.  I won't 

attempt to say whether I think you support it or not.  That's for 

you to say.  But just a simple prohibition against 

discrimination. 

 

The opposition comes for a concern about what else may be 

involved in that, where that may lead, what that may mean in 

respect of other questions.  If you ask the question in terms of 

do you favour legislation that promotes homosexuality, then 

you get a different answer. 

 

But we don't think the legislation does that.  We think the 

legislation is very narrow and very important, and asked, as I 

suggested, asked in those terms, enjoys a great deal of public 

support. 

 

The member characterized my remarks the other night as 

arrogant when I said that I thought this legislation enjoyed the 

support of a number of people.  I know he wasn't personally 

attacking me or anything like that, but I assure him I was not 

being arrogant.  I was simply stating that asking the questions 

in the terms I've suggested, it's been my experience that this 

proposal enjoys broad support from the public. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, perhaps the statements you 

have said publicly and have said in second reading and you've 

said in interviews, perhaps there is a lot of public backing for 

what you said.  And if what you've said, maybe even I could go 

along with some of the things because I do not believe that 

whether you're . . . whoever you are, black, white, brown, any 

colour, any type of religion, whoever you are, a gay person, 

lesbian, homosexual -- they have 



1696 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1993 

rights.  I believe that, and I think you know that I believe that.  

They have to have a place to live and they have to have a job.  I 

agree with that. 

 

But I do not believe that I've ever heard any big issues in this 

province where somebody has lost their jobs because . . . finds 

out that they were.  Mr. Minister, I don't know what happens in 

your bedrooms.  You don't know what happens in my bedroom.  

That's not for your business.  It's not my business.  And it's not 

anybody's business what happens in these people's bedrooms.  

So if they would just keep it to themselves, you wouldn't have a 

problem. 

 

But you're going to have a bigger problem.  That's my view.  

You'll have a bigger problem once . . . because what these 

people want is to be recognized to say that they are 

homosexuals in the workplace; I am a lesbian in the workplace. 

 

And you're going to see this happen like it happens in all the 

main socialist countries of the world -- I'm not talking about 

you people being socialist because we're getting socialism in all 

governments -- that where this is happening, it's promoting it 

and it's making more trouble for them. 

 

But on the line of questioning that I was going to get in there, 

that's better off to come in committee or whatever.  What I am 

going to say to you: you did comment on what your party 

thinks about this type of thinking, on protection, special 

protection or whatever you want to call it, whatever rights for 

homosexuals and gay people. 

 

What does the party . . . I know what the party thinks because I 

had the statement and it's in Hansard here where I read out a 

resolution from your own party. I put it in my second-reading 

speech, what your party said.  But what does your party agree, 

that you're going far enough or just . . . because I do believe 

that you think that this is all this Bill means, is just what you 

say it means.  I believe that that's what you believe. 

 

But time may tell before this Bill is through or whatever that it 

may mean more, because the people that draft it could be 

wrong and we don't know that.  And I'm not a lawyer and I'm 

not here to say that.  But what I am saying is, does your . . . do 

the people that are backing this -- you are the one that 

mentioned the party and that's where you get a lot of the 

requests from -- are they saying that you should go farther?  

Are they satisfied that just need protection for these people in 

the workplace and a place to live?  Is that what your party's 

saying? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Nobody has suggested to me that we 

should go farther and as a matter of fact in my second-reading 

speech, I made it just perfectly clear, perfectly clear, that it was 

this far and no farther; that this was not the thin edge of the 

wedge, that we've just drawn the line here and speaking on 

behalf of this government we will not go any farther with 

respect to these questions, than Bill 38. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, then I will have to 

make this comment.  We've got one of our other . . . another 

member wants to get back in again.  And we can get into these 

things on Committee of the Whole or whatever.  But I will read 

you this from your own party convention. 

 

Be it resolved that this annual convention express its grave 

concern that our government has failed to live up to the 

promise to establish protection against discrimination 

because of sexual orientation and has thereby left gay men 

and lesbians exposed to harassment and just denials of their 

rights, benefits and opportunities generally available to all. 

 

Be it resolved that this convention urges the NDP 

government to recommit itself to amending the Saskatchewan 

Human Rights Code to specifically prohibit discrimination 

based on sexual orientation; and further, to review all 

provincial statutes with the object of amending the definition 

of the term spouse, family and marriage status wherever they 

occur to include same-sex partners so as to ensure that 

lesbian and gay partners enjoy the same benefits as are 

available to heterosexual partners under pension, disability, 

sickness and other benefit plans. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, you must not have been at some of these here 

conventions where these things were at.  Maybe I should have 

been there and I could have stopped it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman and to the member, I am 

advised -- I haven't checked personally -- I am advised that that 

resolution was not passed by convention, it didn't reach the 

floor of plenary. It clearly passed at some constituency level, 

but was not accepted by the provincial convention.  Now I'll 

double-check that for the member. 

 

But in any event, we're just not going to do it.  We've said no, 

we're not going to do it; we're not going to do it in this Bill; 

we're not going to do it in the life of this government, period. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a 

couple of questions for the minister.  The first question is, Mr. 

Minister, when a case is before the prosecutor, how do they 

determine whether or not they should proceed with a particular 

case?  What qualifications do they apply to that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, and to the member, the 

prosecutors will review all of the material that's on the file.  

That would typically be statements and information that come 

from the police.  And they would assess that material to 

determine whether there is a reasonable case there, a reasonable 

likelihood of obtaining a conviction.  And they do that with 

every case. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  If a case was 

to involve sexual improprieties and it took place a number of 

years before and the parents of the 



May 13, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1697 

children involved had made some arrangements with the 

parents of the alleged accused, would that have an affect on a 

particular case?  Would that arrangement by the parents have 

an affect later if the victims of the case wished to bring a 

charge forward? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- We're having a bit of a discussion here 

about exactly what the member was trying to ask, and we have 

differing views as to what the question was.  So could I ask you 

to restate the question?  And I'll answer it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- If an arrangement had been made years 

before between the parents of the children who were 

supposedly molested and the potential accused person, would 

that have any effect later on if one of those victims wanted to 

bring forward a complaint that would arise into charges? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- If that arrangement had been made 

without any reference to the police or the justice system, then it 

would not have an effect.  If, however, the situation had been 

resolved in some way involving the police or involving the 

department, then the result might be different.  But a private 

arrangement?  No.  That wouldn't affect the potential criminal 

responsibility later on. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  So any private 

arrangements between parents would have absolutely no affect, 

would not be taken under consideration by the prosecutor when 

he looks at the evidence dealing with a possible charge. 

 

(2115) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The private arrangement of which the 

member speaks is not irrelevant.  It could be taken into 

consideration by the prosecutors in determining how the case 

should be handled.  So I perhaps . . . I should have perhaps 

qualified my earlier statement.  I mean it's not irrelevant, but it 

doesn't operate as a bar, some kind of a statutory bar to 

prosecution, nor does it relieve the wrongdoer of criminal 

responsibility by itself.  But it is something that the prosecutors 

would take into account in deciding whether or not to proceed 

with the prosecution. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, that's somewhat 

different to what you said earlier because there is that potential 

situation with a constituent of mine, a group of constituents, 

involved in exactly that type of a situation.  And the prosecutor 

in the case said because an arrangement had been agreed to by 

the parents, that charges could not be laid against that 

individual by the victims later.  And this is causing a great deal 

of concern by the victims themselves and with their siblings at 

this present time. 

 

So perhaps, Mr. Minister, what I should do with this is bring it 

to you personally and let you have a look at it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, I would appreciate that.  We'll look 

into it.  And I regret having sort of spoken too categorically in 

the first part of my answer, but I'd 

be glad to see the member and chase this thing down. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I just 

remembered . . . I almost forgot to bring a bit of information 

with me and I'm glad my colleague came in at the time. 

 

I'm going to ask you a question here, read a bit of information 

into the record, and you could respond to it.  It's regarding the 

Joe Olson case, down, I believe, at Oxbow.  And that was that 

young gentleman who lost his life, was the owner of a car 

dealership down there, and a number of questions have arisen.  

I've sent a question, a letter to your office, requesting some 

clarification based on information that's been requested on my 

behalf by family members, parents, grandparents and certainly 

the wife of the deceased. 

 

And just for the record here, I'm going to just read a couple of 

paragraphs. 

 

I have some grave, very grave concerns regarding the present 

thinking of our justice system.  The concerns I have have 

been fuelled by the cases in the past few months for the loss 

of life of Joe Olson, William Dove and the two gentlemen at 

Kamsack occurred, and in particular, the sentencing of these 

cases. 

 

And three things are brought out.  First, it appears as though 

you are no longer placing any value on a human life.  

Second, the innocent family members are put through 

tremendous emotional stress for a longer period of time, 

waiting for justice to be served, than the guilty served for the 

criminal offence.  Third, when a conviction is handed down, 

it seems as though the sentencing is nothing more than a slap 

on the wrist. 

 

I feel some thought should go into what it takes to mould a 

human life -- the time, the caring, the effort of all those 

involved in that life.  And when someone takes a life, the 

time that person serves for the life they have taken should be 

reflected in the sentence. 

 

But the sentence handed out in the above-mentioned case, or 

cases, this was not revealed.  For just a moment think of how 

you would feel if Joel Olson was your son.  What kind of 

justice would you want served?  It's hard to be rational when 

you're personally involved.  It's not that I'm writing to 

promote the idea of reopening the case to reflect on the 

severity of the crime and hand down a punishment that 

would fit a crime of this magnitude . . . 

 

And it goes on.  I think, Mr. Minister, that basically brings out 

the questions and the concerns that arise from that case as well.  

And I'm wondering if you could comment, just bring us up to 

date.  It's a situation that certainly is affecting a young family 

down in that area, and at the same time I want to also lay on the 

Table a number of petitions that were presented to me as well.  

I wonder if you can make a comment on that, Mr. 



1698 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1993 

Minister, please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  The case went to 

trial, a murder charge was laid, and the prosecution was on the 

murder charge at the conclusion of the evidence in argument.  

The court found the accused guilty of manslaughter and 

imposed a two-year sentence.  On March 18 of this year the 

department appealed that sentence to the Saskatchewan Court 

of Appeal.  We were not able to appeal the conviction because 

we did not consider that there was any legal ground for 

appealing the conviction, but we appealed the sentence on the 

basis that we did not believe the sentence was adequate. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I'm sure that the 

Olson families would appreciate the effort that has been put 

into it.  It would certainly appear to me that two years really 

isn't much of a time in consideration of the fact that a person of 

that young an age . . . his life is just totally gone and taken from 

his family. 

 

One more question.  I believe the department is also 

responsible for police services in the province.  And in the 

town of Martensville . . . Number one, I guess, there's a couple 

questions related to this.  There's been an ongoing debate in 

this province regarding RCMP services, the cost of these 

services, the portion that the federal government puts into it, 

what percentage comes from the federal government and the 

province.  And I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, where we are 

today regarding negotiations on RCMP services? 

 

The second question, Mr. Minister, is regarding the situation in 

Martensville where the community of Martensville has decided 

to not continue with their local police force.  There's some 

circumstances surrounding that as well in light of accusations 

that have arisen where they brought the RCMP in.  Now a 

number of local community people have also raised the 

concern that they would still like to have a local police force.  I 

don't know if your department's had any requests come out of 

the town on that, but I wonder if you could just make a few 

comments on these questions before we move to voting off 

Justice estimates. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, and to the member, the 

member will recall that last year at about this time we signed a 

policing agreement with the federal government, a 20-year 

agreement.  It provides for a cost sharing of 70 per cent 

provincial, 30 per cent federal. 

 

The town of Martensville has recently decided, by a motion of 

its town council, to disband its own police force, and they will 

henceforth be policed by the RCMP.  We are at the present 

time providing services on an interim basis pursuant to The 

Police Act, and this legislature has enabled us to now sign an 

extended policing agreement with the town of Martensville 

under which they will pay for the cost of policing.  It will not 

be a cost to the province. 

 

We have supported the town with a grant in respect to 

some of the costs that they've incurred through these 

extraordinary times, and we believe that we are not aware of 

there being any opposition to the RCMP in the town of 

Martensville, but there well may be.  We have acted on the 

request of the town council, so I think that was appropriate. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Just one comment.  Mr. Minister, certainly I want 

to thank you for your responses tonight.  I also want to thank 

you for sending over these written answers.  I just wish I'd had 

a little more time because there's a lot of good questions in 

those written responses.  But I want to thank you for the time 

and thank your officials for their involvement in the debate this 

evening. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I would like to thank the member 

for his courtesy and the thorough way in which he approached 

this matter.  And I'd like to thank all of my own officials, a 

department of which we can all be proud, I think, doing a very 

difficult job under difficult circumstances and doing it well. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 3 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992-93 

Consolidated Fund 

Budgetary Expenditure 

Justice 

Vote 3 

 

Item 1 -- Statutory 

 

Vote 3 agreed to. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat 

Vote 25 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the minister to please introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like 

to introduce Mr. Marv Hendrickson, who is the deputy minister 

and is seated to my left.  Behind Mr. Hendrickson is Mr. Victor 

Taylor, who is the assistant deputy minister, and behind me is 

Mr. John Reid, the executive director of strategic planning. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I've 

got a couple of items here that I wish to bring to your attention 

on behalf of Saskatchewan people before I ask you a few other 

things.  One is, and it's a copy of a petition presented by the 

Onion Lake Band Indian Reserve 119-120 that I believe that 

you are aware of requesting the Royal Canadian Mounted 

Police to conduct an investigation into the allocation of band 

monies.  I'm going to lay this on the Table like I say.  I'm sure 

that you have copies of it.  I'd like some comment from you on 

that. 



May 13, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1699 

(2130) 

 

And also, Mr. Minister, while you're commenting on that one, I 

have a letter here from the RM of Rosthern No. 403.  This was 

sent February 16, '93, to the director of Indian and Metis 

Affairs Secretariat pertaining to a land claim by the One Arrow 

Band on a community pasture, Rosthern community pasture.  

This is from the administrator, Mr. Spriggs, talking about the 

formation of this pasture and how, in his opinion and his RM's 

(rural municipality) opinion, this should not have been deemed 

Crown land to begin with, and that this particular claim has no 

business being part of the structure. 

 

So I also believe, Mr. Minister, that you'll have this letter in 

your possession, and if need be I can supply copies.  If you 

could comment on those two issues before I get into some other 

things. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, and to the member, 

dealing with the document from the Onion Lake Band, we are 

not aware of that particular matter.  I don't recall it nor do my 

officials.  We don't make any grants to that band.  The federal 

government does and it may be that they have the matter under 

review.  But we will look into the matter and give you such 

information as we're able to uncover. 

 

With respect to the letter from the RM of Rosthern, again I 

have no recollection of receiving that letter nor have my 

officials. 

 

I might just comment though in general that with respect to 

these entitlement claims, they are made and they are taken 

subject to third-party interests.  And we believe that the way it 

would work with the community pasture is that the patrons of 

the pasture -- if that's the right term -- the people using the 

pasture have a third-party interest as that term is understood 

under the agreement.  And it would take a majority vote of the 

pasture patrons in order for the land to be claimed successfully 

by the One Arrow Band.  Now I may be wrong, but just in 

general that's how it would work, so it may work like that in 

this situation.  Again though, we'll check out the letter and get 

back to you with more information. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I've asked the staff to provide you with a copy 

of that letter.  It's not a very good copy unfortunately.  There's 

one paragraph that is very difficult to read, but I think you'll get 

the gist of the letter.  And I'm surprised that it hasn't showed up 

there some place because that's who it was addressed to.  And 

if you would look at both issues. 

 

The other one with the Onion Lake Band, there's some very 

serious allegations there of fraud and misuse of funds and that 

type of thing, and I would have thought someone in your 

department would have been aware of that type of issue 

coming to the forefront.  I'll leave it in your hands, Mr. 

Minister, to give me a report sooner than later on that particular 

issue. 

 

Now there's a couple of other things that I wish to 

touch on, Mr. Minister, and I don't think they'll need to take a 

long time.  I wonder if you could give me a quick summary of 

your negotiations with the White Bear Band and the Bear Claw 

situation other than the legal stuff.  We all understand the 

situation is now before the courts, and they are going to 

determine whatever.  And I would suggest to you, Mr. 

Minister, that this was inevitable, that the flawed process that 

the government undertook prior to simply muddied the water a 

little bit.  But I wonder if you could tell me where exactly you 

are at as the minister responsible for Indian-native affairs 

vis-a-vis this particular band. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, and to the member, I and 

my officials were involved in the negotiations with the band 

prior to the band opening the casino on the reserve and those 

negotiations were not fruitful.  The thrust of those negotiations 

had been to attempt to bring the White Bear proposal within the 

four corners of the provincial gaming policy as that had been 

publicly announced.  And we were not able to successfully 

conclude those negotiations and the member will know then 

what happened after that. 

 

Quite recently, I can give the member a report of 

developments, although I personally have not been involved.  

I've dropped out of those negotiations because it just didn't 

seem appropriate for Justice to be involved in those 

negotiations while the charges were outstanding. 

 

But my colleague, the minister who is responsible for gaming, 

has, I am informed, had a meeting with White Bear officials 

and a very constructive meeting.  I'm informed that the thrust 

of that meeting was that White Bear is very interested in 

establishing a casino within the policy and are going to put 

together a proposal to that end.  And there are no other 

developments of which I am aware. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, have any of the Indian bands in 

the province indicated to you that this is sort of an unnatural 

relationship to be drawing, and exhibition associations and 

agricultural societies that have been long-standing institutions 

in the province, along with Indians bands, in order . . . As my 

former position as minister, I guess, allows me to listen to a lot 

of people from the Indian and Metis community, and it isn't a 

particularly easy relationship, Mr. Minister, to establish nor to 

look at a long-term marriage of mutual convenience, and I'm 

afraid that the price of divorce may be more than what 

Saskatchewan's public and society will be willing to accept 

because I'm afraid the divorce will be very messy. 

 

And I really hope that you as the minister responsible for 

aboriginal people in this province is listening to those concerns.  

And I shudder to think what the Agriculture minister may have 

to do in some cases here too, down the road.  It doesn't seem to 

me, Mr. Minister, an alliance that will be here a hundred years 

from now.  I'd like your comments on it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- There is no question, Mr. Chairman, and 

Mr. Member, that this is a bit of an unnatural situation that is 

developing.  First of all, may 



1700 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1993 

I say that the negotiations between the groups involved have 

been proceeding very well with respect to a proposal to 

establish a casino at North Battleford, and that Prince Albert 

also seems quite enthusiastic about it.  But there are certainly 

people in this loop that have some misgivings and they're 

trying to work those out. 

 

The exhibition associations are our natural partners in whatever 

happens here because they have been running casinos in some 

of our larger centres for a long time.  And it's no secret that 

those casinos are a very important source of funding for the 

exhibition associations.  I think it's correct to say that without 

them they would be in really great financial difficulty.  Of 

course the way the Criminal Code is structured with respect to 

this area, the participation of exhibition associations is 

practically a necessity. 

 

The Indians were the first off the mark with respect to the idea 

of establishing casinos in Saskatchewan in any significant way.  

They had their . . . their research included trips to Minnesota 

and they had quite well-developed plans when they came to 

talk to us about opening casinos.  At the time they were talking 

about opening their own casinos where they would have, in 

effect, a monopoly on it.  And our view was that could not 

happen in light of the situation with the exhibition associations. 

 

And those two streams led to the idea that perhaps joint 

ventures between these partners could be a workable thing.  I 

think it can.  I have no way of knowing whether it can hold up 

or not, but I don't see any reason why not.  The Indian and 

Metis community and leadership, as the member will know 

from his own experience, are very mature and have acquired a 

considerable amount of experience with respect to commercial 

matters.  And the exhibition associations have had a long 

experience in the subject in casinos, especially in the board 

games, the card games. 

 

While it's not the sort of thing that you would just naturally 

think of, I think that there would be nothing preventing their 

success.  If Saskatchewan people are willing to patronize these 

casinos -- and I guess they are; all indications are that they are 

-- then I think they can succeed, and I'm optimistic.  I'm really, 

sincerely hopeful in believing that the divorce that the member 

refers to will never take place. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I'm not going to belabour the point, Mr. 

Minister, but I'm being told is everybody thinks it's a great 

proposition as long as they don't have to share the proceeds.  

There is a great expectation amongst many parties that they can 

use this to get ahead, but when they have to split it many ways, 

it is going to be more difficult.  And I would suggest that some 

of the problems that your government has with your current 

minister of gaming and some of his problems with other 

companies are because the Department of Finance has more to 

say about this equation than the exhibition associations and the 

Indian bands and others. 

 

That is going to put a lot of pressure on this particular 

marriage.  It's like having to live with your mother-in-law who 

constantly demands certain amounts at all times.  I just say, 

watch it close, Mr. Minister. 

 

(2145) 

 

There's a couple of other things here, and then we can wrap this 

up.  I notice in the information you sent over, and I would 

thank you for all of it, and thank your officials, that you have 

about a page and a third of terminations here, and you also 

have about a page and a third of new employees. 

 

And I would just like the minister to go on record again -- as he 

did last year -- that there would be none of the employed 

positions here, any type of back-filling going on in this 

particular department, with political people, given that the 

number of terminations and the number of new hirings are 

almost exactly the same.  So I'm sure the minister won't have 

any problem giving me the assurance that he hasn't back-filled 

any of these positions with New Democrat types. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I'll try to answer the member's 

questions.  With respect to the terminations, some of these are 

not people who have been terminated and are out of the 

government service, their employment in one classification 

terminated and they were promoted into another classification; 

they include movement within the branch. 

 

The people who have been terminated right out were . . . There 

were five of them and with reference to this sheet, the first 

person mentioned, the training consultant; the third person 

mentioned; the fifth person mentioned, the secretary; the sixth 

person mentioned, the director; and then the first person 

mentioned under non-permanent -- those were all position 

deletions as a result of budget cuts and none of those have been 

replaced by anybody. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

Item 4 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, the two Bills which you 

introduced into the legislature the other day pertaining to 

agreements between the federal government and yourself on 

the, I believe, Natural Resources Transfer Act of 1930 and the 

other one.  Are they directly impacting on these amounts of 

monies that are being voted here as far as the treaty land 

entitlement process? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The two pieces of legislation were to, in 

effect, to implement the agreement so far as the provinces are 

concerned.  We agreed to do a number of things under those 

agreements and those things are reflected in those two pieces of 

legislation.  The money that's provided there is our annual 

contribution to that agreement that we've agreed to make, and 

that will continue for a period of some 10 more years, 10 more 

years. 



May 13, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1701 

Mr. Swenson: -- My question was what's being voted here this 

year?  Is there anything that because those Acts are being 

introduced in the legislature that there's going to be a direct 

ramification?  I mean we're talking about mineral rights and . . . 

Are any of the moves being made which will impact on those 

two Acts also impacting on this budgetary item here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- It's a very complex kind of question, Mr. 

Chairman, but the answer is no, not directly.  We have agreed 

in the framework agreement to implement the things that are in 

the Bill.  We have also agreed in that same framework to pay 

the money.  They are connected directly in that sense, but they 

are independent in the sense that they go off in separate 

directions and they don't directly impact on each other. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I just say to the 

minister, I would hope that as some of these larger events 

unfold, that he will endeavour to keep the opposition informed 

because they definitely impact on a lot of people.  And I think 

the more people that are informed when some of these 

acquisitions happen, the less chance there is for 

misunderstanding by the wider public. 

 

And if the minister will agree to that, then I would just like to 

say, Mr. Chairman, that I appreciate the answers and the 

officials waiting around and coming in tonight, and I have no 

further questions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I want to say that we will keep the 

Leader of the Opposition informed about these entitlement 

acquisitions as they take place because he states the case 

correctly. 

 

And while I'm on my feet, Mr. Chairman, may I also thank my 

officials, a small department with a very broad mandate.  If you 

compare the size of the unit that we have in this province 

compared to that in other provinces who have fewer Indian and 

Metis people, it is remarkable that they're able to keep on top of 

the issues in the way that they do. 

 

Item 4 agreed to. 

 

Vote 25 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992-93 

Consolidated Fund 

Budgetary Expenditure 

Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat 

Vote 25 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 25 agreed to. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board 

Vote 22 

 

Item 1 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, it's my pleasure to 

introduce Marilyn Turanich, the secretary of the Saskatchewan 

Municipal Board.  And I just want to say that I have here some 

general answers that the hon. member opposite will probably 

need to start his questioning. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, have all 

of the general questions, the standard questions, have they been 

answered? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, I say to the 

hon. member, that all the standard questions that we've been 

answering for each department, as I understand it, have been 

answered in this grouping. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I also 

welcome your official as well.  Excuse me, I didn't say that 

earlier. 

 

We just had a couple of areas that we wanted to touch on, 

nothing too terribly significant but something of a concern to a 

lady who formerly was a board member of the Saskatchewan 

Municipal Board.  I just wanted to touch on a Wanda Eifler.  I 

understand she was a board member for a number of years and 

then at some point was let go.  Now I just wanted to . . . Is the 

minister aware of the situation, if he could outline it a little bit. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- For the hon. member's information, 

Wanda Eifler had been a member for a number of years and the 

severance occurred in February of 1992, little over a year ago.  

The circumstances there were that there was a severance 

package paid out, and I think in the end the settlement was 

reached that was, my understanding at least, satisfactory to the 

two parties. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- There was a severance package, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- My understanding is that the 

severance judgement was 18 months.  And so it fell well within 

the parameters maybe to the longish end of what these 

severances would normally be.  More standard probably might 

be 12 months, but in this case the settlement was more in the 

area of 12 months salary . . . in the area of 18 months salary. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, my information is different than 

that but we'll rely on your information with respect to that.  I 

understand there has been an opportunity . . . there was an 

opening for a board member in October of '92.  Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Just going back to the previous 

question, I want to indicate to the hon. member that if there are 

other questions about the severance, about the length and that, I 

would be certainly available and I know the minister would be 

available to talk to him.  But my understanding, the 

information that I have here, is that it was about 18 months, or 

very close to that amount.  But if there are other questions and 

you care to follow that up, I know the minister would be more 

than willing to sit down and talk about it. 



1702 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1993 

The opening that occurred in October of '92, the vacancy that 

occurred at that point in time, is still open as we speak now, 

and I would imagine is under active consideration as to 

whether to fill or whether . . . at what point that will be filled 

I'm just not quite sure. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I understand that 

Wanda Eifler had an opportunity to meet with the minister 

responsible at some point and discuss the upcoming candidate 

selection, and at that time was told that she would be given a 

great deal of consideration for the job.  I'm wondering if you 

could just bring us up to date on that. 

 

(2200) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- That I don't know.  But here again, I 

will certainly get that information for you.  What I do know is 

at this point in time there is no nomination before government 

for that position.  If there was a meeting held previously, I 

would have to go and check back and get that information for 

you. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you.  What was the reason for her being 

let go in the first place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The information that I have is that 

there was a hope -- as in many areas of government at that time 

-- to downsize boards, commissions.  And I believe at the 

present time we have roughly two-thirds the number of board 

members, boards and board members, as existed when we 

came into government in 1991. 

 

So we've made an attempt, trying to keep the boards intact in 

the ability to do their work but downsize them in such a way as 

to save money for the taxpayers of the province.  And this 

obviously hasn't been altogether easy because in some cases 

people who we obviously would not have a problem with 

staying on boards were deleted from boards in order to achieve 

the kind of savings that we have found necessary in trying to 

bring the budget in at a reasonable level.  And in fact by the 

year 1996-97, that budget year, Mr. Chairman, actually already 

announced that we're going to balance the books of the 

province.  This is a small but yet important part of doing that. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, so then 

in the department's judgement and Municipal Board's 

judgement, that was the only reason she was let go, for 

budgetary reasons.  The fact that she was doing a good job, 

judging by the number of years that she was in that position, it 

was simply a budgetary concern and had nothing to do with her 

qualifications or her experience. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes.  My understanding is that we 

reduced the numbers on the board from 15 to 11 and this was 

one of the positions that was reduced, and basically for the 

reason that I mentioned. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- So, Mr. Minister, as far as you're concerned, 

you're comfortable that her qualifications and her experience 

were such that she would be 

capable of doing the job, and did a good job while she was in 

place. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The member will know that I have 

not had experience in working with the individual that we're 

talking about.  But the best advice that we had, or that I have, is 

that the problem was not with the quality of work. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- I see.  Okay.  So, my understanding . . . I'm 

having difficulty understanding here then, Mr. Minister. 

 

This lady was let go earlier in the year, November of '90.  Or 

pardon me, early -- I just forget the exact time here -- but early 

in '92, sometime.  And the reason she was let go was for 

budgetary reasons, and you've established that reason, and I 

understand that it had nothing to do with her qualifications or 

experience -- she was doing a good job. 

 

And yet, she had an opportunity to have a visit with the 

minister about it and she was told that it was for budgetary 

reasons -- the reason she was being let go.  It had nothing to do 

with her experience or her qualifications.  Simply budgetary 

reasons. 

 

And the minister told her, indicated to her that if the economy 

improves or a board member is required, that she should 

reapply.  And so, Mr. Minister, that's exactly what took place.  

There was a board appointment opened up in October 31, '92 

on the Saskatchewan Municipal Board, and Wanda Eifler did 

make application to the board for that job, for that appoint . . . 

for that job.  And I have her rsum here and I have everything 

else that she put forward at that time. 

 

So we have a situation where an employee of the Municipal 

Board was let go for no other reason than budgetary reasons, 

given the assurance from the minister that if the position 

opened up again, that she should reapply.  And she wasn't let 

go for anything such as a misconduct or her lack of 

qualifications or anything like that.  She was clearly established 

that she was let go simply for budgetary reasons. 

 

And yet when the job position opened up -- and she clearly has 

the qualifications and experience -- the chairman wrote back to 

her and said, the successful applicant will be selected following 

interviews with those candidates whose qualifications and 

experience appear to be closely match the requirements of the 

position.  As a result, we will not be pursuing your application 

further at this time. 

 

Now there seems to be some inconsistency here, Mr. Minister, 

because she wasn't let go for any problem with her 

qualifications or her experience because she had worked there 

for nine years, obviously she had experience.  She wasn't let go 

because of anything to do with her qualifications because you 

have already established here earlier that her qualifications 

were fine.  The only reason she was let go was because of a 

budgetary concern. 



May 13, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1703 

So, Mr. Minister, is there any other reason that would come to 

your attention that she may have been let go for?  What reason?  

Because it doesn't seem to be very consistent here, Mr. 

Minister.  She's qualified and she's experienced.  She was told 

by the minister to reapply if the job did come open.  The job 

did come open and she reapplied, and she was told she doesn't 

have the qualifications and experience.  I wonder if you'd care 

to clarify that for us? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I just want to make it absolutely 

clear to the hon. member opposite that the understanding here 

is, is that there was downsizing going on on the board and 

therefore there was a reduction . . . I just want to get you the 

amount of money that was saved by the reduction because it 

was rather significant.  In fact, in the year 1993-94, we expect 

the saving will be $180,000 which is significant on one small 

change.  And when you add these up across government, it's 

not hundreds of thousands of dollars but millions of dollars that 

is being saved by these changes.  That's the one point. 

 

When going through these selections in downsizing of boards, 

there were a number of people changed because the 

government wanted to have new people on boards.  That's the 

prerogative of government.  It happens often times when 

governments change; often times not only on boards but also in 

the staffing of departments.  Ministers and governments will 

want to change their deputies, their associate deputy ministers, 

executive directors, not because the individuals who are there 

aren't doing a good job but because government needs new 

direction.  And this often happens and as not only often 

happens, is expected. 

 

In this case the downsizing took place and then later on an 

opening occurred.  There was . . . applications were taken for 

the position, my understanding, 65 people applied for that 

position, and the person, the individual that you're referring to 

was one of the 65. 

 

Now as the process goes on, the chairman of the board has a 

role to play in selecting and short-listing the group that will be 

finally appointed.  And of the 65, at the end of the day, 

someone will come forward.  But to say that all of the people 

who don't get there are unqualified flies in the face of how the 

process works.  It could easily be that 30 or 40 of the 

individuals who have applied, of the 65 who have applied, 

could do a good job on the board.  But at the end of day, only 

one can fill the position.  And so I think . . . understand what 

the board, the chairman of the board was saying in the letter, is 

that at this time -- I don't have a copy of the letter here -- but 

there might be someone who was more qualified. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister. Well it 

seems a little bit hard to believe that there would be someone 

more qualified for the job than someone who has actually been 

working on the job for nine years, has obviously the 

qualifications to do the job because they had worked there for 

nine years and has the experience obviously.  Nine years gives 

you a fairly significant amount of experience. 

And then you tell us that she is . . . and the minister says she 

was only let go for budgetary reasons and then we find out that 

when the job opens up again, it seems like this would be a 

prime candidate for the new job, and then you go on to justify 

it by saying that you've saved $180,000.  Well I doubt very 

much that Ms. Eifler was being paid $180,000.  So the savings 

were insignificant as far as her dismissal is concerned in the 

overall scheme of things, I would believe, particularly within 

months you ask for, you open up a competition for another 

board member.  If the savings were so significant why did you 

open up the possibility, or why did you open up competition 

once again for another board member? 

 

Mr. Minister, I don't know whether you can answer these 

questions or not.  I think we're going to have to have the 

minister herself answer these questions and I wonder if you'd 

care to comment on that, or would you care to report progress.  

Because I don't think I'm getting the kind of answer that we're 

entitled to or expecting on something like this, Mr. Minister, 

because clearly there's some serious inconsistencies with your 

responses and what's being . . . what you're telling us here this 

evening. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I mean we can easily report 

progress and I guess that's what I'll do when I complete my 

comments.  The simple fact is is that Ms. Eifler was making 

60,000, was being paid 60,000 a year and it doesn't take a 

mathematician to figure out that when you make these kind of 

reductions, this adds up very quickly . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- It doesn't add to 180. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- When you reduce by four?  By 

three? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- There was other board members let go at 

the same time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes.  And so I'm not sure that it's 

me not giving the information to you or you not being able to 

multiply 60,000 by 3, which adds up to 180,000.  But at any 

rate . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . But you're the one who 

made the sarcastic comment to start with . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Was her total salary $180,000? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- For three people. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- No, what's her's, I said. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- No, I said it was 60. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Okay, no problem then. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- And we reduced by three.  That's 

180,000, but because you're not able to understand that, I move 

the committee rise, report progress, and ask leave to sit again. 

 

The committee reported progress. 



1704 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1993 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:14 p.m. 

 


