




















































Hansard: May 07, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1529 

 May 7, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, today 

is a very special day for me because I have a great many of the 

members of my family here today.  And I'd like to introduce 

them to you and through you to my colleagues in the 

legislature. 

 

Sitting in your gallery is my very best friend and the best sister 

anyone could ever have, Ellie Stewart, and her husband Hugh 

who is very tolerant of us when we get together; and their two 

terrific children, Elsh and Ryan.  Also sitting up there are my 

husband's two daughters, Penny Murray and her son Luke, and 

Gillian Murray.  And my husband's also up there, but he asked 

me to ignore him, so reluctantly I'll do that. 

 

I hope that they appreciate the fine Vancouver and Victoria 

weather we've provided for them today.  And I would ask all of 

you to join me in welcoming them here to Regina.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, today I 

would like to introduce to you, and through you to other 

members of the Assembly, a group of 52 grade 7 students in the 

west gallery.  On a regular basis, at least since I've been 

elected, we've had similar visits -- I can't remember how many, 

but this group, Mr. Speaker, is from McKenzie Junior High 

School in Dauphin, Manitoba.  Their teachers are Kathy Baxter 

and Kelly Kuzyk. 

 

I want to just say one short word, Mr. Speaker.  I was born and 

raised on the east side of the province and we used to . . . the 

one thing I remember about Dauphin was CKDM Radio, and at 

7 o'clock every night we'd listen to the Cisco Kid . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- 7:30 on the dot. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- 7:30.  So it was a pleasure for me today to 

welcome the students and their teachers to the Assembly.  I 

hope you enjoy your visit to Regina, I hope you enjoy your stay 

at the legislature here, and I wish you a very safe trip home.  

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm proud to 

introduce to you, and through you to the Legislative Assembly, 

a good friend of mine and my constituency assistant, Deb Firus, 

who is in Regina to clean up my office and a few other things.  

And I'm sure she's going to have a good day.  She's really 

looking forward to question period. 

 

And Deb does a lot of work for us, for the government and for 

me, and I'd like all of my colleagues to 

welcome her here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would also like to 

rise and welcome the Stewart and Murray families.  My seat 

mate is very close to me.  And I wanted to add one thing that 

she was reluctant to mention, but it's a very special occasion 

that we welcome them here.  It's the wedding of their son 

Andrew and daughter-in-law-to-be Kirsten from the Edenwold 

area.  So I wish them well in their future together as well. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Economic Summit 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question this morning is to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, now that 

you have had 24 hours to reflect on the mess that your 

government has made of job creation in the province, I wonder 

if your 24-hour reflection has allowed you to take away some 

of those harsh words that you had for the business community 

in our province. 

 

Now that you realize in these last 24 hours, Mr. Premier, that 

you're 16,000 jobs short of what your budget, your own budget, 

projects and the targets that you've set, will you now admit, sir, 

that you do need some help and that you're willing to agree to 

give Saskatchewan business people the opportunity to sit down 

with you and your government cabinet ministers and review 

your own plans to strengthen the province of Saskatchewan?  

Would you do that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the acting 

opposition leader for the question.  To answer the question 

specifically, we have always maintained a policy of 

consultation with not only the business community but the 

trade union movements, cooperatives.  Anybody who wishes to 

talk to the government, we try to arrange an appropriate time to 

meet with them. 

 

But I would also say to the Leader of the Opposition that 

today's Statistics Canada figures are encouraging.  They 

indicate that the labour force is up this month -- April that is to 

say, the month of April -- by more than 4,000 new jobs 

compared to March of 1993 -- 4,000. 

 

And to compare that from year to year, April of '93 compared 

to April of '92, that's up by 2,000 jobs according to StatsCan.  

Agricultural employment is increased by 7,000 -- by 7,000 -- 

from the March '93 level to 82,000 persons.  We still have the 

lowest unemployment rate in all of Canada to boot. 

 

Now that's not to say that we're satisfied with that.  We have to 

continue to working hard on this.  I simply 



1530 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1993 

point out that the figures are, as I've indicated earlier in 

question period, encouraging, that we have begun to turn the 

corner.  We have turned the corner.  We're beginning our climb 

back up out of the recession and out of the difficulties the 

former administration put us into. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Premier.  Mr. Premier, when I asked you yesterday to meet 

with the business community in this province to develop some 

new job creation strategies, to review your own document, you 

came back by chastising the business community and saying: 

don't worry folks, don't worry; everything's fine; be happy. 

 

You passed out this progress report yesterday on your 

government's record to date.  Well, Mr. Premier, I've read the 

report, and other than providing some work for one of your 

NDP (New Democratic Party) printing companies, there isn't a 

whole lot in here to give anyone some hope that there's a job 

around the corner. 

 

Mr. Premier, you need some help.  Your own document, the 

"Monthly Statistical Review", April '93, confirms what the 

business community are saying, is that you, sir, are a way off 

the mark -- your very own document.  Now you need some 

help, Mr. Premier.  Instead of declaring war on a segment of 

this province that's going to pay the bills down the road, why 

don't you say to them, yes, I will meet with you; we will have a 

summit; we will do it while this legislature's in session and all 

Saskatchewan people will have the opportunity to review the 

results.  Mr. Premier, give us that commitment today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member either 

refuses to accept or simply ignores the simple fact which I've 

articulated already in the first question, and that is that there is 

a 4,000 job labour force increase, according to StatsCanada.  

Not the provincial government but StatsCanada.  And that's 

2,000 more than last year. 

 

Now I've said to the hon. member and I've said to the business 

community and the working community, that's not enough.  We 

have a blueprint and we have a strategy.  We have a Provincial 

Action Committee on the Economy made up of business 

leaders, trade union people, and others, who are assisting us in 

working our way out of the very difficult situation which he 

and his colleagues have placed the province.  So we're looking 

for advice from anybody and everybody that we can get.  We 

think we're on the right path. 

 

And I really suggest to the Leader of the Opposition that he 

would be, I think, better off joining us in the direction that 

we're headed rather than simply trying to politic everything all 

the time. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question to the 

Premier.  Mr. Premier, members of the official opposition 

would love to join you and the business leaders of this province 

in an economic summit and we could all sit down and review 

your document and look at how this thing could be built in the 

future. 

 

Unfortunately, sir, you keep denying that you need help.  When 

the facts are in, Mr. Premier, in 1991 in October -- on the day 

of the election, the day you became Premier -- there were 

447,000 people working in this province and 31,000 

unemployed.  Today, Mr. Premier, there are 426,000 jobs and 

45,000 unemployed.  Mr. Premier, my numbers show that 

there's 2,000 more unemployed than there were a year ago. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, that's 21,000 less jobs and 14,000 more 

people looking for work.  That's your record, your legacy, Mr. 

Premier.  There are people out there willing to help you turn 

those numbers around.  You can't blame it on someone else all 

the time, Mr. Premier. 

 

Now the biggest group of people in this province that are going 

to help you pay the taxes are saying that they'd like to sit down 

with you and redress these numbers.  Mr. Premier, why don't 

you accept that offer of help?  Why will you not sit down with 

the business community in this province and try and update that 

document so that it's meaningful, instead of just more fluff that 

your government puts out?  Why don't you do that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member again 

refuses to listen to the answer.  Please, Mr. Leader of the 

Opposition, listen to the answer. 

 

We do want to listen to the business community, we do listen 

to the business community, like we listen to the working 

community and to the farm community.  That's why we have 

the Provincial Action Committee on the Economy, sir.  It's 

made up of leading business people and leading trade union 

people.  They are advising us on the implementation of the 

blueprint. 

 

And I repeat again:  4,000 more people added to the labour 

force -- 4,000 in April of '93 compared to March of '93.  In one 

month's comparison -- 4,000.  I think that's a pretty good 

indicator that we are beginning to make some progress.  Those 

numbers will go up and they'll go down.  We'll have some 

set-backs. 

 

But generally I say to the member opposite that we are working 

with the business community.  We're working with them and 

the trade union movement.  We're asking everybody to 

cooperate, and I think that most people in the province of 

Saskatchewan are definitely interested and helping us in 

turning the situation around. 



May 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1531 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the 

Premier is the one that has the hearing problem. 

 

Mr. Premier, in one of your many versions of the speech 

delivered in New York, and we're not sure which one, but on 

one of the many versions of your speech in New York you said 

to the bankers that we have offset these increases to some 

degree with a number of tax incentives that are targeted to 

encourage expansion in the small-business sector and create 

jobs. 

 

Mr. Premier, what the business community are saying to you, 

sir, is that this simply isn't true.  That what you're telling the 

bankers in New York about what you're doing with the 

business community in this province simply isn't true.  The 

numbers prove it, Mr. Premier -- 21,000 less jobs in this 

province since the day you took office as Premier, 21,000 less.  

Unemployment far higher than it was before. 

 

You tell the New York bankers one thing; the business 

community says, Mr. Premier, this isn't the facts we need to sit 

down and review your Partnership IN PROGRESS* 

document.  We need to re-evaluate it because you're not 

meeting the mark. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, you're not in New York.  You need to come 

out and be straight with Saskatchewan people.  Commit to the 

summit, Mr. Premier.  That's all they're asking for is just 

commit to a sit-down with them to review the progress report.  

Would you do that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the earnestness with 

which the Leader of the Opposition tries to portray the question 

unfortunately does not mask the total failure to understand the 

facts.  The facts of the situation are that in the last budget about 

$31 million in tax concessions and incentives have been 

directed to the small-business community. 

 

Now if the Leader of the Opposition is saying that at the time 

that things are tough going for the people in Saskatchewan in 

some sectors, in some areas, as we readjust and try and work 

our way out of this economic hole that we . . . that he put us 

into, that we should be pumping more money to a particular 

sector like big business, like they did from 1982 to 1991, I tell 

the Leader of the Opposition those days are gone.  We don't 

have megabucks for megaprojects.  We don't have the projects 

for Cargill and Saferco now.  We don't . . . 

 

The hon. member, the former premier, says how do I like it.  I'd 

like to know how he likes it.  He likes it so much that he's 

joined a competitive board of directors and he says that that's in 

the interest of the province of Saskatchewan.  That to me is 

very, very puzzling. 

So I think, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, what you should do is 

get your economic policy in order, perhaps maybe reining in 

the former premier to be on side with you would be a good 

idea.  And from that point of view we might be able to work to 

develop Saskatchewan even stronger than I think it's going to 

be in the years ahead. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's 

the politics that the Premier indulges in that is the problem 

here.  I mean he goes to New York, and I quote from the same 

document, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 And many other national and international companies, 

Cargill, Hitachi, IBM, Northern Telecom, and Weyerhaeuser, 

to name a few, all have substantial projects in our province 

and are the reason that we're going to do so well. 

 

I mean, he indulges in his political flippancy in this legislature 

day by day.  The facts are, Mr. Speaker, the facts are 16,000 

jobs in one year off the mark.  Those are the facts.  And yes, 

those big companies are here employing people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Premier, stop the politics.  The business community are 

saying to you, we will help you redesign the assistance perhaps.  

We will help you do things better.  Sit down with us and be 

open and accountable.  Mr. Premier, give that commitment to 

them today.  Would you do that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, again the Leader of the 

Opposition simply refuses to accept the facts.  I repeat to him 

again that there is an organization called the Provincial Action 

Committee on the Economy.  The Provincial Action Committee 

on the Economy is comprised of business leaders.  It's 

comprised of business leaders from the resource sector, the 

manufacturing section, straight across the piece.  They meet 

regularly.  They advise the government.  They monitor our 

economic plan.   They indicate whether or not we're heading in 

the right direction. 

 

The fact is that we have 4,000 more jobs added to the labour 

force in April of '93 as opposed to March of '93.  The Leader of 

the Opposition can't get around that fact.  He simply ignores it.  

He simply wants to continue to politic. 

 

And I simply say to the Leader of the Opposition and the 

Conservative Party that they ought to face up to realities and to 

basic facts.  And once they do that, then I think we can get on 

to working in a cooperative fashion.  I mean, I repeat again, we 

have to pull this province out of the sink-hole, the depths of 

debt which it was sunk into by the administration when it was 

in power, by the members opposite.  We're doing that.  It took 

us nine and a half years to get into this mess; we're not going to 

turn it around overnight.  But by golly, we're making a very 

good start at it in 18 



1532 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1993 

months -- a very good start. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- I would just like to ask members to please not 

a constant barrage of interruptions when the Premier is trying 

to give the answer. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, you're 

not listening.  That coalition of business groups covers the 

piece in the province of Saskatchewan as far as people who hire 

and employ and pay taxes, Mr. Premier.  And you can have all 

the committees that you want, appointed by your government, 

running around this province; the simple facts are, sir, that the 

numbers aren't there.  And whatever you have done isn't doing 

the job, Mr. Premier.  Your leadership and your vision, they are 

saying, is not doing the job.  We've got to step back, reassess, 

realign, and come up with a plan that does make some sense. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, surely you have the time, when they say 

that the provincial economy is falling apart, that you would 

have the time to commit yourself and your government to a 

sit-down; at least listen, Mr. Premier. 

 

It's Friday morning, sir; why don't you send a message out for 

the weekend that would give people in this province the hope 

that they could spend their life savings on their business and 

know that they've got a government that'll back them up?  Mr. 

Premier, give them that commitment this morning. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, again I can't help but be 

amused at the attempt at earnestness by the Leader of the 

Opposition, from a government when it was in power after nine 

and a half years -- which by the way virtually decimated the 

business community and virtually bankrupted the province of 

Saskatchewan.  The member from Arm River knows that -- 

virtually bankrupted it. 

 

By the way, I find it passing strange also I might add, that some 

of the business leaders of that period were absolutely silent for 

nine and a half years when they saw this kind of bankruptcy 

and pillage taking place in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I welcome their comments now, don't get me wrong.  But for 

nine and a half years they were silent.  Now they're speaking up 

-- some of them are.  We welcome that, but it rings hollow, by 

the Leader of the Opposition, it rings hollow for him to say that 

we're not listening to the business community; we are. 

 

The Provincial Action Committee on the Economy is made up 

of business and community leaders and trade union leaders 

right across the piece.  I have total confidence in them.  And I 

simply say that the so-called coalition speaks in some areas for 

their own concerns and interests.  I don't think that they 

represent the average, ordinary small-business 

person.  That's my view. 

 

We're not going to dismiss their comments.  We're going to 

take their comments seriously, but by golly I'm not going to put 

or accept your interpretation of what they say.  The facts speak 

for themselves -- 4,000 new jobs in April of '93 compared to 

March of '93.  You never had that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Purchase of Video Lottery Terminals 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Minister responsible for the Gaming Commission.  Mr. 

Minister, the former gaming commissioner in West Virginia 

has been arraigned on five federal criminal charges stemming 

from his work as a head of that state agency.  The allegations 

include insider trading, Mr. Minister.  The gaming 

commissioner allegedly bought 700 shares of GTECH, 300 

shares of VLC (Video Lottery Consultant) in '91 and '92, and 

also sent wire orders for the purchase of 4,000 shares of VLT 

(Video Lottery Technologies Inc.). 

 

Mr. Minister, I am sure you agree that these are not very 

reputable transactions.  Can you tell me if the security check, 

which you have been hiding from the public, can you tell me if 

that report knew of these problems when it said GTECH and 

VLT were model citizens? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to 

respond to the member's question.  I became aware of the 

events with respect to West Virginia on the 28th day of April, 

as did the Gaming Commission.  At that time, Mr. Member, is 

when I became aware of the FBI's (Federal Bureau of 

Investigation) investigation in the United States. 

 

I want to say that we took action when we were made aware 

and I will pass on the memo that was sent to the president of 

Property Management Corporation as well as the chief 

executive officer of the Saskatchewan Gaming Commission 

with respect to the issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, can the 

minister tell this Assembly that he has finally, finally read the 

report that was passed on to him by SPMC (Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation) through his top security 

man there, Mr. Egan?  Have you read that report to this day, 

Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that I 

have had a condensed version of their findings and their 

investigations and I can suggest to you that I am sure Mr. Egan 

in his investigation did all due diligence and was aware of all of 

the information available at the time that the study was done 

and at the time they made the recommendation to the Gaming 



May 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1533 

Commission. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Did that Reader's Digest condensed version 

include the mail fraud also involved, the mailing of advertising 

contracts, the second mail fraud count charges that were laid in 

West Virginia? Does it also include charges of insider trading?  

Does it also include of buying shares in the companies?  Does 

that also include meeting and visiting with the people that they 

shouldn't have been meeting?  Does that also include that he 

was fired by the governor of the state of West Virginia?  Does 

it include that?  That condensed version that you read, does it 

include that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I think the member is 

well aware of the timing and of the events that these charges 

were made with respect to the director of gaming in West 

Virginia. And I'm thinking he's also well aware of the fact that 

these events would have happened just prior to the 28th day of 

April.  And I want to say to the member that we have taken the 

necessary action with respect to the happenings in the United 

States. 

 

And I think the member is well aware of that, and as I have 

indicated, I will pass a copy of the memorandum after question 

period so that he can better understand what action we have 

taken in this regard. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, does that 

mean that the minister has cancelled the contract with GTECH 

in response to the information that he has received from the 

Federal Bureau of Investigation in the United States? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I am 

passing across a memo with respect to VLC and the happenings 

with respect to the West . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  I haven't kept track -- I 

want to remind the member from Estevan this morning -- but it 

must be around the 50th that you have interrupted this morning, 

at least that many times, at least that many times.  I've asked 

him before to quit interrupting. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Mr. Speaker, that's unfair.  If you don't 

know, you shouldn't say. 

 

The Speaker: -- I wasn't talking to the member from Rosthern.  

If he'd just please stay out of it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, to satisfy the concerns 

of the member opposite, perhaps I should quote part of the 

memorandum.  And it reads: 

 

 I am most concerned about this indictment because it is our 

responsibility to ensure that 

the the gaming industry in this province is kept clean of the 

problems that have become well established in the United 

States. 

 

 Based on this information, I am hereby directing that no 

agreements be signed . . . 

 

That was sent on April 28. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, I have been raising this question 

with you for a lot longer than the period of time from April 28 

till now.  And, Mr. Minister, I have told you over and over and 

over again, we have a stack of information that deals with 

exactly these kinds of issues from two years ago to today. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, my question to you is 

again:  why don't you take the time to read that report and 

deliver to the people of Saskatchewan a clear, unequivocal 

opinion that your decisions are clean and that they are 

absolutely clean? 

 

Will you confirm to the Assembly that you're going to be 

prepared to do that today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

member opposite, at the time when the investigation was done, 

that the Property Management Corporation and the Gaming 

Commission clearly looked at all of the information that was 

available to them at that time.  They looked at the 

circumstances that were available.  And I want to say that with 

that information, they passed a recommendation to the Gaming 

Commission.  And I think the member is well aware of that. 

 

I want to say to the member opposite, if you have information 

that was not available at that time to Mr. Egan, I'm going to ask 

you to forward it to us. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, I think you 

have a responsibility today, to not only table that memorandum 

that you sent around, but also table the condensed version -- the 

Reader's Digest condensed version of the report -- plus the 

report to the people of the province of Saskatchewan so that 

they can read it.  They, Mr. Minister, will take the time to read 

it even though you don't take the time to read it.  Will you 

provide that for the Assembly today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, let me say to the 

member opposite that when the investigation was done, Mr. 

Egan used all of the information that was available and that was 

public and that he could receive from other gaming 

commissions, from other jurisdictions, as an example, the 

Government of Alberta.  All of this information was compiled 

and based on the information that was available at that time.  

He recommended to the Gaming Commission what the 

recommendation was, and you clearly know 



1534 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1993 

what it was. 

 

And I want to say just one more time, and I'm going to quote 

again from my memo, that we are very concerned with respect 

to the integrity of gaming in this province.  We are well aware 

of the way gaming is handled in the United States.  And 

because of that awareness, we are going to do everything, Mr. 

Member, to ensure the integrity of gaming and the integrity of 

this operation in Saskatchewan. 

 

And I want to say to you that that is why I instructed, and 

because of those concerns, that no agreements be signed until 

we have further information with respect to this issue.  And I 

am going to forward a copy of this memo to the member 

opposite. 

 

And I ask you once . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, the minister 

has said to me over and over again that he is going to provide 

information to this Assembly and to the people of 

Saskatchewan that he knows what's going on.  You have had 

one news release saying you awarded contracts to two 

companies in the United States, VLC and GTECH, you have 

already stated, Mr. Minister.  Then you went again and said 

that, oh no, we'll just do GTECH.  Now, Mr. Minister, you're 

saying you haven't done anything at all. 

 

Why did you do that?  Was it because, Mr. Minister, you never 

checked with the California people, with the Idaho people, with 

the Oregon people, with the West Virginia people, with the 

Maine people, with the Minnesota people, and all of those 

people in United States, and the reason is because you didn't 

read the report, Mr. Minister?  Isn't that the reason why you 

didn't do it then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, let me refresh the 

member's memory.  And he can research Hansard and he can 

check through the jurisdictions which were consulted by Mr. 

Egan, both in the United States and in Canada.  And he will be 

well aware of the fact that this Gaming Commission in this 

province and the investigator from this province has consulted 

with the Government of Alberta with respect to their dealings 

and with respect to their information. 

 

And I want to say to the member, we have consulted widely in 

the United States with all of the different states and we have 

talked with their gaming commissions, and we put together all 

of the information that was available to us. 

 

And I'm asking the member, if you have some inside 

information from some secret source that you appear to have, 

would you table those documents so that the Gaming 

Commission can be aware of all of this inside information that 

you seem to have? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- I ask leave of the Assembly for introduction of 

guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On behalf of my 

colleague, the hon. member from Kinistino, I'd like to introduce 

to you in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, through you to the rest of 

the Assembly, 18 students from the Wakaw School from grades 

4 to 8.  They have with them their teacher Mrs. Brueckner, and 

chaperons Mrs. Nemeth and Mrs. Wawyrk.  And also, I don't 

have the lady's or gentleman's name, but their bus driver is 

from P.A. Northern Bus Lines. 

 

I will be meeting with them briefly right after . . . in a few 

minutes for pictures and drinks.  And I want it on record that 

the drinks will be on the member from Kinistino.  It'll be on his 

tab.  So I look forward to meeting with them and I would ask 

the Assembly to join with me in welcoming the students from 

Wakaw. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- A point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- What's the member's point of order? 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- I didn't hear you call orders of the day.  Maybe 

I missed it. 

 

The Speaker: -- The member's point is well taken.  The Clerks 

forgot to call orders of the day and I missed it too, so your point 

is well taken.  We will by leave go back to orders of the day, if 

we have leave. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE 

 

Removal of Barley from Canadian Wheat Board 

Jurisdiction 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise today, pursuant 

to rule 42, on a matter of urgent and pressing necessity.  The 

issue is the federal government is on the verge of taking 

arbitrary action to remove barley from the sole jurisdiction of 

the Canadian Wheat Board in the North American market. 

 

These federal actions are apparently based on one set of 

opinions from a questionable study done by California 

economist Colin Carter -- actions which are contrary to a 

number of other studies and opinions which demonstrate the 

tremendous harm that would be done to prairie barley 

producers and their successful marketing should barley be 

removed from the sole jurisdiction of the Canadian Wheat 

Board in North America. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I seek leave to move the following 



May 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1535 

motion: 

 

 That this Assembly unanimously support the efforts of the 

many farm groups such as the Canadian Wheat Board, the 

producer-elected Canadian Wheat Board Advisory 

Committee, Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, the National Farmers 

Union, the Canadian Federation of Agriculture, Manitoba 

Keystone Agriculture Producers, Prairie Pools Inc., Western 

Canadian Maltsters, amongst others, who reject recent federal 

actions taken that would remove barley from the sole 

jurisdiction of the Canadian Wheat Board and further damage 

prairie farm income. 

 

The Speaker: -- The member has asked for leave under rule 

42.  Is leave granted? 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Order. 

 

(1045) 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 37 -- An Act to amend The Urban Municipality 

Act, 1984 

 

The Chair: -- Would the Minister please introduce her official 

who is with her today. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I have with me 

John Edwards.  He's the director of municipal policy and 

legislative services for the Department of Municipal 

Government. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I 

will be making a few remarks at the beginning of this, and I 

believe that the minister will be provided with an amendment, a 

House amendment, which I'm going to propose at the 

appropriate time during consideration of the Bill. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the issue of wards in Saskatchewan cities has 

been around for some time.  It has certainly been a 

controversial one and has engendered fairly strong feelings on 

both sides. 

 

As you know, Mr. Chairman, the cities of Regina and 

Saskatoon, Prince Albert and Moose Jaw were given some 

choices back in the 1970s to move to the ward system.  Some 

of them did.  Some of them didn't.  Some preferred to stay with 

the at-large process.  My home community of Moose Jaw has 

never had any desire to have a ward system, and they've 

expressed that over a number of occasions.  The city of Regina 

has held a plebiscite on the issue, and I believe had the citizens 

of Regina resoundingly endorse the ward system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP government has now come forward with 

a Bill which is going to mandate the 

ward system to these particular four cities.  Mr. Speaker, we 

believe, we believe, as do the representatives of SUMA 

(Saskatchewan Urban Municipality Association) -- and they've 

expressed this to the government -- that cities should have 

choices as to the type of ward system that they wish to 

implement and also to the type and way that they set their 

boundaries, that they be given the choice because it's their 

jurisdiction. 

 

And I'm sure as we've seen from the results from the city of 

Regina, Mr. Chairman, that there will be a ward system.  

There's no question.  The citizens, the electors, the taxpayers of 

this city have said, we want a ward system. 

 

But what civic officials are saying is that let us design the ward 

system.  Let us have the opportunity to set the boundaries.  

And, Mr. Chairman, for the life of me I don't understand when 

this topic, which has been so controversial, which has 

obviously been in the political realm for some time . . . why 

this government, who supposedly are onside to let our urban 

jurisdictions design the most efficient and effective type of 

urban government possible, especially in these days of 

cut-backs, when we've seen major offloading occurring now 

from this government down onto the backs of urban municipal 

government, the education system and the health system, when 

we have seen and will see a half a billion dollars of offloading 

occur in the next four years and major pressure on the mill rates 

in these urban jurisdictions . . . that the government instead of 

saying "shall" in the Bill, would change that and say: may. 

 

There's a big difference, Mr. Chairman, and I think they would 

give some credit to our urban councillors, our mayors, the 

people that are charged with handling these very difficult times, 

the people that are going to be in charge of handling this half a 

billion dollars in offloading, the people that are going to have 

to sit down and work with their school boards. They're going to 

have to work with their newly-formed hospital boards, to work 

out what is the most reasonable system. 

 

And it would seem to me, Mr. Chairman, that it is very 

heavy-handed of this government to impose their reviews and 

their will through this particular piece of legislation on our 

urban jurisdictions.  I am sure, Mr. Chairman, that there is 

somebody in the planning department in the city of Regina that 

can sit down with their city council and draw the appropriate 

boundaries for the wards in this city -- I am sure that there is -- 

and not have it imposed by senior government. 

 

And if members of the Legislative Assembly would take time 

to read the Bill, they'll see that that is exactly what can happen.  

That this government, through the way this Bill is worded, 

through this piece of legislation, can dictate that.  And, Mr. 

Chairman, members of senior urban government in this 

province find that offensive.  They've said it to the minister.  

They've said it to the government.  And for the life of me, I 

don't know why they would want to have the 



1536 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1993 

power to mandate those changes, Mr. Chairman. 

 

With that, Mr. Chairman, I will await for the appropriate time 

in the Bill to bring forward the House amendment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chair, thank you, and to the member 

of the opposition, I listened with interest to the comments that 

you made and I think there are several inaccuracies in those 

comments, and at the appropriate time we will give the 

appropriate interpretation of the Act in which you've 

overlooked the circumstances relating to boundary 

determination and to other issues. 

 

On the issue though of self-determination, which you have 

made a point of, both the city council and mayor of Saskatoon 

and Regina have asked for reinstatement of wards.  We are not 

disregarding the view of civic officials at all. 

 

In fact, they were instrumental in bringing about petitions, 

laying a petition before the electorate and asking the electorate.  

And through that process, both by the city council, initiated by 

the city council, and as responded to by the public of Saskatoon 

and Regina, there was a overwhelming, positive response to 

bringing the wards back. 

 

So this government is not intent on imposing any system on 

any city that both the people and the government have now 

asked for.  And I believe your statements around that are quite 

inaccurate. 

 

I will argue the issue around who decides the boundaries and 

the issue on mandatory versus permissive at the appropriate 

time.  But I just wanted to make sure that the public of 

Saskatchewan are aware that the last government in 1987, 

without consultation, with absolute no consultation whatsoever, 

eliminated wards in Saskatchewan, not asking the municipal 

governments at all at the time. 

 

And it's passing strange right now that we have the very same 

members over there that are so intent on allowing for local 

officials and local governments to make up their own mind, did 

not, at that time, give the same due process when they were in 

government.  So you have taken quite a change of heart since 

you were here. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 agreed to. 

 

Clause 3 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I 

would move that we: 

 

 Amend clause 3 of the printed Bill by striking out the word 

"shall" where it appears for the first time in subsection 25(1) 

as being enacted therein and substituting therefor the word 

"may". 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chair, for the reasons that I have said 

before, we will not accept that amendment.  We believe that the 

clause as it is written reflects the desire and the intent of both 

municipal governments and the people of those cities, and we 

will leave it as it is. 

 

The division bells rang from 10:55 a.m. until 11:05 a.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

 

Swenson Martens 

Muirhead D'Autremont 

Neudorf Haverstock 

-- 6 

Nays 

 

Wiens Hamilton 

Teichrob Trew 

Koskie Draper 

Solomon Whitmore 

Carson Sonntag 

Mitchell Cline 

MacKinnon Scott 

Penner Kujawa 

Cunningham Crofford 

Upshall Stanger 

Koenker Knezacek 

Calvert Kluz 

Murray Jess 

-- 26 R 

Clause 3 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 4 and 5 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 30 -- An Act to amend The Local Government 

Election Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, 

my remarks will be very brief on this.  But once again it's the 

issue of choice that is being denied people in our larger urban 

areas.  Once again this government could have agreed with the 

pronouncements of people in urban government that they heard 

at SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association). 

 

This issue, Mr. Chairman, is simply one of urban government 

knowing that the '90s are going to be very difficult times for 

them.  They know that they are faced with diminishing 

resources, decreasing budgets.  And they want to have the 

ability, Mr. Chairman, to be able to meet the demands of their 

ratepayers.  And they know those demands will be very, very 

difficult to meet. 



May 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1537 

So it's clearly just giving these people enough latitude and 

enough choice in their democratically elected systems, Mr. 

Chairman, that is absolutely essential for one of their levels of 

senior government to give them.  Not to be holding over their 

heads all the time the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Now I know, Mr. Chairman, that the minister will stand up and 

say when you guys were in government that you . . . Well, Mr. 

Chairman, we are saying in the opposition, the official 

opposition, that we heartily concur with people from local 

government having the ability to design their own electoral 

systems -- design their own electoral systems. 

 

And I guess, Mr. Chairman, one of the things that the members 

of the official opposition have learned is to listen to people.  

We lost the election campaign because the New Democrats 

promised that they would be a listening government, that they 

were going to be able to do so much more with less, that they 

were going to listen to urban government.  So urban 

government comes along and says, senior government, this is 

what we'd like; will you please listen?  That's the election 

promise that you made 18 months ago. 

 

Do they listen?  No.  It's like the Premier on economic 

development in this province and job creation.  Does he listen 

when somebody says you're breaking your promise to us about 

being open and accountable and listening?  Members of the 

official opposition, Mr. Chairman, paid the price, paid the price 

of electoral defeat in the area of urban government because 

they didn't listen. 

 

Well I can tell you, Mr. Chairman, that what we are bringing to 

this Assembly both in Bill 37 and Bill 30, is simply that the 

words, the wishes, the demands of urban government to have 

enough latitude to cope with what they know is going to 

happen to them.  But this government is insensitive, won't 

listen, and simply says, it's our way or the doorway. 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, last year in GRIP (gross revenue 

insurance program) we heard it.  This year in health we've 

heard it.  This Minister of Municipal Affairs, or whatever they 

happen to call it these days, comes in and says, it's our way or 

the doorway.  And people in the province are getting a little 

tired of this attitude, this government that is drunk with 

political power, that simply won't listen. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, these are the kind of amendments that 

make this type of legislation totally palatable to local people, 

locally elected government.  There is not one thing in the 

House amendment that I will propose on this Bill that infringes 

on anything that senior government wants to do, not one thing.  

Senior government holds the hammer financially over the 

heads of these people for ever and a day. 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, it's like Bill 37, they simply want to be able 

to direct politically, the process from on high at all levels.  And 

that is why we see this government so intransigent on these 

issues.  If they would simply 

listen for a change instead of imposing, they wouldn't be 

getting in the trouble that they're getting in today with so many 

groups in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

For, Mr. Chairman, at the appropriate time I will be proposing 

a House amendment on this particular Bill. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm interested in the 

comments of the member of the opposition.  Under the last Bill, 

he made mention that Moose Jaw, the ward system would be 

imposed on Moose Jaw.  That is totally inaccurate.  We're not 

imposing any ward system on anyone that hasn't asked for it.  

Moose Jaw does not want a ward system and this Bill does not 

impose one on Moose Jaw. 

 

Let me go over the history of this once again so that it's on 

record.  Last year we introduced the wards Bill; we sent it out 

for public consultation with the standing committee.  Over 

many weeks of public hearings not one person came forward to 

the standing committee saying they didn't want a ward system.  

In fact everyone told the standing committee, please bring back 

the ward system in the major cities. 

 

The recommendation from the standing committee therefore 

was, bring wards back.  They enhance the democratic process.  

They better reflect the ability of councillors to meet the needs 

and concerns of their constituents in large cities. 

 

We also had to listen to the plebiscites.  There were two 

plebiscites held in both cities and as well as the city of Prince 

Albert.  Those plebiscites were positive in response to asking 

for a ward system. 

 

So when you say, do we listen to the people, we've asked the 

people last year through the Standing Committee on Municipal 

Government, holding public hearings.  We've had plebiscites 

that overwhelmingly asked for ward systems to come back.  

And the councils, the councils of those cities are also asking. 

 

(1115) 

 

I cannot understand where you say, let the municipal councils 

decide; they want the autonomy.  Not one council has asked for 

that.  Not one council has come forward and said we don't want 

to have ward systems. 

 

So you are inaccurate, Mr. Member, when you say that the city 

councils themselves do not want this legislation.  They do. 

 

Furthermore, when you talk about making it mandatory, you 

overlook the provision in this Bill that says what we are going 

to do is return to the situation prior to 1987 and after two terms 

of ward systems, then if they want to opt out, they have the 

choice of opting out.  We are not imposing upon them 

anything.  We're going back to the situation prior to 1987 for 

two terms, and then if the the city councils and the people of 

the city decide that the ward system is inappropriate, they do 

have the choice.  So it is not a mandatory provision here at all. 



1538 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1993 

You are inaccurate on all those counts, and I believe that what 

we have here is a Bill that reflects the desire and the need of the 

people of the cities of Saskatchewan, and we support it. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

Clause 4 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I 

move: 

 

 That we amend clause 4 of the printed Bill by adding 

immediately after the words "shall elect one councillor" 

where they appear in subsection 12(1) as being enacted 

therein the following: 

 

 "or, where the municipality has not been divided into wards, 

the electors of the municipality may elect councillors at 

large" 

 

I so move, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, if they would read the 

total Bill, they would find that their amendment is already there 

on 13. 

 

Clause 13 says: 

 

 In a municipality or school division which has not been 

divided into wards, the electors of the municipality or school 

division shall elect the aldermen (councillor) and board 

members at large. 

 

It's already there.  I don't think we need to have an amendment 

to that effect. 

 

The division bells rang from 11:18 a.m. until 11:21 a.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Martens 

Muirhead Britton 

Devine D'Autremont 

Neudorf t  

-- 7 

 

Nays 

 

Thompson Hamilton 

Wiens Trew 

Teichrob Draper 

Koskie Cline 

Solomon Scott 

Carson Kujawa 

Penner Crofford 

Upshall Stanger 

Koenker Knezacek 

Lautermilch Kluz 

Murray t  

-- 21 

Clause 4 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 5 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I would like to thank my official, John 

Edwards, for being with us this morning, and the members of 

the opposition. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I too would like 

to join with the minister in thanking the official for coming in 

this morning and helping out with these two particular Bills. 

The topics around the ward system probably won't go away for 

quite a while so I appreciate the department staying on top in 

the answers from the minister. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 33 -- An Act respecting Security Interests in 

Personal Property and making Consequential and Related 

Amendments to Certain Other Acts 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  With me 

today on my right is Mr. Ray Petrich, who is the master of titles 

and the director of personal property security registry.  And on 

my left, Darcy McGovern of the legislative services division of 

the Department of Justice. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. 

Minister.  This is a fairly comprehensive Bill.  I believe it's 

been in the works for quite some time.  The previous 

government had worked on it; now your government has 

worked on it and brought it forward.  While we generally 

support most of the items in the Bill, we do have some 

questions to ask you. 

 

Just wondering what was the rationale for bringing this forward 

and who did you consult with in doing this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. 

Member. You're correct in saying that the work on this Bill has 

spanned both the previous government and this government. 

 

In December of 1990 the Law Reform Commission, following 

an extensive series of consultations, submitted to the then 

minister of Justice its report which was entitled Tentative 

Proposals For A New Personal Property Security Act.  

Consultations then followed with the people that would be 

interested in the operation of the Act. 

 

It was a joint effort between Professor Cuming of the Law 

Reform Commission and officials of the Department of Justice, 

and that resulted in the tabling in the last session of this 

Assembly, Bill 90, which was entitled The Personal Property 

Security Act, 1992.  Then that Bill was widely circulated to 

again the people who would be interested in it, to receive their 

comment. 



May 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1539 

In the meantime the final report of the Law Reform 

Commission on this subject was submitted last June -- June of 

1992 -- and that report received wide circulation as well. 

 

So that this legislation that we're considering in committee this 

morning represents the end result of the recommendations of 

the Law Reform Commission and all these consultations over a 

period of two and a half years. 

 

In general terms -- if you want me to carry on about the Act 

itself -- the Act maintains the basic structure and function of the 

system as it has existed for many years in this province but 

introduces a number of amendments that modernize the Act to 

reflect evolving business practices, to harmonize our Act with 

similar laws, particularly in western Canadian jurisdictions, for 

obvious reasons of commercial convenience and bordering on 

necessity. 

 

(1130) 

 

It also accommodates innovations and intended innovations in 

computer technology to offer computer access and registration 

on a remote basis; and finally to address a number of judicial 

decisions which were inconsistent with the intended policy of 

the legislation as it has existed for many years. 

 

Consultations -- if I could just go back to that for one moment 

in answer to the member's question -- it included a large 

number of actors and included the Canadian Bankers' 

Association, Credit Union Central, and the Canadian Bar 

Association representing the legal practitioners, the law firms 

and lawyers who practise in this field and have an interest in it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Does this Bill 

also deal with the exemptions that are allowed for personal 

property securities? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The answer is no, the exemptions are 

not in this Bill, as I understand your question.  The exemptions 

that I believe you're speaking about would be found in two 

other Acts, which by the way, we currently have under review.  

One is The Exemptions Act and the other is The Saskatchewan 

Farm Security Act, and this legislation does not affect the 

exemptions in those laws. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I didn't see it 

in here and that's why I asked about it, because I believe that 

Exemptions Act was originally brought in in the 1930s, and I'm 

sure it's been updated somewhat since then, but there are quite 

a number of things in there that are no longer relevant, such as 

you're allowed to protect your cream separator or 40 bushels of 

potatoes.  Now not many people grow 40 bushels of potatoes 

any more, so I'm hoping you will take a look at that Act. 

 

In this Act, we know that the federal government's legislation 

applies to the chartered banks.  In the province, this legislation 

deals with credit unions.  And there's not necessarily a balanced  

there between what the credit unions have to provide for 

security and what they can realize on and what the banks can 

do; that there's a difference between section 178 of the Bank 

Act and what the credit unions have to operate on.  Does this 

bring it closer to what the chartered banks are allowed to do? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- This is a very good question that the 

member puts forward.  It's been a problem for a long time.  

And to some extent we try and address it in this Bill. 

 

In section 9 the member will have seen that we try and put the 

banks into a position where they have to make up their mind 

whether they're going to take their security under section 178 of 

the Bank Act or are they going to take their security under The 

Personal Property Security Act.  And that of course has been a 

complaint of the credit unions for many, many years.  And it is 

a very . . . it's a good position for the banks because they've 

been able to take their security under both the Bank Act and 

The Personal Property Security Act. 

 

And as the member knows then, that the bank is in a position, 

rightly or wrongly, of being able to pick where it goes.  Is it 

more advantageous in one situation to realize its security as a 

Bank Act security, or is it more advantageous to realize its 

security under the provisions of this Act.  Or in a complex 

situation can they use both methods, depending upon what 

chattel they're dealing with or what the exemption situation is 

or what have you. 

 

So that we are trying to clarify that situation right up at the 

beginning by having the banks make a determination in the 

character of the agreement that they present to their borrower.  

Are they securing the loan under the Bank Act or are they 

securing it in a more general way under this Act.  And we try to 

deal with that in section 9. 

 

In addition in section 34(11), we deal with a security interest in 

crops or the proceeds of crops that are . . . where the advance or 

the loan is made to the debtor to enable -- I say debtor, the 

farmer -- to produce the crops.  And this security interest is 

given at a time when crops are growing.  And during the 

six-month period . . . Well the member will have seen section 

11; I don't want to get into a big, technical, detailed discussion 

of how that works. 

 

But in any event, that will now be available to credit unions as 

a security interest that they can use in respect of their advances, 

and it deals with another problem that the credit unions have 

had over the years, competing with banks as they do in the farm 

credit market. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Yes, Mr. Minister, I know it's been a 

problem because the credit unions have had a great deal of 

difficulty in taking inventory as collateral, and that is one of the 

things that section 178 does provide to the banks. 

 

What differences will the banks realize between 



1540 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1993 

section 178 and this Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The situation under section 178 of the 

Bank Act is of course governed by federal legislation, and 

there's nothing that we in this Assembly can do to affect that 

law and its operation, the federal government having the 

jurisdiction over banks and banking. 

 

Under section 178 of the Bank Act, for example, the banks . . . 

the exemptions that they face are different than the exemptions 

faced if you're operating under the provincial law, as the credit 

unions are.  So that's one important difference. 

 

I might mention just in passing, dealing with The Exemptions 

Act, that the member raised an example, and I give you another 

one.  I think a teapot is exempt, but your coffee pot or your 

coffee percolator is not -- obviously an Act that needs some 

work. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Hey, what have they against Juan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes.  The other major difference is a 

procedural one. 

 

We have in Saskatchewan, as the member knows, a network of 

law relating to the seizure of . . . by a creditor, and notice 

provisions.  And in this Bill in "Part V, Rights and Remedies 

on Default", there's a whole web of requirements that a creditor 

has to observe, and steps that the creditor has to go through, in 

realizing on the security. 

 

Under the Bank Act, the procedure is much more summary, 

much more direct, much less considerate for the position of the 

farmer, of the debtor.  And so it . . . that's probably why it's 

been a problem for so many years. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  You 

touched on the point that I was going to bring up next, and 

that's the realizing on your securities. 

 

Under previous . . . under the Act before, if you wanted to 

realize on a farmer's combine, you could not do so while his 

crop was in the field.  You also had to give him a three-month 

notice that you were going to realize on that security. 

 

What changes have you made in that way, that people can 

understand that are watching today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- This Act will not change the process that 

is laid down in The Saskatchewan Farm Security Act.  That 

situation will be unchanged. 

 

The Chair: -- I wonder if the members can agree that we 

proceed through the Bill, part by part, until we come to the 

clauses of the Bill that are proposed to be amended.  Is that 

agreed?  Agreed.  Then we'll proceed in that way. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

Clauses 2 to 17 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 18 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, I move: 

 

 That section 18 of the printed Bill be amended: 

 

 (a) by striking out the words "clause (1)(a)" in clause 14(d) 

and substituting the words "clause (2)(a)"; 

 

 (b) by striking out the words "clause (1)(a)" in clause (15)(d) 

and substituting the words "clause (2)(a)"; and further 

 

 (c) by striking out the words "subsection (1)(a)" in clause 

(15)(d) and substituting the words "clause (2)(a)". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 18 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 19 to 29 inclusive agreed to. 

 

(1145) 

 

Clause 30 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I move: 

 

 That section 30 of the printed Bill be amended by adding the 

words "of goods" after the word "buyer" wherever that word 

appears in clause (1)(c). 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 30 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 31 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I move: 

 

 That section 31 of the printed Bill be amended by striking out 

the words "pursuant to subsection 28(3)" in subsection (4) 

and substituting the following words: "pursuant to section 26 

or subsection 28(3)". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 31 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 32 and 33 agreed to. 

 

Clause 34 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, I move: 

 

 That Section 34 of the printed Bill be amended by adding the 

words "subsection (6) and" after the words "Subject to" in 

subsection (2). 



May 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1541 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 34 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 35 to 48 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 49 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, I move: 

 

 That Section 49 of the printed Bill be amended by striking 

out the words "Subsections 50(7) and (9)" in subsection (11) 

and substituting the words "Subsections 50(7) to (9)". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 49 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 50 to 85 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Before doing that, could I, on behalf of 

the Assembly, thank the officials for all the help that they were 

to me in the preparation of this legislation and for coming to 

assist in the committee dealing with it today. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The 

opposition would also like to thank the minister's officials for 

coming in today and for helping him provide us with the 

answers. 

 

Bill No. 48 -- An Act to amend The Police Act, 1990 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like 

to introduce to the Assembly Mr. John Baker, who is the 

director of policing in the Department of Justice.  And also 

with me is Mr. Darcy McGovern who I introduced earlier today 

to the committee. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I just 

have a couple of questions and then I'll turn it over to my 

colleague. 

 

This Act is to amend The Police Act and I understand, Mr. 

Minister, that one of the issues that . . . well I'd like you to 

clarify what prompted these amendments.  Was it the particular 

case that you referred to in your second-reading speech with 

reference to Martensville or was Martensville just coming on 

stream because you had anticipated problems like this prior to 

it? 

 

Now I have a . . .  My understanding of the situation is that the 

RCM (Royal Canadian Mounted) Police have themselves 

developed a policy where they will not get into direct 

negotiations with municipalities of under 5,000 people but they 

are willing to enter into negotiations with you as Minister of 

Justice on behalf of these towns to facilitate certain problems 

that exist.  Is that correct, Mr. Minister? 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- That's exactly correct, Mr. Chairman, 

and Mr. Member. 

 

The triggering mechanism was the new police agreement that 

was negotiated over the last several years and was finally 

signed last year.  It's a 20-year agreement, and it changed the 

threshold from 1,500 people in a community to 5,000.  And 

that left a gap in the formal arrangements under which policing 

was done for communities between 1,500 and 5,000. 

 

Now for communities that already had an agreement, those 

agreements were grandfathered, but for other communities it 

was necessary to have some other mechanism.  So we are in 

effect using the same mechanism that we have previously used 

for communities between 500 and 1,500.  So we raised that 

1,500 population ceiling up to 5,000, and we are able to arrange 

for policing services under the extended contract basis that has 

been in effect for the smaller communities for many years. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well thank you very much, Mr. Minister.  

Could you walk me through the procedure that will take place 

now?  Martensville has been in the news unfortunately for the 

past year or so, and it has created problems within the 

community.  And although the community has approached you 

for the RCM policing as opposed to local constables hired by 

the town, that of course does not mean that that is a unanimous 

decision within the community itself. 

 

But because it creates a lot of disturbances, this decision has 

created disturbances within the town itself, with the existing 

police force now being disbanded.  And I think you can 

appreciate some of the problems that that creates.  But in the 

process, stability has to be brought on to the scene. 

 

My question to you, Mr. Minister, is number one:  has the town 

of Martensville officially, officially made representation to you 

to act on their behalf on this issue?  And having said that, 

subsequent to that -- and I take it that they have -- what is the 

time frame that you perceive for this whole thing to be 

judiciously brought to a conclusion where the RCMP will 

actually be policing in Martensville? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- We have been in close touch, I think that 

the member knows, with the Martensville mayor and council 

throughout.  And the present status is as follows: the RCMP are 

policing the community on an interim basis under an order 

under section 24 of The Police Act, and I issued an order with 

respect to that. 

 

And if this legislation is passed by this House, we already have 

in hand a request from the town to enter into an agreement.  

And we're prepared to do that just immediately after the 

legislation is passed, in a very timely way.  It'll happen very 

quickly.  And then that'll mean we move from the emergency 

service to the regular service.  And it should happen very 

smoothly and very quickly. 



1542 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1993 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well I appreciate that, Mr. Minister, and I 

make my commitment that this legislation will pass within the 

next five minutes so you can get going on with it.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, I see my House Leader has put a time limit on my 

questions. 

 

Mr. Minister, how many communities will be affected with this 

change from 5,000 population to 1,500? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The answer, interestingly enough, is 

only Martensville.  Others are already parties to contracts that 

are grandfathered in the Bill.  So at the moment Martensville is 

the only one. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  That answers 

my second question.  What kind of a cost difference or impact 

will this have financially on those communities that may wish 

to use the RCMP versus their own police force? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm advised that the cost 

for Martensville, to use that specific example, will be 

approximately the same. 

 

And I just want to add a little bit because it's very interesting . . 

. at least my advice is -- I hope the members find it so too.  

Under these policing agreements, arrangements, the federal 

government will pay 30 per cent of the costs so that the cost of 

Martensville is about the same even though the RCMP is 

involved, which probably has a higher pay structure than you 

would expect to find at the municipal police level. 

 

There will be four RCMP officers put into the town of 

Martensville and I think that their force was four before the 

town decided to disband their police force. 

 

(1200) 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Again, Mr. Minister, I would like to 

thank the officials for coming to the Assembly this morning 

and assisting the committee. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The 

opposition would also like to thank the officials for coming in 

today and providing the answers.  Thank you. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 37 -- An Act to amend The Urban 

Municipality Act, 1984 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be now read 

a third time and passed under its title. 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 30 -- An Act to amend The Local Government 

Election Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 

read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 33 -- An Act respecting Security Interests in 

Personal Property and making Consequential and Related 

Amendments to Certain Other Acts 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I move that the amendments be now 

read the first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, 

I move that Bill No. 33 be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 48 -- An Act to amend The Police Act, 1990 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 38 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 38 -- An Act to 

amend The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code be now read 

a second time. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to take a few 

minutes to speak on Bill 38.  And obviously, Mr. Speaker, I do 

not support the Bill.  I believe that it is badly drafted.  I believe 

that it is incomplete and I think that we'll provide sufficient 

evidence, not only here in Saskatchewan but across Canada, to 

show that indeed the Bill would not sustain itself if it was 

challenged. 

 

I'm going to take the opportunity to say at the outset that there 

is a great and growing concern in Saskatchewan and across 

Canada about NDP governments initiating Bills of this nature 

that are not well thought out and will not be supported by the 

general public and, in fact if it were taken to a general vote, 

would not likely be supported in a free vote. 



May 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1543 

And I'm going to use as some examples, Mr. Speaker, the 

concern now in the province of Ontario, and I'll bring it right 

here into our jurisdiction.  Because I think even church leaders 

today, while many, many of them are against adding additional 

protection or rights for sexual orientation, even those that 

thought it might be okay, and there are some who are now 

having serious second thoughts. 

 

And let me just read, for example, the Roman Catholic bishops' 

position in the province of Ontario.  And there's two or three 

points that are really worth noting.  The following statement 

was issued by Ontario's 20 Catholic bishops on October 1, 

1986 and we've subsequently heard about their positions to 

date.  The Catholic bishops of Ontario gathered in plenary 

session in Toronto and are opposed to the present form of an 

omnibus Bill 7 now before the provincial legislature. 

 

In this omnibus Bill they say: 

 

 Much in this Bill is good and quite acceptable; however 

section 18, numbers 105 to amend the human rights of 

Ontario prohibiting discrimination on the grounds of a 

person's sexual orientation is unacceptable.  The bishops 

support basic human rights for all members of society 

including those with a homosexual orientation.  However the 

church and the Judaeo-Christian tradition carefully 

distinguishes between homosexual orientation and 

homosexual behaviour.  For the church a homosexual 

behaviour or lifestyle is contrary to Christian morality, and 

any law that leaves the door open to such a lifestyle will 

cause great harm to society. 

 

And I'm quoting the church's position.  And this is a key point: 

 

 Bill 7 does not make this crucial distinction.  Indeed the very 

ambiguity of the phrase sexual orientation lends itself to 

totally unacceptable applications. 

 

I'll read that again. 

 

 Indeed the very ambiguity of the phrase sexual orientation 

(and I understand in this Bill and in the Ontario Bill, 

undefined) lends itself to totally unacceptable applications. 

 

Now I'll go on and read.  And what I'll make and argue, if I'll 

just break from this and argue, is that when I go through several 

different examples of applications I'm sure the minister will 

say, well I agree with you there.  I wouldn't mean it here, and I 

wouldn't mean it there, and I wouldn't want to extend it here, 

and I wouldn't want to extend it there.  I might even consider 

amendments for this amendments for that. 

 

And I'm not going to encourage amendments because I think 

it's flawed to start with, and amending a flawed Bill and ending 

up in a flawed situation will not, will not be . . . is 

fundamentally flawed and would not be 

consistent.  But the applications that the bishops are talking 

about here, I believe that the Attorney General will agree and 

the NDP party will agree, lead to all these exemptions and 

exemptions and the applications you really don't want.  

Therefore what are you sticking up for here?  What's it all 

about? 

 

Let me continue to read.  I quote the Catholic bishops of 

Ontario: 

 

 We believe that Bill 7 in its present form will have the social 

impact of promoting the recognition of homosexual unions as 

marriages and also seriously restrict the freedom of churches, 

governments, societies, businesses, and schools to set criteria 

of conduct for their employees. 

 

In other words, what they're saying is part of the total 

unacceptable application will be the acknowledgement of 

marriages, the affirmative action that might be taking place in 

various situations, or the fact that you would have to teach 

about it, that is the sexual orientation with the consequences 

that are listed here, in schools because you've said that they 

cannot be discriminated against.  And the church says, you're 

digging yourself into a minefield that you just can't get out of. 

 

The demand for social support for homosexual couples has 

already surfaced in Toronto, see The Globe and Mail of 

September 30, '86, page A15:  "Family benefits should be 

offered to homosexual employees, city told." 

 

 Bill 7, if passed as it is, will erode the status of normal 

families by equating their legal status with that of 

homosexual unions.  And we deplore the attempt to pass Bill 

7 without the widespread consultation and discussion which 

will permit the citizens of Ontario to express their concern.  

Therefore we urgently request the government to postpone 

any action on Bill 7 until such consultation has taken place.  

Moreover, we ask our fellow citizens to write or telephone at 

once the respective MPPs in order to register their deep 

dissatisfaction and displeasure. 

 

Now the arguments used by the Roman Catholic church in 

Ontario from its moral position, if you will, its legal position, 

and its small "p" political position is that they find the Bill, 

with respect to the amendment to the Human Rights Code of 

Ontario, totally unsatisfactory.  And they're not rabid 

right-wingers and they're not rabid Liberals or Tories or NDP 

or anything else.  These are people who look at this very 

seriously as a significant, public, social, moral, political 

question in Canada.  Serious consequences. 

 

Now I'll read some more of the highlights a little bit later, but I 

want to just take a moment . . . and from them, their Ontario 

Catholic bishops make a couple of arguments because I think 

that if people are looking for exemptions and if you were 

looking for exemptions to your Bill, my argument will be that 

the 



1544 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1993 

Bill is flawed, and we don't want to look for exemptions in a 

flawed piece of legislation.  Because if you really thought that 

you were doing the right thing, you wouldn't need the 

exemptions. 

 

Let me give you an example.  The NDP government says it 

doesn't want to allow homosexual adoption.  That's the case; 

now I assume that's the case.  Well then the argument would 

be: why discriminate against a couple when it comes to 

adoption if you don't think that you can't discriminate against 

them at all?  Either you believe that they're beyond 

discrimination or they're not. 

 

But if you say that fair enough, we will not let them adopt 

children, well what's wrong with them?  Why are you 

discriminating against them? 

 

(1215) 

 

You see what the Catholic bishops in Ontario are saying?  

You've left a whole range of implications open.  You will not 

stand in your place and say yes, I think gay men can adopt 

children.  You won't do that.  I certainly would support you. 

 

But it is therefore illogical to say, well . . . but we'll have to 

have a Bill so we can't discriminate against these people.  Well 

either you think that they can be discriminated against or not.  

And that's what the Catholic bishops are saying. 

 

So you could say, well I'll put in an amendment so that it says 

that we won't touch adoption; we'll just leave that part out.  

Well how can you have before the charter of rights and 

amendments and say, well you can't discriminate against these 

people, but mind you, Mr. Supreme Court members, in the case 

of affirmative action or in the case of adoption or in the cases 

of marriages, they don't count?  They only count for this. 

 

It's illogical.  It's not consistent.  It's fundamentally flawed.  I 

don't want you to make any amendments for adoption.  Number 

one, I obviously don't think that we need more protection for 

this orientation.  And I agree with the Catholic bishops of 

Ontario that say you have not distinguished clearly enough 

between sexual orientation and the very fact that you can have 

homosexual activity that would be unacceptable to this 

legislature in adopting children or in affirmative action or in 

taking them into your home or anything else. 

 

You haven't been clear enough.  And we will not let you off the 

hook by saying, well I'll have three or four amendments that 

say, well I'll just . . . won't let you do this and won't . . . 

(inaudible) . . . you this, but we'll protect them. 

 

Now what we have to ask is: why are you doing this then?  

What's your reason?  What's your philosophical reason or your 

moral reason?  I haven't heard one yet. 

 

So what I would have to say, maybe you just have a partisan 

reason.  And if that's what it's all about, then 

it's totally unacceptable, if this is a partisan reason to garner 

support.  That isn't consistent. 

 

So I think the Catholic bishops have been very, very clear on 

this.  I'm going to just state it again.  The very ambiguity of the 

phrase sexual orientation lends itself to totally unacceptable 

applications.  I totally agree with that.  Your Bill, undefined, 

leads to totally unacceptable applications. 

 

Now I'll read you one that I just have.  It says: would you allow 

homosexual couples to adopt children?  Yes or no?  Well I 

suspect that you would say no.  Now if you say yes, fair 

enough.  Then you're at least consistent with the Bill -- you 

won't discriminate.  But if you say that homosexual couples, 

lesbian couples, gay couples cannot adopt children, then who 

are you defending?  Why are you doing this Bill?  What's it 

for? 

 

Now if you do want to say homosexuals can adopt children, 

we're into a totally different debate -- totally different debate -- 

which would be totally unacceptable to the Canadian public 

and probably the public of the world generally.  Obviously 

homosexual couples cannot have children; children are not 

born to these people.  And obviously the implications on 

education and environment on children are serious 

consequences, not only moral but social, political, economic, 

and all of the above. 

 

Let me give you another example.  The NDP government says 

it doesn't want to recognize same sex marriages.  Well why 

would you discriminate against homosexuals?  Why won't you 

recognize same sex marriages? 

 

Well because evidently you don't think it's right.  And if you 

don't think it's right, why are you passing this Bill?  And then 

you kind of say to some of your colleagues, well I'll have an 

amendment just on marriages.  This won't apply to marriages.  

Okay, so I have this new Bill protecting homosexual and gay 

rights and orientation, but got to tell you that it doesn't apply 

because I'm going to discriminate on the basis of adoption and 

I'm going to discriminate on the basis of marriages. 

 

Why?  What's the logic behind this?  Why are you doing this?  

Because the Catholic bishops and church people and common 

sense will tell you exactly what the bishops have said: the 

ambiguity of the phrase sexual orientation in law lends itself to 

totally unacceptable applications in society.  These applications 

in law will lead to totally unacceptable applications in society, 

and you're trying to have it both ways.  It doesn't make any 

sense. 

 

So you said, well I will discriminate against these people on the 

basis of orientation if it comes to marriages.  Well that's a fine 

how-do-you-do.  I will discriminate against these people if it 

comes to the raising of children and adoption of children.  Well 

that's a fine how-do-you-do. How do you think these people 

feel?  You're just playing politics with their lives, absolutely 

you are.  Absolutely. 



May 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1545 

If you were to ask Svend Robinson today should we 

discriminate on sexual orientation on the basis of marriages and 

adopting of children, what would he say?  He'd say, of course 

not.  Homosexuality . . . NDP members of parliament that are 

homosexual, talk about it, say yes we are, they would say, I 

have the right to adopt children.  I have the right to be married.  

I have the right to do all of these things, and I should not be 

discriminated against.  But the NDP here say, well gee, Svend, 

I don't think we can do that. 

 

Well then what are you doing?  What in the world are you 

doing?  It doesn't make any sense.  You are discriminating 

clearly legally because normal couples, heterosexual couples 

can apply for adoption and can receive the benefits of marriage.  

So if the church doesn't and you don't, what's this all about?  It 

doesn't make any sense.  And amendments that allow . . . I 

mean it wouldn't be consistent with Svend Robinson and it 

wouldn't be consistent with the law, and it's not consistent with 

the general public good.  So it points to why are the NDP doing 

this?  What is their logic?  What's the rationale? 

 

Well I mean I guess it's from the inside of the party.  They'll 

have to try to tell that, but the general public is . . . you're 

probably playing politics.  Well we'll get a little bit . . . We'll 

look like we're supporting the rights of people; that's what we'll 

look like.  We'll kind of support the rights of this and the rights 

of that.  But when it gets into some of the responsibilities for 

raising children and responsibilities for marriages -- whoops -- 

we'll just kind of discriminate there a little bit.  I mean there 

isn't a six-year-old that wouldn't see through what you're doing.  

Think you're fooling people? 

 

Third one, Mr. Speaker.  The NDP government says it doesn't 

want to give homosexual spousal and family benefits.  You 

don't want to grant homosexual spousal and family benefits.  

You discriminate against spousal benefits.  Oh, they don't quite 

count here.  Well it's the same argument all over again.  It 

doesn't make any sense.  It's not socially or morally or publicly 

or religiously acceptable, what you're trying to do.  And when 

you try to weasel your way out of it, there's no place to go.  

You're inconsistent in the law and you're inconsistent morally 

to these people. 

 

If you thought that they were legitimate in terms of sexual 

orientation, needing special rights, then you'd give them the 

whole nine yards.  But you don't have the courage to do that.  

It's shameful.  You're playing politics with their lives. 

 

People have asked you for their support because they think that, 

well look, the NDP said that sexual orientation needs to be 

protected and we'll do that.  And then when it comes to the 

bottom line, number one, you finally figured out you can't do it; 

and number two is you're trying to do it halfway, part way.  

And so you've got churches upset with you.  You've got people 

-- all kinds of people, heterosexual and homosexual people -- 

very upset, very, very upset. 

 

And the inconsistency is resulting in people prepared 

to sign petitions, that literally by the thousands and tens of 

thousands, saying, you weren't elected to do this; you have no 

idea what you're doing; I don't like the implications.  Just like 

the bishop said or the Mennonite church says or the Anglican 

church says or churches all over the place -- Evangelical 

churches -- they said, we'll put you, give you tens of thousands 

of names, perhaps over a hundred thousand names, so that in 

fact you can take it to the people. 

 

And I think it's correct, and the minister, Attorney General of 

Saskatchewan can correct me if I'm wrong, but he said: well I 

wouldn't recommend you do this, folks.  One, it's expensive; 

and number two, I wouldn't live by it anyway.  Wouldn't live 

by it anyway.  And I believe that was quoted on the radio. 

 

My research staff said that the Attorney General said: well you 

can have all the plebiscites you like . . . And mind you, the 

NDP voted for the plebiscite and referendum legislation in this 

House.  We introduced it; they voted for it.  Three plebiscites 

were passed in the last election.  They didn't even mind; they 

didn't even care.  And now when the people have a moral issue 

before them and they say, we'll bring it here, the Attorney 

General says: oh well I wouldn't bother; it's kind of expensive, 

and frankly I wouldn't live by it anyway. 

 

Now you think you're getting public support with that attitude?  

You won't allow a free vote; you won't allow the people to 

speak.  I mean it starts to get repetitious, Mr. Speaker.  You 

unilaterally change the rules of the House, you cut off debate, 

you unilaterally change farm support programs, you 

unilaterally close 52 hospitals, and you now are saying: well I 

won't even let . . . even if you had hundreds of thousands of 

people come in here with a plebiscite I wouldn't live by it 

anyway.  Arrogance -- flat arrogance, an ill-conceived 

arrogance. 

 

You haven't got the confidence of farmers that you know what 

you're doing.  You certainly don't in health care people.  And 

now you're going out on a moral issue; you don't have the 

churches.  And I'll tell you, as we speak here there are people 

across Canada saying: more power and more rights to 

homosexuals and sexual orientation is not on, Mr. NDP, 

wherever you are.  It's not on; it's not right; it's not moral; it's 

not needed. 

 

These are fine people but they don't need extra rights. And if 

you have come to the position where you don't want them to 

have extra rights for marriage, spousal benefits, adoption of 

children, then what are you messing with it for?  Some bright 

idea dreamt up by somebody who thought, well maybe we can 

get some political support.  Is that what it's about? -- political 

support?  Is this a divergence from reality?  Maybe it's a little 

bit of divergence.  If we kind of close some hospitals they'll 

forget that we're not creating jobs and we've added 1.6 billion 

to the deficit.  Maybe the NDP strategists are doing that. 

 

Well it's hard to figure, Mr. Speaker, because the first three 

examples are perfectly consistent with the 



1546 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1993 

Ontario Catholic bishops saying this is totally unacceptable and 

it will lead to unacceptable applications in society. 

 

Here's another example.  The NDP want to pass this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, but they go on to say it does not want to have 

homosexuality taught in the schools.  Well, why not?  Why 

not?  That's a very good question.  Why not homosexuality and 

affirmative action taught in schools?  Same argument -- you 

say you have to have protection for sexual orientation.  Well 

then you better be able to defend it in adoption and in 

marriages and in education.  But you won't.  Or will you? 

 

Will you?  Is that it?  What's your plan there?  Teach it in 

school?  Teach sexual orientation in school, homosexuality?  

Teach about the adoption of children into homosexual homes?  

Is that what you want? 

 

Well if it isn't, we're not going to let you make an amendment 

and say well we didn't mean that for schools; we didn't mean 

that for homosexual couples; we didn't mean it for adoption.  

Then what is it all about?  Why are you . . . what is this Bill? 

 

The Catholic bishops are right.  The Bill is flawed.  This is a 

bad Bill, bad all the way around.  It's got bad intentions, 

dishonourable intentions.  It isn't complete.  It isn't consistent, 

and frankly it's dangerous.  It is flat dangerous. 

 

There's a section in the Bill presenting actually . . . it allows the 

commission to require any school to teach homosexuality -- in 

this Bill. 

 

Now there are members of the cabinet I think who are former 

school principals, teachers, have been involved in education.  

Mr. Speaker, you'd know about that.  I didn't mean to involve 

you in this debate, just happened to think about the fact that 

you were a teacher. 

 

(1230) 

 

So we're now from the Catholic church and from the 

Mennonite church and from the Anglican church and from the 

Evangelical church . . . is going to teach homosexuality in 

school.  And if you don't, by law you can be charged with 

discrimination which means you have to.  You have to by the 

law.  This is the law we make in here.  This isn't some little 

trial balloon.  This is the law. 

 

And if a child or a parent or somebody else has said, no I've 

been discriminated against; they are not allowing my 

homosexual parents to have equal treatment, then we have to 

have this in school.  Then what will you do? 

 

Well if you don't plan to do it, if you don't plan to teach it in the 

schools, then why are you introducing this Bill? Because you'll 

be challenged, because everybody that wants equal access will 

get it with your Bill.  And if you make all these funny little 

amendments to let you out, then what's the point of the Bill? 

The NDP government says it doesn't want to stop the Red 

Cross from asking blood donors what their sexual orientation 

is.  Why not?  Why not ask blood donors what their sexual 

orientation is?  What are you afraid of?  What's the risk?  Why 

don't you want to ask blood donors what their sexual 

orientation is? 

 

Clearly the fact, unequivocal, non-partisan fact that this highest 

incidence of AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome) 

comes from homosexual orientation and the people associated 

with that activity.  And you say, we will not let the Red Cross 

ask what your orientation is.  Well don't you think somebody's 

going to say, what's your motive here? 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill has not been well thought out.  And the 

churches and common sense and people across the country are 

saying, if this the basic, fundamental moral philosophy of the 

NDP Party, then no wonder they're in some difficulty, and no 

wonder we've always wondered about them.  They're changing 

their positions on all kinds of things.  They say one thing with 

great respect before elections, and one after, some things in 

New York and some things here. 

 

I thought it was quite interesting, Mr. Speaker, this morning 

when the member from Thunder Creek, Leader of the 

Opposition, pointed out that while the NDP campaigned so 

terribly against Weyerhaeuser and against Cargill and fertilizer 

plants, that in New York the member from Riversdale, the 

Premier of Saskatchewan, the NDP Premier had it in his 

speech, here's the diversification and the big investments we 

have.  Well do you think that they just happened over night, 

folks? 

 

How can you campaign against fertilizer plants and paper mills 

and upgraders and all of those things?  Definitely against them 

morally; that's sinful to do work with multinationals like 

Weyerhaeuser, and it's sinful to do all these things with Cargill.  

And then when you win and you go to New York, you talk 

about, but I'll tell you we're proud of our projects: Cargill, 

fertilizer plant; Weyerhaeuser, paper mill -- the hypocrisy. 

 

And the hypocrisy of what you've done in agriculture and in 

health care and in budget.  And you've added over a billion 

dollars to the deficit, and you stand up here in question period 

and you say, well you made the deficit. 

 

You put more on the deficit . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I know the member got carried 

away a bit.  But we are on Bill 38 and not on agriculture or on 

Cargill or whatever.  I just remind the member to get back on 

Bill 38. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I appreciate that argument.  The 

clear link is to the intentions and the honourability of the NDP 

in introducing legislation like this.  It's all for partisan reasons, 

Mr. Speaker -- partisan reasons. 



May 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1547 

They're not going to stick up for sexual orientation.  They've 

got so many places where they're going to deny it that they 

can't ever expect to get political support from people with 

various sexual orientation because they're going to deny, deny, 

deny, deny all the way up and down the line.  Or else they 

really are going to allow sexual orientation to be taught in 

schools and couples to adopt children and all of the above. 

 

And it's the same flip-flop, Mr. Speaker, that we see New York 

versus Harris versus Regina, on health care, on speeches, on 

multinationals, and all of these things.  The NDP are not 

credible, not credible when it comes to morality or economic 

activity or telling several versions of the same story -- well 

they're credible there; they tell them all the time. 

 

The New York version of what's going on in Saskatchewan is 

so far from the truth, it's deplorable.  Imagine an NDP Premier, 

who got elected campaigning against Cargill and 

Weyerhaeuser, and introducing this Bill -- Bill 38.  The same 

NDPer who says, I don't like Cargill and I don't like 

Weyerhaeuser, campaigned against it, and then goes to New 

York and brags about the projects.  Well who did the projects?  

He sure as heck didn't.  And here, what is the motive behind 

Bill 38?  What's the motive?  How can you be so inconsistent 

and not sustain it right through? 

 

Talk to Svend Robinson and say, how should we do this, 

Svend?  And he'll tell you, you can't discriminate on the basis 

of adoption; you can't discriminate on the basis of teaching or 

marriage or spousal benefits or any of those things.  That's what 

he'll say.  Because if he was there as a good NDPer and wanted 

to adopt children, what would you say to him?  Sorry Svend, 

can't let you adopt kids.  Would you do that?  You better 

answer that in here before you proceed with this legislation. 

 

If you will do that, if you said, I will allow Svend Robinson 

and his homosexual partner to adopt children, then say so.  

Then at least you'd be consistent . . . or give you the spousal 

benefits or anything else.  Well I don't think that you will.  If 

you do, fair enough, that's what you believe and we'd know 

what the NDP is all about.  But if you don't, then this Bill is 

terribly, terribly flawed and is not correct, not socially 

acceptable, morally acceptable, or legally acceptable. 

 

The NDP government says it doesn't want to force people to 

accept homosexuality into their homes through forced renting 

of rooms.  Is that true?  Is that true?  Will you force people to 

bring homosexuals into their homes to rent a room?  Well if it's 

more than one room, under your law they have to bring them 

in.  So Mrs. Brown who is 68 years old and has two or three 

rooms in her house in Saskatoon around the university or here 

or Prince Albert or whatever, and she says no, I just don't want 

to do that.  And you said, under the law you have to, Mrs. 

Brown, in good old Saskatchewan.  But you say, well I won't 

do that.  Well then why not? 

Mr. Speaker, I think I've given enough examples to tell you . . . 

I think I've given you enough examples and I will a lot more 

why this Bill is flawed.  The NDP, as they have in agriculture 

and as they have in health care and as they have in the budget 

and they have in taxes and they have on so many things, have 

not thought out at all what they should be doing.  All they can 

do is say, well we got elected in Saskatchewan and there was a 

$14 billion deficit, therefore we have the right to do whatever 

we want.  That's what they say. 

 

Well they campaigned against the deficit as if it was something 

that they were going to deal with and they've added to it.  

They've raised taxes.  They did not tell the truth on any of the 

above, and then they brought this in.  Do you think you'd have 

been elected on this Bill?  Go home and try it.  Think you'd get 

elected on your agriculture programs, on your health care 

programs? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I've made some initial comments why I'm against 

this Bill, and I sincerely hope the Attorney General decides to 

pull it, and I move to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 55 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that Bill No. 55 -- An Act 

to amend The Workers' Compensation Act, 1979 be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 

going to be making some remarks on Bill 55 today that I think 

show that the government has not done a good, consultative job 

in regards to the impact of this Bill on Saskatchewan society, 

Saskatchewan workplace, and the ramifications that would 

occur, Mr. Speaker, if we don't have this government stop and 

listen once in a while to the people that they supposedly are 

representing. 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, the last two days in question period 

the official opposition has been asking the Premier of our 

province some very pointed questions about employment, the 

government's record on employment, what we as a province 

can look forward to on the economic side over the next few 

years, and, Mr. Speaker, we have consistently had replies that 

the Premier says, be happy, everything's okay.  Don't worry, be 

happy, everything's okay.  We're on track; there's no problem 

out there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what the Saskatchewan business coalition did 

when they sent this open letter to the Premier was say that that 

simply isn't the truth.  They are saying that pessimism, 

frustration, and anger have grown across Saskatchewan in 

recent weeks. 

 

I think most people in the province, Mr. Speaker, in the 

business community, expected when the government brought 

forward the Partnership for Renewal last fall, that there were 

more than words 



1548 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1993 

attached to that document. 

 

Do you remember last summer, Mr. Speaker?  This House was 

in session all summer long.  We had just gone through the 

GRIP debate.  We had the government unilaterally changing 

the rules of this House to suit their own purposes.  We saw a 

whole segment of our society disenfranchised vis-a-vis the 

court system by this government.  That this party of new-found 

democrats felt no problem at all in changing the rules of this 

legislature and taking the ability of citizens of this province to 

not be able to take the government to court.  Mr. Speaker, there 

were a lot of people in the summer of 1992 beginning to 

wonder at this newly elected New Democratic Party 

government and their commitment to working with 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Well the government came along with the Partnership for 

Renewal document shortly after that, Mr. Speaker. And I think 

most people in the province -- business community at least -- 

was saying, Mr. Government, we're going to give you a second 

chance.  This sounds good.  This commitment that you made in 

the Partnership for Renewal to be consultative, to work with 

us, to meet some of those economic forecasts and numbers, it 

sounds good. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that goodwill that existed ever since last fall 

when the business community of this province said, Mr. 

Premier, we're going to give you a second chance after the 

member from Rosetown-Elrose had so dreadfully messed up 

the agricultural economy of this province, so dreadfully messed 

up the ability of agriculture in this province to be a contributor 

to Saskatchewan's economic well-being . . .  

 

The business community said, we'll give you a second chance, 

if this economic strategy, if we're consulted on it, if we walk 

through it together, will give us the opportunity to employ 

more people, to stop job loss, to stop the out-migration of 

Saskatchewan people.  The sad fact is, Mr. Speaker, that that 

out-migration has continued unabated, that the job numbers 

which the government keeps predicting and throwing out in 

their budget documents, we're coming nowhere close to 

fruition.  That we see our university students graduating this 

spring with a high degree of pessimism, with a 

doom-and-gloom scenario hanging over our universities and 

our secondary education because they've gone out there and 

they've tested the job market and they're saying there is nothing 

there for me, that there is nothing new going on here. 

 

And to compound it, Mr. Speaker, we have the Premier trundle 

off to New York and Toronto, Montreal.  And I quoted from 

one of his speeches this morning, Mr. Speaker, and he has 

many speeches, evidently, that he uses.  But in it, he talks about 

all of these glowing things that are happening in the province.  

And when one goes through the speech, Mr. Speaker, we 

realize that the glowing reports of Atomic Energy of Canada 

and Cargill and Hitachi and IBM and Northern Telecom and 

Weyerhaeuser were all things that were on the go before. 

(1245) 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Bill 55, which became well known to the 

business community a short time ago, has some components in 

it that flies directly in the face of what the Premier goes to New 

York or Toronto and talks about, which Main Street, 

Saskatchewan have been talking about particularly since the 

budget because it has the ability, Mr. Speaker, to raise the cost 

of doing business.  It has the ability to see more lay-offs occur.  

It has the ability to drive our unemployment numbers up 

instead of down. 

 

It is one of the symptoms, Mr. Speaker, of what this open letter 

to the Premier of our province by the Saskatchewan business 

coalition are talking about.  They are saying that this is a 

betrayal of your promises in the Partnership for Renewal 

document. 

 

And it's interesting, Mr. Speaker, when you go through the 

update that the Minister of Economic Development so 

hurriedly passed around to the media yesterday after question 

period, a supposed update that is presented to the people of 

Saskatchewan as further proof that this Partnership for 

Renewal is working. 

 

And it is just so much fluff, Mr. Speaker.  It is so much fluff 

that it isn't worth the paper that it is printed on.  I don't know 

what this particular little item cost Saskatchewan taxpayers to 

put together, but you know the concerns that are raised in Bill 

55, the concerns that they raised on Bill 55 about the potential, 

the potential of another $200 million in business costs aren't 

addressed here at all, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think every member of this Legislative Assembly should take 

the time to look at this document.  If this is what was supposed 

to pacify the business community, if this was what was 

supposed to say to our university graduates there is hope for the 

future, then once again I say to you, Mr. Speaker, it is not 

worth the paper it is printed upon.  Because this doesn't talk 

about one single job, not one job. 

 

Bill 55, Mr. Speaker, even if one would take the minister's total 

assurance, total and absolute assurance, says that costs are 

going up.  Costs are going up.  But in the minister's words these 

costs can easily be borne by the Saskatchewan business 

community because they're on a roll.  All the indicators are 

looking up.  They're on a roll.  These costs, even at the 

minister's minimum, will have no impact. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the actual folks out there that have faced the 

increases in income tax, in sales tax, in utilities -- you know, 

the telephone, the power, the natural gas -- the things that they 

do every morning when they open their business up and turn on 

the lights, all of those things that have gone up unabated every 

six months since this government came to power, means that 

even the minister's minimum, Mr. Speaker, is causing a lot of 

consternation 



May 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1549 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when you get down to the application, the 

actual application, as well-meaning as the minister may be, we 

know, Mr. Speaker, that other things begin to happen.  Mr. 

Speaker, this Bill supposedly was brought in to protect workers 

and provide a basis that would decrease unemployment and that 

it would further a business's ability to protect its own workers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the critiques that are coming in from the people 

that will actually have to do the implementation show us that 

this simply isn't the case.  They are looking at things like the 

half a billion dollars in offloading onto the property tax base 

that are going to occur in the next four years as per the budget 

document.  So they're saying, I know that my school board is 

setting mill rates for the coming school year.  They know that 

things are going to change at the mill rate structure, that there 

are going to be additional costs. 

 

That's why people in SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 

Association) are saying, whoa this particular Bill has 

implications for us that on top of everything else mean that the 

cost of business goes up.  I think you will shortly see people 

from SUMA and SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities), once they understand the implications tied to 

much of that budget document start to hit home, that say, whoa 

there are some additional costs here. 

 

All of these people Mr. Speaker, have watched this government 

in the area of health care.  They have watched the provincial 

Minister of Health hack and slash her way through rural 

Saskatchewan, which has a lot of impact on a lot of smaller 

communities.  They're seeing Regina, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, 

and Moose Jaw with lay off, but what they're also seeing is an 

offloading, once again, of health care costs. 

 

Issues that used to be dealt with by the provincial government 

are now back in the hands of individuals.  In the case of Bill 55 

it appears that we are going to see health costs that formerly 

were borne by the taxpayer, by the province, in a universal 

sense now offloaded onto a specific sector. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if one looks at the track record of this 

government and this particular Minister of Health and her 

attitude, then it is no wonder, Mr. Speaker, that Bill 55 

engenders a lot of concern from the people that employ the vast 

majority of workers in this province. 

 

They are saying, Mr. Speaker, and they understand about a 

system that is now actuarially sound, that operates without a 

deficit, and has provided some of the highest levels of benefits 

in the country. 

 

Now these are business people, Mr. Speaker, that have listened 

long and hard to this Premier and his various ministers of 

Finance talk about putting the provincial economy back on 

track; talk about being actuarially sound; talking about all of 

these nice financial terms.  And then they find themselves 

where 

they have been participating in a system that is actuarially 

sound, operating without deficits, and providing some of the 

highest benefits in the country, come under attack. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, they know that in other jurisdictions where 

these basic premises were not followed -- in places like Ontario 

and places like British Columbia and others -- they have large 

operating deficits in the account; that they aren't actuarially 

sound any more.  And at the end of the day, the benefit part of 

it has not been up to snuff with what Saskatchewan has been 

able to provide. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, to the average business person out there 

who pays his property tax on both his home and his business, 

who pays all of these increases to senior level of government 

on an ongoing six-month basis, and he says: you want me to 

now give up a system that is actuarially sound, that has no 

deficits in the account, that it has a surplus, that provides 

benefits to my employees, that rank in the top of the country; 

and you want me to exchange that for a system which may be 

like others.  It is no wonder, Mr. Speaker, that they then write 

open letters to the Premier and say that the Partnership for 

Renewal document is flawed, that it isn't coming through with 

what you promised. 

 

That's why the demand for an economic summit, Mr. Speaker, 

with this Premier and his cabinet is right on the money.  

Because this is one of the items that should be put into the mix; 

that should be stacked up against the Partnership for Renewal 

document and judged according to its merits, judged according 

to its ability to meet the Minister of Finance's projections that 

are now 16,000 jobs below where they should be. 

 

And I would agree with one thing, Mr. Speaker -- that those 

projections made by the Minister of Finance are probably what 

this province needs in order to meet some minimum economic 

recovery, some minimum economic wherewithal to even come 

close to what the Minister of Finance has projected over the 

next four years. 

 

The questions we have asked in the interim supply, Mr. 

Speaker, about what is happening out there on Main Street, 

Saskatchewan with things like increase in sales tax -- what has 

that done as far as employment?  What has that done as far as 

cash flow?  What has that done for walk-through traffic and 

tourism?  Those kinds of issues that we ask and are denied on 

an everyday business are the very questions that the business 

community in this province also is asking, Mr. Premier . . . or 

Mr. Speaker.  And they don't get the answers from the Premier 

and his ministers that they right and proper should. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my home community just went through it with 

this government over the issue of the CPR (Canadian Pacific 

Railway) and the communications centre in Moose Jaw -- 

200-and-some jobs; over $7 million in payroll per year.  And 

you know what, Mr. Speaker?  Very few answers.  Very few 

answers.  Frustration; frustration on Main Street, Moose Jaw; 

frustration by 



1550 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1993 

the civic administration; frustration by the downtown business 

district, on and on and on.  Because there are no answers. 

 

They're saying the document obviously has some flaws.  It's off 

track.  Even then, Mr. Speaker, they don't reject it out of hand.  

They say, we're willing to sit down with you in full view of the 

public and discuss where the shortcomings are. 

 

One of the shortcomings that's been identified, Mr. Speaker, is 

Bill 55.  What they have done, Mr. Speaker, is take the worst 

case scenario and the best case scenario, they have sawed if off 

at various levels depending on what happens to economic 

growth in this province, and they're saying that it doesn't meet 

the criteria of the government's own document. 

 

In other words this Bill removes control from those who pay 

the bill and puts it in the hands of government.  What that does, 

Mr. Speaker, in effect amounts to taxation without 

representation.  Mr. Speaker, as you know, one of the basic 

tenets of this parliamentary system that we have demands that 

with taxation always goes representation and the responsibility 

to implement it fairly and properly. 

 

They are saying, Mr. Speaker, that Bill 55 is missing the mark 

because it is in effect taxation without representation.  It is a 

change that puts the whole system of workers' compensation at 

risk. 

 

What happens, Mr. Speaker, given the government's earned 

track record, in areas such as the construction industry?  Given 

the government's current track record if those numbers continue 

to slide, if this 16,000 becomes 18,000, becomes 20,000, fewer 

and fewer people paying more and more puts the system in 

jeopardy. 

 

The business community is saying the only way to keep these 

minimums that the minister so proudly talks about is to have 

the unemployment numbers going down, the number of jobs 

going up, and the ability to pay being lessened on all parts of 

the system that supports workmen's compensation.  How else 

can injured workers, Mr. Speaker, expect to get the benefits 

that they rightly deserve?  How else can they expect to get 

those benefits if the very people that employ them don't have 

the ability to pay, if there's fewer and fewer of them all the 

time? 

 

They're saying to the government, your document is flawed.  

And in order to meet those criteria, to meet those numbers, you 

must sit down with us and talk about the solutions. 

 

For two days, Mr. Speaker, the Premier has had the opportunity 

to stand on his feet in this legislature and give that 

commitment.  I don't know of a businessman in this province 

that wouldn't shut his store, his business down, Mr. Speaker, 

for whatever amount of time it takes to meet with the Premier 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  It now being 1 p.m. this House 

stands adjourned until 2 p.m. on Monday. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 

 

 


