




















































Hansard: June 11, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2435 

 June 11, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Again today I will 

be laying some petitions on the Table and at your request I'll 

just read their prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have four pages here.  The first page is all 

Southey; the second one is all Melfort, Star City, St. Brieux; 

and the third page looks like it's all Cupar with the exception of 

two or three from Punnichy; and lastly, Lampman, Arcola, 

Kisbey.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I now lay these on the 

Table.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have petitions as 

well from petitioners across the province and I will read the 

prayer, Mr. Speaker. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are a composite of Saskatchewan 

with petitioners coming from Delisle, from Swift Current, 

Outlook, Vanscoy.  There's an entire page almost of Delisle 

except for one person from Kindersley, another page from 

Delisle, and a page from Kyle, from Kyle, Saskatchewan; 

White Bear and another page from Kyle, Mr. Speaker, and it 

gives me great pleasure to present these petitions to the 

Assembly at this time.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have petitions 

that I want to lay on the Table for the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan and the prayer is this: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they are here, signatures here today from 

Star City, Melfort, Brooksby, Spalding, Beatty, 

P.A. (Prince Albert), Turtleford, and Mervin.  I present them to 

the Assembly here today. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I too have 

petitions to present to the Assembly and I'd like to read the 

prayer to the Assembly: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the petitions here are signed by individuals 

from McCord, Glentworth, a number of people from the Maple 

Creek area, Consul, Tompkins and the Eston area.  I so present 

them to the Assembly. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order, the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7), they are hereby read and 

received: 

 

 Of citizens of the province praying that the Assembly may be 

pleased to defeat any legislation introduced to redefine the 

NewGrade Energy corporate governance and financing 

arrangements. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Jess: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to take this opportunity to 

introduce to you and the other members of this Assembly 36 

grade 3, 4 and 5 students in the west gallery.  I can't see up 

there very well from here myself, but I understand there's 10 

chaperons. 

 

I will be meeting with them for photos at 11 a.m., and 

following the photos we will meet for drinks in room 218 and 

hopefully some very easy questions.  These students are 

accompanied by their teachers Sharon Assman, Roberta 

Mansfield, Miriam Buswell. 

 

And I will look forward to meeting this group later and I would 

like to ask you to join with me in welcoming them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's indeed with great 

pleasure I want to introduce to you today and through you to 

the members of the legislature a group of students that are 

visiting here from Milestone School.  These students are a 

grade 4 class, 15 students, and they're a class that I feel very 

close to as they're from my home town and also a class that I 

had taught before I was elected. 

 

They're a very capable group and I've actually visited in their 

classroom last, oh about two weeks ago, 



2436 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1993 

where I had an interview with them.  And I must warn our 

press gallery that we have some very budding journalists and 

interviewers there. 

 

I'd like to welcome them along with their teacher that's brought 

them here today, Rhonda Pyett, and the chaperons, Debbie 

Winkler, Debbie Keys, Kathleen Haack, Brenda Kalina, and 

Lynn Erhardt.  I will be meeting with them after for pictures 

and a good discussion and drinks, and I'd like all members to 

help me welcome them here today. 

 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a pleasure to 

introduce to you and to members of this Assembly, 54 grade 3 

students from the Outlook Elementary School.  They are sitting 

in the east gallery, Mr. Speaker.  It's always a pleasure to have 

Outlook here.  This is my 15th year I've been here and there's 

never been a year, I don't believe, that Outlook hasn't been 

visiting this legislature.  And I thank them for their interest and 

we're going to look forward to a visit with them in room 255 at 

11 o'clock, I believe it is, and then a photo afterwards. 

 

And I ask all members of this Assembly to join in welcoming 

the students, and their teachers, chaperons -- I believe there's 

10 of them -- and bus drivers. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too 

would like to draw to your attention and to the attention of the 

members of the House, some 24 students from St. Theresa 

School, in the west gallery, who are here to visit the legislature 

today.  They are a class of grade 4 students from a school 

which I know very well because I used to teach there, as I 

indicated when there was another large group here just a few 

days ago. 

 

And I want to also mention that they are accompanied by their 

teacher Elaine Pack, and Carol Tompka and Mrs. Matt. 

 

I would like to ask members to join me in extending a warm 

welcome to these students who are guests here today, and I 

look forward to meeting with them after the question period for 

some refreshments and some discussion and the taking of a 

picture. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, it gives me great 

pleasure today to introduce to you and through you to the 

members of the Assembly, a class that I know very well.  

They're from my home town, from Lintlaw-Okla School.  

There are 31 grade 2, 3, and 4 students.  There are 12 

chaperons, and if I had my glasses on I could probably 

introduce them as well. 

These students are very good students; they're learning a lot 

this year.  I know that because they have two very tough 

teachers, one Gwen Olshewski, and a Donna Cunningham who 

happens to be related to me through marriage.  So I know that 

they're behaving very well this year, as I do all the time.  So I'd 

like you to join me in welcoming them to the Assembly, please. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

Assembly, a good friend of mine and the pastor of my church 

in Swift Current.  He's here to observe the proceedings today.  

Mr. Lorne Willms is sitting in your balcony, Mr. Speaker.  And 

I assure you that I will be on my usual good behaviour when 

my pastor's here watching what I'm doing. 

 

I ask you to welcome him here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Compensation for Hemophiliacs 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

directed to the Minister of Health.  Madam Minister, as you are 

probably aware, three provinces have agreed to compensate 

hemophiliacs who have contracted HIV (human 

immunodeficiency virus) from tainted blood. 

 

And in the time that has passed since hemophiliacs in our 

province began pursuing compensation, six of these individuals 

have died.  What are your plans regarding the surviving 24 

hemophiliacs in Saskatchewan who have contracted HIV from 

tainted blood? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I thank the member opposite for the 

question and would like to make this comment.  That the 

matter is going to be discussed in June at a deputy ministers' 

meeting throughout Canada.  All deputies will be meeting and 

they'll be talking about that specific issue. 

 

The member opposite is probably aware of the fact that there 

are lawsuits in Saskatchewan pending on that issue and 

therefore it becomes difficult to talk about the issue publicly 

because of the pending lawsuits.  However I can state that the 

matter is under discussion and will be discussed later this 

month at a deputy ministers' meeting across Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I wish to 

quote from a letter dated October 26, 1990 to the Health 

minister of the day.  And this letter states, I quote: 

 

 I write to encourage your early and favourable response to 

the request of the hemophiliac society.  Catastrophe relief is 

an appropriate 



June 11, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2437 

title for the situation facing these 25 citizens of our province. 

 

And as you will note, this letter in 1990 cited 25 citizens . . . 

there are now 24. 

 

Madam Minister, this letter is signed by the current Associate 

Minister of Health, the member for Moose Jaw Wakamow.  

Why is there something that was a catastrophe in 1990, now an 

issue that can wait when the author of this letter is in a position 

to do something about it? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well the member opposite knows that 

there was an agreement with provinces that took . . . The 

member opposite knows that there was an agreement made by 

the former government with the provinces across Canada that 

they would not accept legal responsibility for this 

compensation, because in effect the federal government is 

responsible for monitoring the blood supply. 

 

That agreement took place, I think it was in 1990 or 1991.  The 

issue is now under review.  We are aware of the situation with 

respect to hemophiliacs and the hardship that this has created 

on many families.  So the issue is under review.  It is 

considered important by the government.  And as I pointed out, 

there's a meeting this month to discuss that very issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well, Madam Minister, there seems to be 

some conflict here, because as recently as May of 1993 the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow wrote the president of the 

hemophilia Saskatchewan stating, and I quote:  financial 

assistance to HIV-infected hemophiliacs, extra to that provided 

by the federal government, will not be forthcoming from the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, what we have here is what was referred 

to just a moment ago.  And that is that we have a member who 

made one commitment while sitting in opposition, but has 

since turned his back now that he is in government.  And I'm 

really wondering how you can explain to these individuals in 

the hemophiliac society who have received this information, 

why is it that this is now transpiring from exactly the same 

individual, Madam Minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I believe the hemophiliac community has 

also been advised -- and I'm sure you're aware of that -- that 

this situation is being re-evaluated.  The member opposite also 

knows that there are lawsuits pending, and therefore it becomes 

very difficult to speak publicly about what may be taking place 

in terms of re-evaluation. 

 

But I do believe the member from Greystone is aware that the 

associate minister has indicated that it is being re-evaluated.  I 

have also indicated that to the press, that it is going to be 

discussed by deputies in June.  Ministers have it on their 

agenda for September.  The matter is being re-evaluated across 

Canada right now. 

However we do have lawsuits pending.  And I think that . . . 

like I appreciate you raising this, but we must be very careful 

that this, with the lawsuits pending and with the gravity of this 

case with respect to these families, that we don't play politics 

with the issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, if we're 

talking about who's playing politics with this matter, anyone 

who will claim that simply before this . . . this is a matter 

before the courts, so you can't comment, and you'll wait until 

your Health ministers' conference in the fall, the fall may be 

only three months away for the Health ministers in Canada, but 

three months away may be a lifetime for the 24 people we're 

talking about. 

 

If you're not prepared to deal with this issue on a humane level, 

then let's just look at it from an economic level.  These people, 

the 11 out of the 24 who are prepared and are in the courts 

about this matter, are stating that they will drop their legal 

actions if in fact the Government of Saskatchewan deals with 

them in a judicious way.  There are 24 hemophiliacs in 

Saskatchewan; 11 of them are pursuing legal action.  And they 

say, with the adequate compensation of $30,000 per person, per 

year, they will drop the pending legal action. 

 

Now one claim of this nature, Madam Minister, that was 

launched against the Government of Australia, ended up 

costing that government $15 million as a result -- one claim, 

Madam Minister.  Now these people are not asking for an 

unreasonable amount.  Their request is $30,000 per person, per 

year.  Can you assure me that you are going to stop ignoring 

their plight? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- For the member opposite to represent the 

government as ignoring their plight is false, incorrect, and 

unfair.  And she knows full well that there was a letter sent to 

the hemophiliac association in June 3 where it was indicated by 

the Associate Minister of Health that the position was being 

fairly re-examined and re-evaluated, and we are looking at the 

situation. 

 

It's not a question of not being compassionate.  It's not a 

question of not being humane as the member opposite wants to 

portray it.  It's a question of balancing the legal actions and 

re-examining and re-evaluating these issues in a manner that 

will be fair to everyone involved. 

 

So the member opposite should simply . . . I appreciate her 

raising the issue but let's get the facts straight.  The facts are, 

and she knows, that it's being re-evaluated.  The facts are, and 

she knows, that it's being re-examined.  The facts are, and she 

knows, that the hemophiliac association has been advised of 

that.  The facts are it's being discussed in June and she knows 

that.  She knows as well there was an agreement across Canada 

by provinces made by the former government.  She knows that.  

She knows that this is all under re-evaluation and there will be 

an 



2438 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1993 

eventual conclusion to this matter. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Last question. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Madam Minister, what we should be 

asking is what you're really telling the people versus what 

you've been telling the hemophiliacs of this province.  How 

much less could you be doing for innocent people who are 

paying such a high price for someone else's mistake?  It's just 

astonishing.  You've been in government for 19 months.  These 

are people who are dying as you stand by and say that you're so 

terribly concerned. 

 

Madam Minister, I'm going to quote from one more letter here 

and this was written by the member from Saskatoon Broadway 

who stated at the time, and I quote:  I support your request for 

relief for the 25 affected families.  Please advise me as to how I 

can help. 

 

Well I'm going to tell you how your government can help, 

Madam Minister.  You can ask your Premier to have enough 

decency to meet with these people who he told he would not 

meet on June 1 of 1993, just some 10 days ago.  These people 

are living on borrowed time, and as recently as the beginning 

of this month he indicated that after you have exhausted 

speaking with everyone else, Ms. Simard, Mr. Calvert, and the 

Department of Health and your organization feels that a 

meeting might be helpful, I would at that time consider your 

request for a meeting. 

 

Well I suggest if you're so concerned as a government, request 

from your Premier that he please meet with these people.  Will 

you commit today to have the Premier of this province meet 

with the individuals who are suffering from HIV as 

hemophiliacs in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the government is meeting 

with hemophiliacs on an ongoing basis.  They're having 

ongoing discussions with the hemophilia association.  The 

associate minister has met with the hemophiliac . . . either a 

group of the hemophiliacs or the hemophilia association in 

Saskatchewan.  There are ongoing discussions between the 

Department of Health and the association.  And I want to 

assure the member that we are doing what we can to have this 

matter resolved. 

 

And the very fact that the deputy minister has been instructed 

to discuss it in more detail with his counterparts across Canada, 

the fact the ministers consider it enough of a priority to put it 

on their agenda -- all this is happening, Mr. Speaker, and I'm 

convinced that the matter will be resolved in due course. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Increased Taxation 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, and to the 

Premier, I, like most people in the province of Saskatchewan, 

I'm sure, as we observed the news last night, were rather 

breathing a sigh of relief when we heard that tax freedom day 

had reached the Canadian population.  Today was going to be 

tax freedom day. 

 

However I find out this morning, Mr. Premier, and Mr. 

Speaker, that the Fraser Institute has released their report and 

low and behold, for Saskatchewan people, we can't breathe a 

sigh of relief just yet.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, we're going to have 

to wait till July 8 to breathe a sigh of relief and finally realize 

that the dollars we're working . . . and earning are finally going 

to go into our pockets rather than the pockets of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Fraser Institute has determined that, because of the 

government's policy, tax freedom day will not take place until 

July 8 here in the province of Saskatchewan.  Mr. Premier, 

from 1992 to 1993 tax freedom day has moved back from June 

27 to July 8 -- the biggest jump of any Canadian province. 

 

Mr. Premier, when you were elected you were elected 

primarily because you promised that  . . . you suggested 

Saskatchewan people were overtaxed and there would be no 

new taxes.  Yet we see Saskatchewan people have the greatest 

tax burden in all of Canada. 

 

Mr. Premier, how do you justify promising Saskatchewan 

people that you will lower taxes and then nail the same people 

with the biggest tax burden in all of Canada?  How do you do 

that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd be pleased to 

answer that question.  The members opposite should have very 

carefully considered the possible tax burden that governments 

would have to impose on the citizens in the '90s when they 

governed in the 1980s and they racked up a huge debt -- the 

highest per capita debt of any province in Canada. 

 

This government is committed to balancing the books of the 

province.  Our approach was to begin with expenditures -- that 

is with cuts -- which we did.  But there's a limit to how much 

you can cut.  Therefore, we were forced as well to raise taxes. 

 

I find it very, very interesting that these members are raising 

this at this time.  As I say, had they considered more carefully 

what they were doing in the 1980s, we would not have to raise 

taxes in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and to the Minister of 

Finance.  As I suspected, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance 

has responded in the usual manner -- just by pulling out the 

blame thrower and going back to what was built up in the 

1980s.  But as 



June 11, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2439 

we said earlier, Mr. Speaker, the deception that has been used 

of always accusing the government of the '80s, when they 

forget about the '70s and even the '60s and the fact that 

governments of the '60s and the '70s failed to put the 

appropriate funds in the pension plans. 

 

Madam Minister, the Fraser Institute has named you and your 

government the number one taxman in all of Canada.  Because 

of you, Saskatchewan people pay 52 per cent of their income in 

one form of taxes or another.  In fact we're the only jurisdiction 

where over half of the average family's income goes to pay 

taxes.  Our tax freedom day is fully two weeks behind the other 

worst province in Canada and that's B.C. (British Columbia) 

and guess who they have for a government - 

_ it's an NDP government. 

 

Mr. Premier, you were the individual who promised not to raise 

taxes.  Madam Minister, why did you deceive the 

Saskatchewan people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to take the 

member opposite up on one of his points about the facts of the 

situation.  What I would refer him to is the Manitoba budget.  

And what I would refer him to particularly in the Manitoba 

budget is a table, and the table compares the cost of taxes and 

basic rates in Winnipeg and in Regina.  What the member 

would find there is that it is cheaper to live in Regina in terms 

of taxes and basic costs for basic utilities. 

 

So what I would say to the member opposite is that, don't look 

just at what's happening in Saskatchewan.  Compare what's 

happening here to other provinces -- where they do happen, by 

the way, to have Conservative governments -- and you'll find 

that we stand up pretty well in terms of comparisons. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, again to the Associate Minister of 

Finance, and maybe it should be to the Premier:  Mr. Premier, I 

understand that the NDP (New Democratic Party) leader in the 

province of Prince Edward Island is considering laying himself 

off and going on pogey for the summer.  I wonder if it would 

be possible if you would lay off all your cabinet ministers and 

go on pogey.  It may not be the appropriate thing to do, but it 

may save the taxpayers a lot of money. 

 

Mr. Premier, your government's budget documents had a 

number of charts showing the Saskatchewan people had a fairly 

modest tax burden when compared to people in other parts of 

Canada.  Today we see that simply isn't true.  We have by far 

and away the heaviest tax burden of every province in Canada 

due to your government. 

 

Madam Minister, why did you mislead the Saskatchewan 

public by including those inaccurate, deceptive charts in your 

budget materials? 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, what I would refer the 

member to is the budget address.  And again in there you'll find 

tables.  And what those tables will show is that a family 

earning $25,000 a year in Saskatchewan has the third-lowest 

cost of basic necessities -- that is taxes and basic utility rates. 

 

So what we're very proud of is the fact that although we are in 

a very difficult financial situation, inherited from the members 

opposite, still we are doing the best possible job of protecting 

the average family from rising costs.  We're very proud of that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, another question to the Minister of 

Finance.  Madam Minister, in 1992 the average Saskatchewan 

family had a tax burden of $20,032.  In 1993 that tax burden 

has jumped to $23,159 -- an increase of over $3,000 in just one 

year.  That's $3,000 extra taken out of the pockets of every 

family in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now unless you're working in the minister's office, I doubt that 

there are very many Saskatchewan families that saw their 

salaries increase by that kind of money.  Madam Minister, 

when you take $3,000 out of the pockets of every family in 

Saskatchewan, it's no wonder our economy isn't growing. 

 

Madam Minister, when are you going to realize the damage 

that this level of taxation is doing to Saskatchewan, and when 

are you going to start keeping your promise to start lowering 

the tax burden instead of raising it and live within the means 

that the Premier promised of $4.5 billion? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, it is absolutely 

incredible to hear the hypocrisy of the members opposite 

talking about us learning to live within our means, when in the 

1980s on average they overspent $1 billion each and every year 

that they were in government.  Absolutely incredible. 

 

The other thing that's incredible though is that we have this 

year a deficit of just over 500 million for the previous year.  If 

in fact we were getting from Ottawa the same dollars as we 

were getting in 1988, we would not have a deficit.  So the 

federal government managed to offload on the members 

opposite when they were in government 500 million -- and 

silence. 

 

Now it's gone further.  The members opposite are actually 

supporting -- many of them -- a candidate to be prime minister 

of this country, who has said openly, I'm going to cut another 8 

billion from the provinces.  So they've gone a step further.  In 

the '80s they were just quiet about the offload; now they're 

actually promoting the offload.  Shame. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, and to the Minister of Finance, well 

it's certainly nice to hear the Minister of Finance finally 

admitting that there was some debts created in the 1970s.  

When the Minister of Finance 



2440 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1993 

says the government of the '80s spent about a billion dollars a 

year and they continue to bring up 16 billion, that leaves $8 

billion at the feet of the province of Saskatchewan and the 

government of the '70s.  And even the media have seen through 

that.  And the people of Saskatchewan have also seen through 

that. 

 

If you look at the Fraser Institute report, Madam Minister, 

you'd see that when resource taxes are factored out, tax 

freedom day remained unchanged from '84 to 1992.  And 

between 1992 and '93 it jumped by 11 days.  In other words, 

Madam Minister, from '84 to '92 the tax burden in this province 

remained the same.  Taxes may have gone up, but they went up 

at the same rate that people's incomes were rising.  Between '92 

and '93 taxes shot up sharply and incomes weren't even close to 

keeping pace. 

 

Madam Minister, why can't you understand the type of jarring 

effect that kind of tax burden has on the economy and jobs and 

on the people's lives of Saskatchewan. When are you going to 

follow the example of the associate Finance minister and say 

that there is no impact. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, once again, it's 

incredible that the members opposite are irresponsible enough 

to sit there and pick at our solutions to the problem that they 

handed us. 

 

We would have a surplus this year, that is we would have extra 

money to spend on health care or job creation were it not for 

one single factor, the fact that we will be paying in excess of 

$800 million a year, $200 million each and every day on 

interest -- interest on the public debt created when the members 

opposite were in power. 

 

We are beginning the process of turning this province around.  

We have a plan to balance the books of the province.  Instead 

of sitting there and carping, join with us in providing hope and 

optimism about the future because we are living within our 

means in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, when the Minister of Finance 

continues to blame the feds for their problems, in fact the 

federal government has a larger debt than even the per capita . . 

. than the people of Saskatchewan do. I wonder who the local 

governments blame.  It would seem to me that their finger is 

going to have to be pointed at this government. 

 

Madam Minister, the Fraser report is full of interesting 

numbers and here's another one:  Saskatchewan has the highest 

municipal tax burden in all of Canada.  Saskatchewan families 

pay about 3,400 in property taxes, $300 more than the second 

highest which is the province of Ontario. 

 

Now I'd like to think that's because we have the highest 

property values, but unfortunately that isn't the case.  It's 

because of all the downloading that your 

government has done onto municipalities, cuts to revenue 

sharing, offloading the cost of policing and environmental 

protection, grabbing a greater share of municipal fine revenue. 

And it's only going to get worse. 

 

The 8 per cent revenue-sharing cut that's coming next year and 

the downloading of health care onto the property tax base as 

we're seeing the Minister of Health doing, are going to make 

property taxes sky-rocket in 1994. 

 

Madam Minister, how do you justify all of this downloading 

onto municipalities?  How do you justify giving Saskatchewan 

the highest property taxes in all of Canada? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, there are statistics, 

statistics, and other statistics.  There are studies which say that 

Regina and Saskatoon have amongst the lowest property taxes 

in all of Canada.  So we can battle the statistics back and forth. 

 

But my main point remains.  Face up to the reality.  You left 

this province in a very perilous situation.  We are beginning the 

job of getting the situation under control.  We have a plan to 

balance the books of the province.  When we devised that plan, 

we did worry about jobs.  Because, for example, when the 

business community told us they did not want a payroll tax, as 

they have in Manitoba where there is a Conservative 

government, we listened, because they made a very good 

argument.  A payroll tax discourages employment. 

 

So we were very careful and cautious in the way that we 

approached taxation and the way we approached the whole 

budget.  But what we're doing is we are cleaning up your mess, 

and we have the support of the people of this province.  

Because although these are difficult measures, they know we 

have a plan, they know we are committed to living within our 

means, and they know we are committed to developing a 

long-term plan for the future of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, and to the minister.  Madam 

Minister, the fact that there is $3,000 more coming out of the 

taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan in one year is 

reflected on nobody else but yourselves. In fact that $3,000 is 

because of the choices that you have made as a government, 

the choices to expand cabinet, the choices to increase the 

budget to the principal secretary's office, the choices to 

increase the salaries of assistants, MAs (ministerial assistant) in 

ministers' offices. 

 

Madam Minister, those are your choices, and because of your 

choices, Madam Minister, the taxpayers of Saskatchewan have 

to dig deeper.  When are you going to finally admit that the 

choices you have made have hurt the people of Saskatchewan? 



June 11, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2441 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is 

very misleading.  We could close down the whole legislature 

and all the costs associated with that and we would pay the 

interest on the public debt for about two or three days.  What 

would you do about the interest for the other days of the year 

and the other expenditures of government?  What I ask the 

member opposite, who is sitting there again and carping at our 

attempts to clean up their mess, if in fact they were not going to 

increase taxes, what then were they going to cut?  Where are 

they going to find another $200 million in cuts?  Close 

hospitals, close schools, close universities? 

 

We believed it was important to make cuts, but we also believe 

in compassion.  There has to be a basic safety net there below 

which people cannot fall.  My suspicion is that the members 

opposite either would not care about balancing the budget or 

would balance the budget on the backs of the most vulnerable 

people in this province. 

 

We're committed to balancing the budget.  We're committed to 

creating jobs.  We're committed to rationalizing services.  But 

we're also committed to ensuring that there is a basic safety net 

for the most vulnerable people in our society.  And we're proud 

of it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 

 

The Chair: -- At this time I would ask the members to come to 

order and ask the minister to introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  With 

me today I have Dr. Hartley Furtan, who is the deputy minister; 

Terry Scott, who is assistant deputy minister; Harvey 

Murchison, who is the director of administrative services; and 

Ross Johnson, who is our department budget officer; and Norm 

Ballagh, general manager of Ag Credit Corporation. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

believe I was one of the last ones asking questions when 

Agriculture estimates were on before, and I'm only going to be 

talking for a few minutes because I have to leave to go out to 

the students.  So I just wanted to touch a little bit, Mr. Minister, 

on what I was . . . the requests that I gave you when we closed 

off.  And I thank you for the material that you sent me and the 

questions that you answered. 

And the one I want to talk about now is just to continue on 

about ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan) 

settlements.  We were talking about, I asked you about, policies 

on settlements with ACS people and the inconsistencies that 

have been drawn to my attention out there. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I can understand how you can have policies 

for people that are just . . . that are still paying and what not.  

The policy I'm talking about, Mr. Minister, is when a farmer is 

either winding down or just hanging on and how we deal with 

it.  Because I see, I definitely see inconsistency. 

 

I see inconsistencies from the . . . even comparing from the 

Watrous office to the Outlook office.  When you . . . seems to 

be dealing out of the Watrous office which takes in the 

Davidson area, it seems to be fairly commendable compared to 

out of the Outlook office.  Now I don't know whether that's 

different directions or maybe just personalities, I don't know 

this.  But it's caused a little problems and I'd just like your 

comment on how we try to get some consistency into those 

kind of settlements. 

 

The Chair: -- Before the minister answers, I'd like the 

cooperation of the members.  The business before us is the 

consideration of estimates and as part of that, officials are here 

to listen to the questions that are being put by the members.  

Because of the noise in this Chamber, because of the many 

conversations that are taking place, it frankly becomes difficult 

to do so.  And I would ask members to respect that and to not 

interfere. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and 

thank you, member, for that question.  As you know, there are 

some very difficult times in rural Saskatchewan and many 

farmers because of conditions well beyond their control have 

difficulty making payments to lending institutions, and 

certainly ACS is one of those. 

 

As we pointed out in the answer, we have guidelines that we 

use, that ACS has for policy, and I think we try to be consistent 

because that is only proper for a government agency operating 

with taxpayers' dollars, to try to treat taxpayers in different 

parts of the province, and clients, in a similar fashion. 

 

We try however, I think, to leave a bit of flexibility to deal with 

individual situations. We don't want to tie up our personnel to 

the point where they're implementing policy in a heavy-handed 

way that follows rules to the line and therefore make decisions 

that aren't very advantageous to either ACS or the client.  So 

we do try to give them a bit of flexibility and there may be 

some differences. 

 

I think often, although cases on the surface may appear to be 

very similar, when you look at the case in detail there are 

differences, types of security and loans and repayment ability, 

and so on, that although two cases that may appear very similar 

on the surface may be dealt with in a somewhat different 

manner.  There 



2442 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1993 

may be reasons for that, is that they are, when you look into 

them, not exactly identical. But certainly it's a problem. 

 

We hope that we're as consistent between regions as we can be, 

and if the member thinks that there is some evidence that we 

are not being consistent, I would certainly like to see it and we 

would try to rectify that. 

 

(1045) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you for those comments, Mr. 

Minister.  Yes, I understand this very serious situation that 

we're into.  As an MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 

we can have farmers come to us, we can have farmers go to 

different personnel in Agriculture or ACS, and it can sound on 

the outside or look exactly the same situations.  They can be 

sitting in coffee rows in town and one farmer can tell the other 

one, well I got this settlement or that settlement, and the other 

guy can't understand why he can't get the same.  And maybe 

you're right, Mr. Minister, maybe it's an entire set of different 

circumstances. 

 

I don't want to labour on to that.  I have one particular one and 

I'm not going to mention names of course, Mr. Minister.  I have 

an individual in the Elbow area, and his wife was just fired 

from government not too long ago, and it's caused a very bad 

financial situation. 

 

And I would just like . . . I have two or three that there seems to 

be inconsistencies as far as I can see, and I just . . . I don't want 

to talk about it in the House here other than get a commitment 

from you, who in your department that I should go to and 

explain these and maybe bring these individuals to and not 

have to . . . because they're not in a position where they want to 

go to the board.  One person's 85 years old and he's been 

hashed a little bit to pay some of his pension.  And it just 

doesn't seem to be fair. 

 

And I think that if the right people could get a hold of these 

here situations, it could be righted.  That's all I ask you, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Certainly we'll make that 

commitment and in fact be quite thankful for the opportunity.  I 

suggest that the member bring them directly to my office and I 

will deal with them with the appropriate authorities.  And 

certainly if there are inconsistencies I want to know about 

them.  And if we can be helpful in those cases, I will certainly 

appreciate your bringing those to me. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I appreciate that because we have this one 

person that's . . . he's about 65 years old and he's not well, and 

only thing he's kept is a few cattle.  And he's offered ACS all 

his machinery and it looks to be fair, but maybe there's . . . if 

we all get in the same room together there might be something 

different.  And I will do that. 

 

I just want to . . . I have to go spend some time with some 

students and I'd just like to leave this with you, Mr. Minister.  

We're hoping that we get rain this 

weekend; we're all hoping for that.  The whole province is 

needing rain really, more or less, except for small little pockets 

here and there.  But I'd like to . . . I can remember when we 

were in opposition . . . when we were in government and you 

were in opposition, every time that there would be a dry 

weekend out there, you'd jump up in the House over here and 

scream and holler that you better get some policies for these 

here cash-strapped farmers. 

 

Now it's you're over there and we're over here, of course, and I 

want to bring that same thing to you.  Because we felt that we 

did have . . . as best we could, tried to make plans ahead of 

time, not after the fact. 

 

Now I'm seeing a bad situation out there this summer with the 

bad crop last year, lower prices, and they're talking about lower 

grain prices again for the 1993-94 crop.  We're hoping that isn't 

going to be the case but that's the tendency and it's put a lot of 

worry on farmers.  And some areas of the province, and I think 

most areas, the feed situation looks to be a disaster out there 

unless there's some heavy rains and some quick turn-around.  I 

think there's a lot of damage.  I know through the irrigation 

area in the Outlook, Elbow area, a lot of the low-lying areas 

have touched with frost, and that's where an awful lot of hay 

comes to feed cattle in Saskatchewan. 

 

So what I want to leave with you is, please, don't leave this.  

And I ask you for the sake of the farmers: are you working on 

some plans if . . . and to have in place if there's an emergency?  

I just don't want you to leave it.  And I'd like your commitment 

it's not left after the fact to have to put plans together in the last 

dying minutes after farmers are cash strapped, got no crop, no 

grain to sell, and no feed, and no grain in the bins.  What's your 

plan for something like that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well obviously the member's right.  

We need to look ahead, and there often are droughts in 

Saskatchewan.  In fact we did strike a drought committee of 

people from Crop Insurance and Water Corporation and  

department and Grant Whitmore, or I should say the member 

from Biggar, I know where he's from.  We are trying to . . . we 

did that this spring before there was any sign of droughts. 

 

We wanted to look at droughts, insect problems, or whatever 

emergency arises to sort of keep a handle on the situation so 

that we at least know where the situations are occurring and 

what might be done in terms of cattle feed or moving cattle or 

getting insecticide or whatever might be necessary in the case 

of emergency. 

 

So the member makes a good point.  Although we don't have 

huge dollars in our budget for emergencies, certainly we do 

want to monitor and be on top of the situations as they occur. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I just have 

time for one more question.  I'd just like to leave this with you.  

Maybe I could get your commitment that you could send to me, 

or the critic for Agriculture, 



June 11, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2443 

the hon. member for Morse, an outline of some of the planning 

you've done and maybe some of the things that you have in 

mind for emergency if emergency comes. 

 

Especially, Mr. Minister, we know that one of the things in 

agriculture that's putting a dollar in people's pockets is the 

cattle industry, especially the cow-calf.  And we'd sure hate to . 

. . We can't help the grain situation.  We know that the prices 

are the cause of that.  We understand that.  We can't help the 

weather. But we need something in place. 

 

Like we've always been through cash-strapped years before and 

drought for the cattle industry.  That's my biggest concern.  If 

you could just send us, or the critic, something outlining your 

plans so we know you're doing it.  Have it in writing so we 

know what your plans are.  If you could commit to that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, we can do that. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

and officials, welcome. 

 

I will pick up where I left off actually when we met last.  Mr. 

Minister, who's making the decisions in terms of priorizing 

what research gets funded? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That primarily is a decision of the 

ADF (Agriculture Development Fund) board. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Is there a strategy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, there is a strategy.  It involves 

agricultural extension plus into areas of value added.  And 

certainly we're hoping to fine tune that strategy.  When we 

have our ag strategy paper completed and we think we know 

where we're going in agriculture, we will be working with the 

ADF board to coordinate research that corresponds with the 

directions that farmers are telling us that agriculture needs to 

go in the next 10 years. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, am I to understand then that 

there is a strategy as far as priorizing research, that strategy has 

been either articulated by or adopted by the Ag Development 

Fund and that one could have access to how that strategy is 

implemented? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The ADF is made up, as you know, 

of farmers and academics and industry people.  They have 

adopted a general policy of enhancing agriculture and doing 

value added.  We will have hopefully a more . . . we'll be 

expecting them to do a more detailed strategic plan when we 

have our agriculture strategy paper in place and can give them 

some better direction as to where agriculture is going.  Right 

now they operate basically on that general principle of 

enhancing agriculture and doing value added. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I guess what I'm 

most interested in here is that we know that there are scarce 

resources.  And if in fact your 

government is allocating scarce resources, it begs the question, 

to what end?  And surely after 19 months in power you can tell 

us toward what end you are allocating the scarce resources in 

the agriculture budget. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well certainly we know that we 

want to enhance the agricultural industry.  And the ADF board 

is a board that we have a lot of confidence in and they are 

making those decisions, and hopefully are priorizing in a 

manner that is proper. 

 

As the member has pointed out, there certainly are a scarcity of 

dollars.  And I believe they are doing a good job of allocating 

those resources in general.  Or there may be decisions that 

they've made that are not the best, but we believe they're doing 

a reasonably good job of allocating those resources. 

 

And we hope to give them more guidance when we have 

guidance from the producers in this province who tell us what 

it is that they want to do in agriculture. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Chairman, 

and Mr. Minister, has the government established target 

sectors? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No, we have not targeted sectors of 

agriculture.  We hope that . . . or we expect that that may come 

out of the ag strategy paper. 

 

I think that it's not incumbent upon a government to do that on 

their own.  I don't think there's a point of the Department of 

Agriculture targeting the hog sector or a cattle-feeding sector if 

the producers in this province are not targeting that sector, are 

not prepared to develop that sector. 

 

So I think that's the purpose of the ag strategy paper, is asking 

the producers and determining what there's an interest in.  And 

if then we need to target sectors in research we could do it on a 

basis of something that's likely to come to pass and to be 

productive in the future. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I take it then, Mr. Minister, that what in 

fact you're saying is that you are collating information.  And 

based on that information you will then determine the best way 

to allocate resources.  And once seeing that information, you 

will then be able to say, this is where it makes most sense and 

these particular sectors will be targeted. 

 

Am I following you correctly? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well that's a fancier way of saying 

. . . No, I would have . . . I would say that we're talking to 

farmers and to see what sectors it is that they want to target, or 

if they do want to target sectors.  And at that point we certainly 

want to give them our best advice as to what we see in markets 

and economic possibilities and correlate with them where we 

should go. 



2444 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1993 

But basically I think what you've said is where we're headed. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. 

Minister.  So what are your goals as an Agriculture 

department? 

 

I would like you to tell me what your goals are in terms of 

numbers of farms, perhaps what you've been discussing in 

terms of biotechnology, what the department talks about in 

terms of its goals in hogs, what your goals would be in terms of 

special-crop numbers, the way in which your department is 

conceptualizing everything from, you know, livestock and so 

forth.  I mean are there ways in which the department has 

actually looked at everything in an overview and said these are 

the things that are realistic in the province of Saskatchewan?  Is 

there a plan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well overall goals, I think we have 

a vision statement that we are discussing, that we propose to 

farmers which is now under discussion which basically says 

that we want to see self-reliant agriculture with as many people 

in rural Saskatchewan as possible in vibrant rural communities.  

That's the overall goal. 

 

Certainly we're looking at how do you achieve that.  You 

know, we certainly are trying to determine which sectors might 

help us do that, what value added might make sense in this 

province.  And hopefully when we get our strategy paper out 

we can have that in more detail in that paper. 

 

(1100) 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'll tell you 

where I've been going now.  I am wanting to understand, 

because a lot of people are not understanding what's happening 

in agriculture in the province.  And I think it is very important 

that you are consulting with people, but there still is no 

understanding about what is the strategy involved.  Does the 

government itself have its own strategy, does it have its own 

identified mission in the department and its goal and the 

objectives outlined and an understanding of its own self as a 

department of government? 

 

And when we're talking about something like targeted sectors, 

what is your strategy?  Is it a first come first served thing?  Is it 

who lobbies you the best?  I mean it's important for us to have 

some understanding of this because it appears as though a lot of 

people who are in the agriculture industry don't understand.  

And we're not simply talking about producers, we're talking 

about agriculture overall. 

 

I think that it's very valuable that there will be this conference 

at the end of next week and I know that I'm looking forward to 

it.  I hope that we'll have an opportunity for many of us in this 

particular House to not have to be sitting so we could be at it.  

But I would like your comments on that because people are 

having a sense that agriculture does not have a direction in the 

province.  And I'm not suggesting that 

it should simply be government that provides that direction, but 

surely we have to provide some kind of statement to people, 

some sense of, as a department, that the government knows 

what it's doing and where it's going. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well I couldn't agree more that we 

do need a sense of direction. I think it's been lacking in 

agriculture in the past number of years.  People need a sense of 

direction and a sense of hope that there is a future and we 

certainly are struggling to provide that.  Again that's the 

purpose of the strategy paper. 

 

I don't think that can be provided strictly from the department.  

I don't think a department target to triple the number of hogs in 

the province of Saskatchewan as an example, will go anywhere 

if there isn't some producer and community support for that 

sort of notion. 

 

And we can say that it looks like there's market for hogs or 

looks like the feed lot industry could do well because there's 

markets in Asia, or you know, we can point out what we think 

is possible for the future.  But ultimately it will be the 

producers in the rural communities that must buy into a 

strategy and be prepared to implement it and live with the 

consequences of their decision. 

 

So I'd appreciate the member's attendance at the conference 

that we're having and I'm sure we'll get some input.  And we 

are hoping that this strategy -- and I think it's long overdue -- 

will give us a sense of direction in agriculture. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, I do appreciate 

the responses that you gave me the last time that we were in 

Agriculture estimates and the time you've given today.  I have 

one last area to which I want to make some reference, and that's 

the farm stress line. 

 

You know stress doesn't take a day off, but it appears that the 

farm stress line does.  And I think one of the things that . . . I 

want you to know that I've actually spoken to the person in 

charge and indicated what I believe is a solution to this.  

Because I think it's quite inappropriate that I continue to 

receive phone calls at midnight, and 1 and 2 and 3 in the 

morning which I am quite prepared to take, that I do take, and 

that I do follow up when the farm stress line does not. 

 

And even though there may be statistics stating that there are 

only a small percentage of people who will phone at a 

particular time, I assure you, Mr. Minister, nobody phones 

anywhere at that late of an hour unless it's in a state of 

desperation.  And the people who are alone and desperate and 

feeling truly isolated at that particular time are the people who 

need somebody at the other end of the line, not someone taking 

their message and phoning them back after they have received 

the message on their answering machine the next day. 

 

I really would like to know if in fact there's going to be 



June 11, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2445 

some innovation used here.  There is an opportunity for there to 

be what I consider to be . . . call a clearing house.  There are 

many people in a state of crisis in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  There's no question about it.  There are all 

different kinds of services that are being utilized through 

particular crisis lines, and I think that it's important for us to get 

the biggest bang for our buck and provide the best service 

possible.  And that can only be done if there's going to be a 

fully coordinated kind of system for the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The member makes some very 

good points.  I believe we did, during seeding time, open it on 

Sunday where it was closed and that's a day that we found, of 

course at seeding time when family was home, that often that 

was a day when people were working and machinery was 

breaking down and creating stress.  So we did extend it to 

Sunday. 

 

We are working to get a back-up from the other crisis lines.  

We don't have it fully in place at this time but it's something . . 

. The member makes an excellent point.  If we can provide 

back-up from some of the other services that exist we can 

possibly do that. 

 

We certainly looked at total integration into the other services 

that are available which may have saved us some money.  We 

thought that there was a need for a definite rural or farm crisis 

line and identified as such in having a separate number for 

farmers because we thought that they would be more likely to 

use it.  But certainly we are looking at a back-up linkage to 

other agencies to try to cover that off, and I certainly appreciate 

the points. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, the real point in a clearing 

house is not that people wouldn't have their own line like a 

farm stress line.  It means that there would be a greater 

coordination of services; there'd be 24-hour connection.  There 

are people who in fact are suicidal in the middle of the night.  

And trust me, if you don't have people who know what they're 

doing at the end of the line, it's not going to prevent a suicide in 

all likelihood. 

 

And I think that . . . it is of great concern to me that we still 

have an unprecedented number of marital breakdowns, 

unprecedented family violence, people who are suffering from 

feelings of total hopelessness and helplessness.  We have an 

extraordinary set of circumstances and it's not getting better. 

 

And I know that it may not be considered part of your 

department, but I do think that what we need is, again, greater 

coordination between the Department of Health and yourself 

because what we're talking about here is to come up with some 

possible solutions for people, and it's not simply a health issue. 

 

And a lot of individuals who are requiring assistance, acquiring 

help, are requiring assistance and help from people who do 

understand about their particular kind of background, the things 

that they're going through.  And they aren't people who simply 

fit into some 

psychiatric disorder that they may be treated for if it's purely 

from a health perspective. 

 

And I continue to be really disconcerted, alarmed, and 

disappointed that after all of this time, the work that I did 

throughout the early and mid-1980s leading up to 1989 when I 

left my position, there is still no one in the province of 

Saskatchewan who is considered to be a farm stress expert who 

has people surrounding the individual to whom people like I'm 

referring to can be referred. 

 

And you can speak with . . . it doesn't matter if its someone at 

the Saskatoon Mental Health Clinic who's brought in and 

discusses farm stress issues with people -- she will still say, Dr. 

Gerrard will still say, that there are not the people available to 

make referrals to.  And it's an extremely serious problem and 

it's not going to simply go away. 

 

And with the kinds of changes that people in rural 

Saskatchewan are experiencing over and above what's 

happening in their day-to-day living with just being part of 

farming in this province, it's astonishing what people are going 

through.  And the calls from whom I am receiving information 

now, these individuals are, in many instances, considered to be 

the most outstanding people in their communities. 

 

These are people who are involved in their health centres; they 

are involved in their municipal councils or their rural 

municipalities; they are involved in all different sorts of things.  

These are the people who have kept it together to provide 

leadership to everybody else.  And when you have individuals 

who are the ones who have to portray to everyone that things 

are fine, and things are not fine with them, you begin to see all 

the pieces beginning to crumble around them.  And it's 

extremely important.  I offer whatever assistance I can be to 

attempt to address this issue which I do not believe is being 

adequately addressed by your government. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave I would like to 

introduce some guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. 

Minister, for allowing me to . . . for the interruption.  I've just 

been informed, Mr. Speaker, that we have a group of 28 grade 

12 students from the town of Shellbrook here. 

 

And I take special pleasure in introducing this group to the 

members of the legislature, for these young adults that are here 

and also for their teacher who happens to be, Mr. Speaker, a 

gentleman called Colin Neudorf, who is a nephew of mine, and 

is continuing the -- I don't know if he wants to admit to that -- 

but he is continuing the fine teaching tradition that Neudorfs 

have in this province as educators.  So I want to welcome them 

here from Shellbrook. 



2446 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1993 

It's not very far from Hague.  And I'm sure that the students of 

Shellbrook are familiar with a couple of my sons who played 

for the Hague Royals and the Hague midgets and so on, so they 

may have had contact from time to time with them as well.  

And we've had some good rivalry with Shellbrook over the 

years and we certainly look forward to having more of those in 

the future. 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, I would ask all members of the legislature 

to please help me welcome those students and teachers and bus 

driver from Shellbrook this morning. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 

Item 1 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In 

response to the member from Saskatoon Greystone, obviously 

has some expertise in this area and we would certainly 

appreciate . . . I will meet with her personally or have a 

meeting set with officials of the deputy and Mr. Imhoff, who is 

in charge of the stress line, and possibly somebody from Health 

if that's so desired.  And certainly it is a great problem.  And if 

there's any advice and help that we can get, we will certainly 

appreciate it. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

have a number of questions that I want to have you respond to, 

dealing with the Western Grain Transportation Act.  I'd like to 

know from you what the position that Manitoba is taking in 

relation to the payment to the western Grain . . . or from the 

western Grain Transportation Agency.  And I'd like to know 

what their position is in relation to whether they want to have 

the money that is paid in by the producers to move the grain 

from Thunder Bay to Montreal, whether that is going to be 

included in the discussion as it relates to the pooling portion of 

the Wheat Board. 

 

And I'd like to know from you what their position is in relation 

to the discussions that are going on today, and then I'd like to 

know also what Alberta's position is in relation to that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I don't know 

that I speak well for the position of other governments on this.  

I can give you my impression of what their position is.  I 

certainly don't want to speak for either Mr. Findlay or Mr. 

Isley. 

 

The last meeting I had with Mr. Findlay, he has many of the 

same concerns that we have.  Realizing that this is now a 

regional subsidy was really part of the tradition and the 

development of western Canada.  It was one of the benefits that 

we got in some saw-offs that saw other benefits go to eastern 

Canada and is certainly concerned about the dilution of that 

benefit. 

Manitoba is concerned about the pooling problem, and there's 

about a $60 million problem that they believe they have, which 

has been promised to them off the top of the western grain 

transportation subsidy, which is a concern to us.  One of the 

problems with the proposals that we see is that not only are 

they talking about changing the method, they're talking about 

reducing the amounts and diluting it in many different ways. 

 

(1115) 

 

So Manitoba certainly shares some of our concerns on western 

grain and some differences as to how it should be paid.  But 

they certainly have some concerns as to maintaining that as a 

regional subsidy and not losing the money to western Canada. 

 

The position of Alberta, again I can't speak with any authority 

for the Government of Alberta.  I think they basically are, as 

you know, wanting to change the method of payment and do 

not seem to be too concerned about losing it altogether. 

 

I guess part of the whole dilemma around the Western Grain 

Transportation Act is that Saskatchewan is the government . . . 

or the province that has the most to lose on this.  We get the 

largest portion of it.  And so on balance we have some serious 

disagreements with Alberta about how much of that subsidy 

should be paid to Saskatchewan and how much will be paid to 

Alberta.  We also have some serious disagreements about how 

it should be paid out. 

 

The interesting thing with Alberta is they have a feed subsidy 

which they claim is there because it's an offset to the WGTA 

(Western Grain Transportation Act).  WGTA has been reduced 

by 10 per cent.  They did not reduce their feed subsidy, so to 

me that would suggest that that argument is not valid. 

 

However, I guess there are some papers around that we can get 

you on positions of those governments, but I really hesitate to 

speak for other governments. 

 

Mr. Carlson: -- With leave, I would like to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Carlson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I would like to 

introduce to the members of the Assembly 56 grade 4 students 

from Parkview School in Melville that are visiting here today 

and are in the Speaker's gallery. 

 

They are accompanied by their teachers, Darlene Taylor, Elmer 

Heshka, and Stan Merydk; with chaperons of Diane Smith, 

Marilyn Kozakevich, Mrs. Yelle, and Mr. Keel.  And bus 

driver is Mrs. Armbruster and Mr. Al Schatz, should be here 

there some place too. 

 

Also, Mr. Chair, I'd like to acknowledge one of the other 

students who is a neighbour of mine, and I'm 



June 11, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2447 

friends with his parents, Mr. Owen Reid, behind the bar on the 

main floor here.  And I'd like all members of the Assembly to 

welcome the students in today.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, the reason 

I'm asking about what the Manitoba's position is is because 

you're in a position to negotiate on behalf of Saskatchewan. 

 

And the concern that I have is that what has been traditionally 

about a 55 or 54, 55, or 56 per cent of the Western Grain 

Transportation Act money coming into the Crow benefit, that 

that volume of dollars is usually accrued to Saskatchewan.  

And we want to know for sure that we maintain that, and we 

need to be in a position where we can argue that we maintain 

that volume of dollars to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The reason I raised the Manitoba position, Mr. Minister, is that 

the Manitoba's position is there and it was there to include the 

pooling portion of the freight rate from Thunder Bay to 

Montreal, was there to be included in how the method of 

payment was going to evolve eventually to where it's going to 

get.  And I'm not sure where that is. 

 

But what it does, Mr. Minister, it reduces or dilutes our 

particular benefit in Saskatchewan.  And I'd like to know what 

their position is in relation to that so that the public of 

Saskatchewan can understand that there are many issues in 

dealing with this that are not just simply either pay the railway 

or pay the producer. 

 

There are other issues on the table that I think need to be 

addressed.  And I'd like to have what their view of this matter 

is in order to bring some more of the issues to the awareness of 

the public. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Certainly the member is right, and 

I think it's fair to say the position in Manitoba is that they 

would like their pooling problem fixed and the $60 million 

taken off the top of the Crow benefit which obviously is not 

beneficial to the province of Saskatchewan.  We would gain 

some on the eastern side and lose some on the western side, 

and on balance, Saskatchewan would not gain anything.  And 

certainly we're not going to agree to somebody getting $60 

million off the top before it's distributed. 

 

But I think the wider issues on where the money goes is, first 

place, will it stay in western Canada as a regional subsidy?  

What the feds are proposing is we're going to roll this into 

safety net; safety nets should be national. 

So over a very short period of time what we're saying is a Crow 

with $726 million, which is regional benefit, instead of coming 

to western Canada, gets diluted into national safety net 

programs, and we lose it.  And we all lose -- Alberta, 

Manitoba, and Saskatchewan.  And certainly I don't know that 

I've made that point with Alberta, but certainly Manitoba is 

very concerned about that development. 

 

Then the other issue is if you keep in western Canada, do you 

keep our share in Saskatchewan?  And you know, when you 

have proposals that say, well we're going to take off 60 million 

to fix the pooling for Manitoba, and we're going to take off 

some for the hog farmers in Quebec, and we're going to give 

some to B.C. to satisfy their feed freight assistance problem, 

and meanwhile we're cutting 10 per cent from the top and 

another 10 per cent, there isn't a whole lot left coming. 

 

And you're right, there's more to it than the method of payment.  

We disagree with changing the method of payment, but we 

disagree even more with losing this regional or provincial 

subsidy which is . . . or not to call it a subsidy, but what we 

believe was a trade-off that is our right and part of the ties that 

hold this country together. 

 

One of the advantages that we got as a region was the Crow 

benefit.  Eastern Canada certainly got other benefits.  And now 

we are losing that benefit and that certainly is something that . . 

. we need to form alliances with other governments.  But the 

success of doing that is that the bottom line is we need to 

maintain the $400 million that's coming in . . . has been coming 

into Saskatchewan, and it looks like we're losing that fight at 

this point. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- That's absolutely correct.  What disturbs me 

in this discussion is that it might be 60 million average.  But if 

the amount of grain moving from Thunder Bay to Montreal -- 

and it moves at roughly $20 a tonne -- if that moves up to . . . I 

think two years ago it was . . . three years ago I think it was 7 

million tonne, which would take you to $140 million, if you 

have 12 million tonnes of grain move through the ports to 

Montreal, you got $240 million coming out of the pooling. 

 

And that is a significant amount of money that is going to come 

out of Saskatchewan farmers' pockets in order to help the 

Manitoba farmers.  And that's what my concern is in relation to 

this. 

 

The other thing that the federal government may put on the 

hopper is that the involvement should be because some of the 

benefits of the payment to western Canada accrued to the 

Quebec farmers because of the grain transportation Act. I 

believe that they are already getting a fairly substantial amount 

of subsidy from the federal government in two ways, Mr. 

Minister, both Quebec and Ontario, in a direct subsidy in the 

milk that they pay from the federal government to the milk 

producers and also the consumer subsidy, because they raise 

the price to the consumer in a forced way.  And that accounts 

to, in 



2448 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1993 

Quebec, roughly $500 million a year and in Ontario another 

$500 million a year. 

 

And those are offsets that I believe that you need to be aware of 

in order to say to those people over there, you are getting 

special benefits in other areas and the need for Saskatchewan to 

receive the $420 million or $400 million as a transportation 

subsidy needs to be kept in place to counteract some of those 

things. 

 

Because if reality was put into place, the hog industry wouldn't 

be in Quebec and the dairy industry wouldn't be in Quebec; it 

would be in Manitoba, Saskatchewan, and Alberta.  And that's 

reality, Mr. Minister.  And I think we need to put that as an 

argument to the federal government so that they understand 

very clearly that even though you are discussing it on a 

transportation basis, and you have the Maritime subsidy and 

you have the Quebec involvement with western Canada, but 

you still haven't got a level playing-field because they take 

subsidies from other commodities and then they have argued 

that for years that that's different.  But I say that you must be in 

a position to argue very strenuously on behalf of 

Saskatchewan's portion that it remain here because they should 

have their subsidies cut as well. 

 

And on top of that, Mr. Minister -- and this is the argument that 

I always got from the Quebec delegation -- is that this was 

necessary because this was a supply-managed industry.  And 

what happened in effect, Mr. Minister, is that they market 

internationally a hundred million dollars worth of product.  

And that causes the dairy producers in western Canada a whole 

lot of problems, because they marketed internationally with a 

subsidy both from the taxpayer and from the consumer. 

 

And then on the other hand, in Saskatchewan we get criticized 

on a national GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) 

agreement on the fact that we have a payment made to 

producers for transportation. 

 

And those are the arguments that I think are very, very 

pertinent in relation to this discussion.  And I believe, I believe 

very strongly, Mr. Minister, that if we continue to debate the 

issue on whether it is pay the producer or pay the railroads, we 

will lose.  We will lose the argument in the long run.  And that, 

that is the base line of where I think we ought to be arguing. 

 

When we establish how much money we get in this 

transportation payment, when we establish what volume of 

dollars we get, then let's go talk about how we pay it, rather 

than paying . . . deciding now how we're going to pay it 

because then they're going to take it away on us. 

 

Since 1989 I've argued with those people and I've discussed 

with those people, and I know what they're about.  I know the 

players in the industry.  And Ernie Isley will stand here and 

say, pay the producer.  And Mr. Findlay will say, pay the 

producer but give me the pooling as well.  And that raises a 

whole lot of concerns. 

And what my concern is in addition to that, is that both of them 

may in fact do an end run on Saskatchewan in order to achieve 

what they want to achieve and then we get left.  As the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan we will be continuing to argue 

about pay the producer or pay the railroads and we will lose the 

money.  And that's what my concern is, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, that is a very 

legitimate concern.  You make some of the exact same 

arguments that I made at ag ministers', national ag minister's 

conferences.  The federal government is saying to us that, look 

we've got to change WGTA because it's distorting our 

production and it's not GATTable and all that. 

 

And at the same time, you know, they're pumping money into 

Quebec hogs and they're pumping money into Quebec and 

Ontario dairy, and their P.E.I. (Prince Edward Island) potatoes, 

and GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) is not GATTable 

as it stands in Manitoba and Alberta as well.  Why are we 

picking on this particular subsidy?  And yes, Manitoba and 

Alberta are attempting to make an end run and the federal 

government is buying them off with this goody and that goody, 

all coming off the top of the pool. 

 

They talk about Ontario seaway.  Well don't worry, we can do 

something to fix that.  We can do something to fix your hog 

problem in Quebec, and yes Manitoba, we can fix your $60 

million pooling problem.  That's no problem.  And B.C., yes 

we can fix that.  Meanwhile they're saying there's no new 

money.  Where's the money coming from?  It's coming out of 

the pool of which we have half. 

 

And so the member makes very good arguments, and I've made 

those arguments.  I think what I would ask the member to do is 

to work like hell in the next election to defeat the federal 

Conservatives and Charlie Mayer and we'll make some 

headway with that argument. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well I'm just going to say, you can talk 

partisan politics all you want, but let's talk for the farmers in 

the province of Saskatchewan.  And what you are saying is 

exactly what needs to be addressed in a hard, fast way.  And 

what you're doing, Mr. Minister, is you're losing the argument.  

You're losing the argument because you are stuck on a track 

that says, pay the railways.  And that track is going to lose all 

of Saskatchewan farmers the money that they have in the pot 

right now.  And that's my concern. 

 

You are saying, there is only one way to do this.  Why don't 

you get the money and then decide how you're going to do it.  

And that's what I'm saying is far more strategic for the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan, because every day you dilute 

that volume of dollars coming in is one dollar less coming to 

Saskatchewan.  And that's why I say to you that you need to 

dislocate yourself or move away from how it's paid, to the 

position of how do I get the money the quickest. 



June 11, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2449 

(1130) 

 

That has to be the position you take, Mr. Minister, and I think 

that that will solve the problem.  When you have the control of 

the money, and the people of the province of Saskatchewan 

have control of the money, then let's talk about how we spend 

it.  And if we decide to spend it paying the railways because 

that's the way the people of the province of Saskatchewan want 

it, then that's the way it needs to be done.  If it's decided that 

you pay the producer, then that needs to be the way that it's 

done. 

 

But let's get a real value dollar on the transportation subsidy.  

That's what I think we need to have in a very clear way, and we 

need to have you argue on behalf of producers in the province 

of Saskatchewan that that's what we get. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I can only say 

that I have been arguing very hard on behalf of the producers 

of the province.  I thought we were making some headway.  I 

think if you see the announcements that came out recently 

which would say that the federal government, and partisan 

politics aside, they obviously have the jurisdiction and they 

have the political will to do away with this subsidy as a 

regional subsidy.  And they are headed hell-bent to do it, and I 

think the only way to stop it is to change that government.  And 

we need to voice that in the next federal election, which is 

coming up.  And I think if we send not one Conservative MP 

(Member of Parliament) from Saskatchewan, they will get a 

message. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I think there's going to be 

every MP from Saskatchewan is going to be a Conservative.  

And that, Mr. Minister, is more really because of your policies 

in this province than anything else.  And that is as obvious as I 

believe it's going to be. 

 

Now putting that politics aside, let's talk about the real value as 

it relates to the Saskatchewan farmers.  The Saskatchewan 

farmers need the money.  They need the money for paying their 

transportation costs.  That's what the farmers of Saskatchewan . 

. . that's the baseline that we should be arguing about, not 

whether one guy or another guy is running the show. 

 

And as a matter of fact, if you put the Liberals in place in 

Ottawa, I don't care what Mr. Chretien has said.  What Mr. 

Otto Lang has said has a significant amount of weight in this 

country.  And he has said over and over again for 20 years that 

it's going to be pay the producer.  So what the national Liberal 

Party has said is not significant in the debate because I don't 

think that what they said is relevant.  And what I say to the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan, Audrey McLaughlin 

is not going to get elected. 

 

And so let's talk about reality and let's move all of that aside 

and let's talk about how the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan are going to pay their grain costs in 

transportation.  Let's talk about how much money they're going 

to get, rather than all of those 

other details, and that's what we need to address. 

 

My personal opinion of how Alberta and Manitoba are going to 

deal with this is that they're going to get the pay the producer.  

And that, Mr. Minister, is going to be at a cost to us in less 

dollars.  And that's what really bothers me, has bothered me all 

the time that we've been talking about it since the middle of the 

'80s.  And that's the discussion that we've had and the reality is 

that we need to have that payment come to Saskatchewan. 

 

And then let's you and I sit down and talk about . . . and the 

Pool, Sask Wheat Pool, they will also want to talk about it.  All 

the grain companies will want to talk about it.  And when you 

get to that point, Mr. Minister, then we maybe have some 

innovative discussions to take place.  And I think that that is 

something that we should set aside in this discussion and move 

directly to the volume of dollars.  That's what we should be 

getting to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well obviously the volume of 

dollars is a major concern.  And if you look at what this federal 

government has done, they just reduced it by $40 million, and 

another $40 million in the next year or two.  That to me does 

not speak of a government that's willing to leave the volume of 

dollars coming into this province.  And I think if you send 

Conservative MPs from Saskatchewan and they are indeed the 

government -- heaven forbid -- they will move very quickly not 

only to change this program but to eliminate it. 

 

And I think there's no doubt the intention is to have that 

regional subsidy eliminated.  And if that is the philosophy of 

the federal government and if we send members from here to 

endorse that, I think that will be the result.  And I don't think . . 

. I as a provincial minister will argue against that very 

strenuously and will point it out.  But if the electorate does not 

respond to that, I think they will view it as a mandate to 

continue on the course they're on.  And I think the member has 

eliminated two options for voting in Saskatchewan and I will 

leave it to the electorate to select the third alternative. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I'm going to go to another issue that I think is 

of concern to many people.  We have in the province of 

Saskatchewan a serious grass problem, Mr. Minister, and the 

stock growers told you that at the meeting in Moose Jaw 

recently.  And they were concerned about the fact that they 

have more fees to pay with less grass. 

 

And I'm just going to list some of the ways that you've 

addressed the livestock industry.  You've increased the fees in 

the pastures; you've increased the amount of bulls the patrons 

have to buy; you've increased the various fees in relation to 

brand inspection; you've increased all of these areas.  You've 

taken the SaskPower Corporation, you've increased the rates 

that farmers have to pay.  You've increased SaskTel rates. 

 

You've increased the costs of farmers in relation to 



2450 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1993 

fuel costs.  You've increased the costs on the licences that they 

have to buy, and some of these trucks the individuals have have 

surcharges on them.  Some of them have a change in the 

amount of deductible that they have; some of these farm trucks 

are $2,500 deductible.  That, Mr. Minister, is an extreme cost 

to the farmers.  You've increased the rates and reduced 

coverage on crop insurance; you've taken the offset off. 

 

Mr. Minister, you've taken $68 million -- $68 million -- out of 

the farmers' pockets. 

 

Now the federal government through StatsCanada said that the 

average farm was going to have a 5,000 net income.  

Saskatchewan farmers were going to have less than 5,000 net 

income. 

 

Now you just took a thousand dollars-plus out of every farmer's 

pocket when you did all of your fee things this year.  That's 

what you've taken out of their pocket right out of the 

Department of Agriculture.  And you have increased their cost 

so that their net is less this year than probably it's going to be in 

the history of the province. 

 

And that raises serious concerns in relation to what the member 

from Arm River was talking about.  You have to have some 

money.  And the member from Saskatoon Greystone talked 

about the stress.  That, in rural Saskatchewan, is very real, Mr. 

Minister.  On top of that, Mr. Minister, in the town of 

Vanguard there are 23 people who are going to lose their job in 

the hospital.  They're going to lose their job.  And every one of 

those people is supporting the farm. 

 

In Ponteix, I had a fellow phone me from Ponteix.  He lives in 

my constituency and his wife works in the Ponteix hospital.  

And he said, one year, and if I can't make it I'm leaving.  

Where is he going to go?  He's going to go where his wife can 

find a job, and that's in the United States, Mr. Minister.  He's 

going to move to the U.S. (United States) because his wife is a 

nurse.  She can go get a job down there and he can farm 

anywhere he wants.  It isn't exclusive to Saskatchewan. 

 

So what have we got?  We've lost one more farmer.  And that is 

going to be a very, very serious problem.  As a matter of fact 

he was going to go . . . he had already done this, Mr. Minister.  

He had gone to Gravelbourg, put a down payment on the 

supply for a brand-new house for his farm.  And he had put the 

money down. 

 

And the day that Ponteix hospitals were cut, he phoned me and 

said, I voted NDP last time, and he said, that is the last time I'm 

going to do that, sir.  But he said, that was one mistake.  But he 

said, if I stay here and go to Gravelbourg to the lumber yard to 

say that I'm not going to build my house, I'm not going to take 

that, I'm going to lose my down payment. I'm going to be 

losing the second time if I don't go do that. 

 

So he went and he lost his down payment on his house.  He 

said, I don't want next thing that comes along, Mr. Minister, is 

that the schools are going to 

have to adjust to 23 jobs less.  And how are they going to 

adjust to that?  And that, Mr. Minister, is at least three teachers 

less in Vanguard and four in Cabri.  That's what that says.  

Okay, you reduce the pay there.  You have a ripple effect all 

the way through the system, Mr. Minister, that is going to 

cause very, very serious concerns. 

 

So you add all of this up and what have you got?  What have 

you got?  You've got $5,000 a year coming to those farms.  

And you take out of your department another $68 million and 

say, I don't want to have to pay the producers in the province of 

Saskatchewan that extra 68 million; we've got to protect the 

debt.  Well sure we have to protect the debt.  We've got to pay 

down the debt. 

 

The member from Moosomin just said earlier that your taxes 

went from 20,000 . . . the cost of taxation in the province of 

Saskatchewan went from 20,000 last year to 23,000 this year.  

That's your debt, Mr. Minister.  That's your increase in the debt 

that has caused that.  All things being equal, that's your price 

that you're paying, and that's the taxes that come out of the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan.  And that's why we 

have a serious concern about what Agriculture is doing. 

 

And in my part of the world on April Fool's Day when the 

MLAs in Alberta had this story in The Calgary Sun about 

annexing Saskatchewan, that wasn't an April Fool's joke on my 

part of the world.  They seriously considered that as an option, 

Mr. Minister.  And I think that you need to take it very serious 

what you're doing to address those concerns in the province of 

Saskatchewan, and I think you need to be involved. 

 

There's an article in the paper today that says: "Anger subsiding 

over health cuts."  And do you know what the reason is, Mr. 

Minister?  "In the meantime, they'll bide their time -- and let 

their anger smoulder."  Mr. Minister, you can have conferences 

all over the place and deal with agriculture in a way, but there's 

a smouldering underneath there that is ready to blow up.  And 

when farmers have to start to move off, as I've indicated here in 

the points that I made, you're going to have a very serious 

problem. 

 

I know an individual who used to represent the constituency 

that I have today, went into his home town of Vanguard and 

said, just wait a while; when the hospital's gone and the 

teaching is gone -- he said this to the Hutterite colony there -- 

he said, you'll be able to buy land for next to nothing. 

 

And then you have another ripple effect, Mr. Minister, and that 

ripple effect has to do with the credit unions and the ripple 

effect to ACS.  It has serious implications every time you take 

a step like that, Mr. Minister. 

 

And I want to say to you that is your responsibility, to see that 

that is the least . . . has the least amount of negative impact as 

possible.  And I don't think you're doing that, Mr. Minister.  I 

don't think you're standing up for the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 



June 11, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2451 

I led with the western Grain Transportation Agency or the Act 

and its payment to western grain transportation.  And I don't 

think you're defending it in an adequate way and I don't think 

you're defending our prairie farm producers in an adequate way 

either.  And I could go on and on, with a list in the hog industry 

and in the cattle industry.  I could go on and on on that. 

 

And I don't think you're doing it.  I think you need to be far 

more pointed.  You need to be far more aggressive. 

 

And I want to say to you that you need to take your deputy and 

turn him loose on some of those people because he has the 

capacity to argue those points.  He's got the understanding and 

the background to argue those points, because I know he has -- 

because he's worked for me.  And you need to turn him loose to 

argue the position of Saskatchewan because I think he can 

handle it a whole lot better than you can. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well luckily, I have a competent 

deputy to fill in for me. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I think we have to the best of our ability been 

making the arguments as strongly as we can.  It's interesting 

that the members opposite don't even want to discuss 

agriculture in here, have not stood up to the federal 

government. 

 

I have not heard anything coming from the benches opposite in 

the offloading that's happening in agriculture, whether it be in 

WGTA or the Wheat Board or the cash advance or anything 

else.  I certainly have not heard any strong arguments coming 

from that side except for in the House here today.  And I think 

that's a fact.  And we certainly will have a very able deputy 

making the arguments and I will make them to the best of my 

limited ability, as the member points out. 

 

(1145) 

 

I think if we look at the fees, I think to quote a rather prominent 

person from Saskatchewan, the member from Estevan, who 

said at one time that deficits are deferred taxes.  That's the 

deficit.  Now the deferred taxes are coming in.  And that 

$3,000, or whatever numbers that the member quotes opposite 

are going one place only.  They're going to New York to pay 

the interest on the debt.  We don't have it for the farmers for the 

drought situations and for other problems. 

 

And I think with regards to being annexed to Alberta, I think 

the member opposite has done too much of his gloom and 

doom because although there's hard times in my area of the 

province and there's certainly no underestimating the difficult 

situation in agriculture, there's also a lot of optimism and a lot 

of desire to stay here and rebuild this province and rebuild the 

rural communities and agriculture.  And I think we will adapt 

again and we will rebuild, and I think . . . with some leadership.  

And I think if the members opposite are preaching gloom and 

doom, it's no wonder that their constituencies are downtrodden 

and ready to join Alberta, but I think the rest of the province is 

not. 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, just 

actually recently I've had a few requests come into my office 

from young couples who would like to get into agriculture but 

are having a very difficult time, even though interest rates are 

down, land prices are probably as realistic as they could be.  

But we all realize the difficulties that individuals face in first of 

all, trying to find the down payment and even coming up with 

the 20 or 30 or $35,000 available for a quarter.  And many 

couples are looking at alternative means of deriving some 

revenue. 

 

And the request was just wondering what the department has in 

place today that would help young couples, say in establishing 

a small feedlot operation. If there's anything or any kind of 

assistance or operating money or low interest, long-term 

money.  Is there anything available through the department to 

help young couples get established on the family farm? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm glad that the 

member from Morse hasn't turned his constituents off, I see.  

At least it's nice to hear that there are young people out there 

who want to start farming in his constituency. 

 

There are some programs.  ACS will lend money for livestock 

and irrigation projects and that sort of thing; they will in land in 

cases for home quarters.  There's also a vendor financing 

guarantee that's available for young people to start farming. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Minister, in response, I might add that 

these young couples are having great difficulty trying to start 

farming.  And that's the reason the question is coming forward.  

It seems there is very little that's available from the government 

of today or the department. 

 

But I appreciate the fact you mentioned there are some 

possibilities out there, and I wonder if the minister will give his 

assurances that you will at least pass on some of this 

information to me so I can forward it to my constituents.  I 

would appreciate that.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We'll certainly do that. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just want to 

make one point, Mr. Minister -- and you can make a pretzel 

look like a straight line. 

 

And I just want to say that what optimism is in the province of 

Saskatchewan in agriculture is driven by people who have a 

real desire to stay here.  And I believe that that is evident in 

every one of the 60,000 that are left, because, Mr. Minister, 

they've been taking it out of their savings to farm, they've been 

taking it out of their parents' savings to farm, and they've been 

doing that on an ongoing basis. 

 

Yesterday or the day before, Mr. Minister, the province issued 

a bond at 6 per cent.  If it's any indication from last year what 

would happen this 



2452 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1993 

year, we got $560 million coming in.  And I believe at no time 

in the history, in any of the time that I was in government, was 

there any opportunity to ever give 6 per cent money to the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan for agriculture -- at no 

time, Mr. Minister. 

 

And I believe that you are at a crossroads today with an 

opportunity that has not existed since the '70s, since the early 

'70s, when an opportunity to deliver low-cost money to the 

province of Saskatchewan would be available to them.  You 

have that option now, Mr. Minister, and you have that option at 

almost no cost. 

 

And I'll tell you where the benefit . . . the average cost of 

interest in the province of Saskatchewan is in the 

neighbourhood of 10 per cent; that's agriculture cost of interest, 

but there are many, Mr. Minister, who are over that.  And 

therefore and because of that, because who those people are, 

those are the young people that the member from Moosomin 

was talking about, those are the young people that want to get 

established and are trying to establish themselves, they are 

stilling paying at 12 per cent, 13 per cent, and that, Mr. 

Minister, is a fact. 

 

Today you have an opportunity -- the door of opportunity -- 

like no one has had since the early '70s to provide an 

opportunity for an agriculture investment in a way that would 

clearly establish a lowering of a debt that the farmers of the 

province of Saskatchewan have from an average of 10 to an 

average of 6.  And the cost . . . The benefit to the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan would be in the neighbourhood of 5 

billion times 4 per cent, which is $200 million, $200 million 

net benefit.  The net in the province of Saskatchewan would go 

up considerable in light of that, from $5,000 to roughly $9,000 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

That, Mr. Minister . . . you have today that opportunity to do 

that.  And that is almost equivalent to what the payment is, or 

it's 50 per cent of the payment paid in western grain 

transportation.  You have that opportunity today at no cost to 

the province.  You have that.  And I would say that if you 

neglect to take this opportunity, you are causing a serious hurt 

in the province of Saskatchewan.  And I would say that that is 

an opportunity that comes only once in a lifetime, Mr. Minister. 

 

Farm Credit now owns 1.1 million acres.  They also have that 

opportunity to do that, Mr. Minister, and I'm not going to quit 

talking to them about it.  But you and the federal government 

need to talk about what you can do for agriculture.  There is 

what you can do.  I believe there's $20 billion worth of debt in 

Canada in agriculture.  A 4 per cent saving on that is a fair 

chunk of change to benefit agriculture and help us be more 

competitive. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, is where you need to be leading.  And 

when you come to your agriculture ministers' conference this 

summer, I believe that you need to have that on the table as a 

positive alternative 

for the benefit . . . and show leadership in the province of 

Saskatchewan in giving direction to the federal government 

and to this province to help the farmers out. 

 

I believe that's necessary and I believe you have a uniqueness, 

Mr. Minister, you can call it a door or a window, but you have 

a uniqueness today which is far different than anything that I 

ever had as a minister and we ever had in the late '70s and in all 

through the '80s, and that is to give a reasonable rate of interest.  

Because we have to find a new way to finance debt in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  And in that process we could also 

lower ours very, very considerably. 

 

And I want you to take that message forward to the ministers' 

conference that you're going to be probably having this 

summer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well we certainly are concerned 

about farm debt and have been talking about it.  We did come 

up with a six-year leaseback to address part of the problem.  

We are talking to the federal government and FCC (Farm 

Credit Corporation) about how we can coordinate, and it 

certainly will be a topic on the agenda at the ministers' meeting. 

 

I think the member calls it a door or a window.  It looks from 

where I sit a lot more like a brick wall.  I'm sure the Finance 

minister . . . and I will speak to her and see if she can run down 

to New York and borrow $5 billion to cover off the farm debt.  

I'm sure we can raise $5 billion in Saskatchewan savings bonds 

quite easily.  That I think is not quite the fact. 

 

I think if you look back at the golden opportunities that the 

members opposite saw, where they let out $1.1 billion at 6 per 

cent interest, hassle-free cash, it was a golden window to do 

that at that time too I suppose.  And a few years later the 

interest rate is up to ten and three-quarters per cent.  Last year 

we wrote off $36 million of those loans at a cost to the 

taxpayer.  And I don't think the farmers out there who are being 

foreclosed on and are . . . that the member talks about are under 

stress, are very appreciative of the fact that they got the 

hassle-free cash and was a big solution to their problem. 

 

And I think you look at the farm purchase program that the 

members opposite did at 8 per cent interest rate, drove the price 

of land up at the time when grain prices would have dictated it 

was coming down -- those are other farmers who are now 

facing a debt load that they cannot survive.  That's always been 

the solution to the members opposite to a debt problem, is to 

lend more money. 

 

Farmers are telling us you can't lend us . . . we can't borrow our 

way out of trouble.  We tried that.  We want some real 

solutions.  So certainly . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay, I 

certainly would not be accused of being long-winded.  And I 

think that answers the question. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I want to just make one observation 



June 11, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2453 

about the 6 per cent, Mr. Minister.  That 6 per cent is not at a 

cost to the government.  That is what the interest is on the 

bonds that you asked to have paid in for by the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan.  So it's not a cost to the taxpayer, 

Mr. Minister.  It's not a cost to the taxpayer.  Allow that 

opportunity to be there.  And what your leaseback is doing is of 

almost no effect in the province of Saskatchewan.  It has no 

impact.  That's a cost to the taxpayer.  That is an excessive cost 

to the taxpayer.  If you allow the people to invest in the 

province of Saskatchewan with an opportunity at 6 per cent, 

that's a real saving to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well I think the $36 million that 

we wrote off last year was a cost to the taxpayers.  And I think 

lending money to people who do not have any potential of 

repaying it is not a productive loan. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Item 6 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I'd like to have you provide me a list of those 

research projects that are going on through ADF.  Would you 

be able to do that for me?  I don't think that we asked that in the 

list of questions but I know I've received it from you on other 

occasions and I'd be . . . I'd like to see that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Certainly.  We can provide that. 

 

Item 6 agreed to. 

 

Items 7 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 1 agreed to. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I just want to say to the minister that you need 

to become far more aggressive and far more stubborn around 

the cabinet table in order to maintain the volume of dollars 

coming to Agriculture. 

 

Agriculture took the largest single hit, Mr. Minister, of any 

department in a percentage basis.  And I believe that you have 

a responsibility to the people of the province of Saskatchewan 

and the farmers in Saskatchewan to make sure that they are 

well represented and what they see at the cabinet table is what 

they're expecting to see in the national debate. 

 

(1200) 

 

And what they see at the cabinet table is not very refreshing to 

them.  And that is why I am saying to you, put a little sand in 

your back and don't turn yellow and run.  And I want to do that, 

I want to do that for the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And when you represent the people in the province of 

Saskatchewan, you have a large constituency to represent.  

They are the backbone of this province. 

They have the greatest amount of impact on the economy in 

this province.  And I don't want you to forget that we are as 

concerned as every other producer in the province of 

Saskatchewan that you haven't done the job adequately.  And 

we want to remind you of that, sir. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't think the 

people of Saskatchewan sit around the cabinet table, and I think 

my colleagues will think that I'm miserable and stubborn 

enough as it is without being any worse. 

 

But I think, you know, the members opposite, when we fight 

with the federal government, we're forceful in our arguments 

with the federal government as they offload on us, then they 

say, don't fight, cooperate.  When you try to cooperate and 

work with the federal government who continues to bulldoze 

ahead in their own stubborn way as they did when you were in 

government. 

 

I mean I think calling us yellow when you are the government 

that took the offload on crop insurance, on GRIP, on the 

drought assistance plan -- they offloaded more in agriculture in 

the 10 years that you were in power than ever in the history of 

this province. 

 

And one of the big problems we have in this province is that 

you, when you were in government, accepted responsibility for 

a whole lot of things that were federal.  And with a very, very 

limited resources we are struggling to try to regain and put the 

responsibility back on the federal government where it belongs. 

 

And even in this House you would not even debate issues, 

would not even debate the issues in this House.  You voted 

against third line of defence in here. I want to remind you of 

that. And they're calling us gutless.  We made the trek, we 

made the arguments, we fought hard with the federal 

government.  And again we will fight one more fight with the 

federal government and that's going to be when this next 

election is up and we will see the results of how well we fight. 

 

And I urge you to join against us to . . . Join with us would be 

more appropriate.  I was suspecting that . . . Join against your 

cousins from Ottawa and fight this election and send some 

New Democrats down there and send a signal that 

Saskatchewan is going to stand up to the federal government 

next term. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Loans, Advances and Investments 

Agriculture and Food 

Vote 146 

 

Items 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 146 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992-93 

Consolidated Fund 

Budgetary Expenditure 



2454 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1993 

Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 1 agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, I would like to 

thank my officials for attending today and giving me the 

advantage of their wisdom and knowledge, and I'd also like to 

thank the members opposite for their questions. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to just say to 

the staff at the Department of Agriculture that I told them one 

day after I was no longer the Minister of Agriculture that I 

would put pressure on them to do their best, and I hope that the 

context of what I've said here today has been in that flavour. 

 

And I encourage you to stand up for the people of the province 

of Saskatchewan in agriculture like you used to do and like I 

know you are capable of doing.  When you argue with the 

federal government, argue from that basis, that you do it on 

behalf of the province of Saskatchewan and good people from 

here.  Thank you. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

SUSPENSION OF BILLS 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Before 

we get to adjourned debates I request, pursuant to rule 55(1), 

that Bills 38, 79, and 90 be hoisted. 

 

The Speaker: -- I would just ask the member from Rosthern, 

were there three Bills? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, 38, 79, and 90. 

 

The Speaker: -- At the request of the official opposition, under 

rule 55(1), proceedings on Bill No. 38, Bill No. 79, and Bill 

No. 90 are hereby suspended for three sitting days. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much Mr. Chairman.  

It's a real pleasure to introduce . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Does the member have leave to introduce 

guests? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I want to introduce to the Assembly 

50 grade 5 students, some of whom are from my constituency 

in Regent Park School, some of whom are from Strasbourg 

School.  This is an exchange program.  They are accompanied 

by their teachers, Rick Beattie, Gary Krivoshein, and Maryann 

Genaille; and the bus driver, Darren Bender. 

I'm going to meet with them when they leave in a few 

moments.  And I trust we'll then probably work a bit on the 

pronunciation of one or so of those names.  I don't think I may 

have done them justice. 

 

I know members will want to join with me in welcoming these 

students to this Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Health 

Vote 32 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I would like to 

introduce Mr. Duane Adams, the deputy minister of Health 

who is here to help us right now, and there will be other 

officials joining us in a few minutes. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Not quite, Mr. Chairman, not quite.  Mr. 

Chairman, when I say not quite, it's almost a mind-boggling 

chore that we as an opposition and I as Health critic have to 

adequately hold this government accountable for what's been 

going on in the field of health.  Tremendous sums of money, 

essentially a third of our budget goes to Health and yet as we 

see things developing, it is becoming apparent that it's 

becoming more and more difficult for the taxpayers of this 

province to know precisely where their dollars are going. 

 

As the health district boards are being developed, there seems 

to be a vacuum developing and there seems to be a . . . whether 

it's cognizant or not; I will give the government the benefit of 

the doubt at this time.  But certainly it's going to become more 

and more difficult for the taxpayers and for the opposition to 

find out precisely what these -- and in fact the government and 

the Department of Health -- precisely what these monies are 

being spent on. 

 

And I know, Mr. Chairman, that over the last four months, or 

however long this House has been in session, there have been a 

constant barrage and stream of questions being asked by the 

opposition, trying to ferret out some of the information that we 

feel that the taxpayers of this province indeed want and are 

legitimately expecting to receive answers for. 

 

And I know furthermore that we have spent considerable 

amount of time, Mr. Chairman, in this legislature dealing with 

various health issues and the various health Bills that have 

come forward.  Sometimes members may even argue an 

inordinate amount of time on some of these Bills.  But, Mr. 

Chairman, it is incumbent upon us as opposition members to 

try to hold the government accountable. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, I know, for example, that in the 

newspaper -- and I believe it was today's newspaper; I don't 

have the exact date on this particular copy of 



June 11, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2455 

the Leader-Post that I have before me -- but anyway there is a 

suggestion in one of the columnists suggesting: "Anger 

subsiding over health cuts."  I repeat that, Mr. Chairman: 

"Anger subsiding over health cuts."  And I'm sure that Madam 

Minister is aware of this particular article.  And I just want to 

bring it to everybody's attention because on the surface of it, it 

may just be somewhat misleading, an article like this.  And it's 

brought out in the article as you go through it. 

 

And the question is asked, Mr. Chairman, and perhaps 

legitimately so: 

 

 What happened to the anger that flashed across southern 

Saskatchewan like lightning after the cuts were announced? 

 

And then he proposes, the columnist, that there are essentially 

two possibilities for that apparent development.  And he 

answers:  "The first one is simple.  Spring seeding." 

 

Because most of the anger, and certainly, Mr. Chairman, we 

should hasten to add, certainly not all of the anger, but a lot of 

the anger was focused in rural Saskatchewan because that is 

where the ultimate impact is being felt.  Although it is being 

recognized by more and more people now in the urban centres 

that this issue is also germane to them. 

 

But so, spring seeding.  We have to make a living, first of all.  

Secondly, Mr. Chairman, it is recognized that: 

 

 When rally organizers came back to Frontier after the rally 

they did have a few ideas for some further action against the 

cuts. 

 

 But they decided to put them on the back burner and let the 

local . . . board take over. 

 

So they were putting some of their trust in the local board that 

those concerns that they had would be addressed through that 

fashion. 

 

But I think a very telling remark -- and I'm sure that the 

minister is also aware of -- is this concluding statement where 

the columnist says they've been told that they'll hear by the end 

of the month in terms of what is going to be happening to their 

hospital. 

 

 They've been told they'll hear by the end of the month. 

 

 In the meantime, they'll bide their time -- and let their anger 

smoulder. 

 

They'll bide their time and let their anger smoulder.  Mr. 

Chairman, I think we have to take and be cognizant of the 

meanings of those words, that although there does appear to be 

a somewhat waning public endorsement and/or frustration 

about the developments in the health care field, it does not 

mean . . . I guess that silence does not mean in this case that 

there is a simple acceptance of this fact. 

It is not the . . . the anger is smouldering beneath the surface.  

And, Madam Minister, I'm just going to suggest to you that 

unless things develop to a degree where you can restore the 

confidence of the people of Saskatchewan, and perhaps 

particularly the rural people of Saskatchewan, that indeed that 

you know that what you are doing and that the results of what 

you are doing are not going to be catastrophic for them in the 

province, then I suggest to you that that smouldering could well 

flare up into flames once more.  And so that's a caution that I 

want to put forth to you. 

 

Specifically, Madam Minister . . . Like I said there's absolutely 

no possibility of me asking you all the questions that I would 

like to ask.  Some of the questions that I'm going to be asking 

you today, this morning, are questions that are detailed 

questions that perhaps with your commitment to answering 

them in a reasonably short period of time I will accept, and that 

we can do that as we go along. 

 

The first issue, Madam Minister, specifically that I would like 

you to answer is a concern that has been developing, because in 

a previous time when we were in the estimates for Health, a 

week or so ago -- well it's a little longer than that -- in 

reviewing Hansard of May 20, I notice that on page 1893 that 

you are suggesting that the minister is not accountable for and 

should not be held accountable for the expenditure of public 

money that is being spent by the health boards.  Madam 

Minister, that is worrisome.  That concerns me.  So before I 

start asking specific questions about that, perhaps it might save 

us some time if you could elucidate your intentions in terms of 

accountability process for money being spent by the health 

boards. 

 

Now I don't want you to get up and tell me that if I want 

information in this legislature about how money is being spent 

by the health boards that I have to go to each of the 29 health 

boards potentially that are going to be around this province.  I 

want to have a focused clearing point where we can hold you 

responsible for.  So I want a clarification of your stand on what 

the accountability process is going to be for monies allocated to 

and spent by the district health boards in this province.  Could 

you please explain that, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Chair, there are a couple of things 

that I want to respond to that the member raised. 

 

And I'm going to first of all refer to his comments on the article 

in the paper about anger subsiding over health cuts and simply 

say that the latter part of the article that talks in terms of the 

board member in this particular community saying that they 

have met with flexibility from the department and that the 

department had indicated that they were willing to support 

some kind of continued service at the hospital, whether it was a 

wellness centre or a clinic to a quasi-hospital with other 

possibilities. 

 

Which is really the point I was attempting to make in the 

legislature yesterday during question period, that 



2456 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1993 

there are a lot of discussions going on.  There are some positive 

options being put forward.  The department is working with 

these communities very closely to get alternate services in 

place. 

 

And I feel very positive about the process that is going on out 

there and I believe that we will be able to deliver very high 

quality health care services to the people in our rural 

communities.  And so we are working in that general direction 

and I want to assure the member opposite that that is what the 

department is working on and what we will achieve by October 

1. 

 

He also raised a question about accountability and I want to 

thank him for that question.  I think it is a well-put question.  

However, I do want to say that we have never indicated we will 

not be accountable for the expenditure of public monies.  We 

are obviously accountable and will continue to be accountable 

for the expenditure of public monies. 

 

But I do want to point this out, that we will not know, for 

example -- because I think the question was, was how many 

communications people are working for the Saskatoon Health 

Board -- we will not have that sort of detailed information.  We 

can get it, but we will not have it. 

 

We do not manage the hospitals on an individual line-by-line 

basis through the Department of Health, nor did this occur prior 

to the health reform.  Hospitals did their own management, 

hired and fired their own people, had contracts with unions -- 

the Department of Health didn't do it.  And that isn't going to 

change. 

 

However, the Department of Health will be entering into 

service contracts with each district board that will outline what 

services that district board is going to deliver and what funding 

will be available for the delivery of those services.  And the 

department will be monitoring the fulfilment of those contracts 

and the outcomes of those contracts, like whether or not the 

district board lived up to its responsibility and lived up to the 

contract and will have to answer to the department. 

 

The district board will also have to go to the public in that 

district and lay out the budget and the contract with the 

department and determine in conjunction, with consultation . . . 

in consultation with the citizens in their district whether or not 

the objectives have been met by the district board; whether or 

not they followed through on their obligations to the 

community; what the health status is of the residents in that 

community. 

 

And I want to point out that I feel that is very, very positive for 

Saskatchewan people because it will be the first time that 

they've had access to boards that deliver acute care and other 

health services to make them accountable publicly to the 

citizens within that district.  These will be open, public 

meetings.  They're required to have two a year, have to table 

budgets, and have to table health status at at least one of those 

meetings.  I think that is very positive. 

The fact that districts will have more community input, that 

there will be more involvement at the community level doesn't 

mean that the department doesn't have to answer questions 

from the opposition with respect to how public funding is being 

spent.  Obviously we have to do that. 

 

But what some members of the opposition felt we should be 

doing is know, on our feet, whether there were two 

communication officers here or somebody doing this there, in 

that particular hospital or in that particular area.  And we can 

access that information by writing to the hospital or the board.  

What we can't do, what we don't do, is keep track of all of their 

management of their particular institution or service on a 

line-by-line basis.  But that never occurred before either, so it 

isn't as though there's anything new in this regard.  And I just 

want to clarify those duties and responsibilities for the member 

opposite. 

 

(1230) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Following up on the theme of accountability, 

Madam Minister, I'll be asking you a question on that shortly.  I 

just want to stress on this article once more, Madam Minister, 

that although the board member does say there was some 

flexibility -- and I'll give you credit that there's some flexibility 

-- in listening, but no guarantee, no decisions reached.  And 

they stress at the end of article simply is this:  "In the 

meantime, they'll bide their time -- and let their anger 

smoulder." 

 

It's still there, Madam Minister.  It's just below the surface 

waiting to erupt if -- if -- that flexibility that seems to exist 

right now does not prove in fact to be there when the decisions 

are coming down in the final analysis. 

 

And at the same time, they say: 

 

 "We feel we're bare bones down here.  We're operating as 

bare as we can and still survive." 

 

That is the seriousness with which the local residents in rural 

Saskatchewan are viewing this, and that's the concern that they 

have.  And I'm just drawing it to your attention once more, 

Madam Minister. 

 

Now getting on to the accountability process.  I'm not satisfied 

yet.  What I want to know now is the board positions, the board 

positions that are in various stages right now.  Give me an 

example of board positions being advertised, board positions 

being appointed, board positions being elected, and also follow 

up on the Premier's promise last session that a committee of the 

legislature would approve all appointments to these boards.  

What is happening there and is that promise going to be kept? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- What is taking place with respect to the 

appointments of health care boards across the province, is that 

the planning groups that are in existence in the province, which 

are people who 



June 11, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2457 

have primarily worked in municipal government or the health 

care sector who are grass roots people who have come together 

to facilitate the process of establishing a district, have 

advertised in the paper for nominations from any resident 

within the district to this board, because the legislation 

indicates that a person appointed to the board must be 

nominated to sit on that board. There will be a deadline for 

nominations to come in.  Anyone in the district can be 

nominated to sit on that board but must be nominated from 

someone within the district. 

 

Now when the nominations close, then the planning group will 

take a look at it and provide the Department of Health with 

some feedback on who the individuals are and who they feel 

would comprise a good solid health care board.  The Minister 

of Health and cabinet then will appoint the members from the 

nominations that have been submitted, taking into 

consideration any recommendations or comments that are made 

by the planning group. 

 

And that group of people that are then appointed as the health 

board will be an interim board that will deal with health reform 

in the next while to come.  At some point in the future after the 

government has had an opportunity to establish wards and look 

at the electoral process and how that is going to proceed, and 

that will be done in consultation with districts.  There will be 

elections of eight of the members to the board within a district. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Let's pursue the issue of accountability a wee 

bit further, Madam Minister, a question, and then how 

accountability is going to follow that. 

 

What do you anticipate the percentage . . . Let's say there's one 

and a half billion dollars spent in the Health budget per year. 

What proportion of that would you anticipate would be given 

as either conditional or unconditional grants or whatever your 

formula happens to indicate, that the health board will have 

direct spending authority over? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- First of all, it's not unconditional grants.  

It will be a service contract that will detail the programs and 

institutions that will be run by the board and the conditions 

surrounding the operation of those services and programs.  So 

it isn't going to be an unconditional grant, it is going to be a 

contract, a service contract in effect. 

 

We expect that there will be about two-thirds of the Health 

budget, when all the boards are in place, that will be 

administered through health boards.  In other words that is 

approximately what is spent on institutional services, on home 

care and emergency services and some other services that 

boards will be administering. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  So although not 

unconditional, I guess it would be a conditional grant based on 

the service contract that's going to be entered into, an 

agreement entered into by your department and the individual 

health boards.  And that's two-thirds.  So that's a billion dollars 

in my calculations, roughly speaking.  We're talking about a 

billion dollars. 

 

Now that billion dollars, I want you to explain to me precisely 

how that accountability trail, that audit trail, is going to be 

followed and the role that the Provincial Auditor plays in his 

audit of those individual boards. 

 

I may as well tell you right now, Madam Minister, so that you 

can ingest this into your answer.  The Provincial Auditor has a 

great deal of concern right now about the accountability that 

this government is apparently trying to evade.  And I say that, 

Madam Minister, because Treasury Board, of which you are a 

member, and the member sitting back to your back there who's 

the Minister of Finance has directed the auditor that he may not 

charge for these additional . . . additional -- and I say additional 

because that's what they are -- additional responsibilities, that 

he may not charge.  First of all, let me just step one back. 

 

Right now the auditor has $3.8 million to run his office.  Now 

we have in this legislature what is called the auditor Act, The 

Provincial Auditor Act.  And it stipulates that the auditor shall 

audit the expenditures, all of the expenditures of public money.  

But do you know what, Madam Minister?  Because of your 

colleague, the Minister of Finance -- upon direction from the 

Premier, no doubt -- is saying to the Board of Internal 

Economy, and that message is being sent by the government 

members on that Board of Internal Economy, no, Mr. 

Provincial Auditor, you are not going to get enough money to 

do the audit on all of the public expenditures. 

 

As a matter of fact, there's about 40 per cent of the money that 

you folks are spending as a government that's not accountable 

because the auditor has a budget of $3.8 million. That's all that 

was allocated by the members on the government side in the 

Board of Internal Economy. 

 

He said when he gave us his submission, his budget, I need 

$4.8 million to do my job.  Now subsequent to that, because of 

changes in the method in which he has to do his accounting 

because the accrual accounting method is not going to be 

followed, he says, well that saves me $100,000.  But he's still 

looking at now $4.7 million to do his job.  But he's being 

short-changed.  And then he has to cherry pick, which ones will 

I not do?  I'm required to do all of them, but which ones will I 

not do? 

 

And there are such issues as the Crown corporations, the 

Crowns, the agencies, the Liquor Board.  And you know what 

else, Madam Minister -- and I've come full circle now back to 

the health boards -- he's going to have to audit these health 

boards.  But he hasn't got the money.  So that is a major, major 

issue for him. 

 

Now we have just determined that a billion dollars is going to 

be spent by these health boards.  Number one, Madam 

Minister, is the auditor going to have full access to all 

expenditures by these health boards?  And number two, will he 

have sufficient funding to carry out the mandate under The 

Provincial Auditor Act so that he can indeed hold your 

government 



2458 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1993 

accountable? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Now on this there's a number of points I 

wish to make for the edification of the member opposite.  First 

of all, today, let's talk about what happens right now -- today.  

The Provincial Auditor today does not audit hospital boards, 

does not audit home care boards, does not audit ambulance 

boards, does not audit special care home boards.  So with the 

exception of Crown hospitals, it's my information that the 

Provincial Auditor does not audit the boards of these services 

that are being provided and will be under a district board. 

 

Now that doesn't mean that the Provincial Auditor can't audit 

those boards, if those boards ask for the Provincial Auditor to 

audit them.  Because it's my understanding the Provincial 

Auditor can do that, and can still do it under the district.  If a 

district board, when the district boards are in place, want the 

Provincial Auditor to audit them, they will have to hire the 

Provincial Auditor to do that audit, and that's okay. 

 

But the Provincial Auditor does not have responsibility for 

auditing the major portion of that billion dollars that we've 

referred to.  However, the Provincial Auditor will have and 

does today have the responsibility of auditing the Department 

of Health, and will have the responsibility of auditing how the 

Department of Health passes out the money and how the 

services are delivered from the financial point of view. 

 

The Provincial Auditor will have the responsibility to monitor 

the Department of Health and how the money goes out.  And 

there are discussions ongoing about how we deal with how the 

contractual services are being delivered and what the outcomes 

are with respect to that. 

 

So what happens today is the auditor doesn't have 

responsibility for auditing the boards of these institutions and 

programs.  However, if a board wants to hire the auditor to do 

that, they can do it, and under the health reform, the auditor 

will be able to hire a district board . . . or a district board will 

be able to hire the auditor to do it if they choose to use the 

Provincial Auditor as their auditor. 

 

The Provincial Auditor has a responsibility to audit the 

Department of Health and determine whether or not these 

contractual services are being properly monitored. 

 

(1245) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Wow, I can't believe what I just heard, 

Madam Minister.  That is a really worrisome, scary answer.  

Both ways you lose.  So I ask you to reconsider that answer.  

That's not what the auditor is telling us. 

 

What is the difference between a board that is totally locally 

elected and a board that has government-appointed directors 

sitting on it as far as 

the responsibility of the Provincial Auditor is concerned?  Now 

please reconsider your answer. 

 

Secondly, Madam Minister, while you're reconsidering, it's 

very, very scary when you get up and answer me in the 

legislature and say, yes, these local boards will spend a billion 

dollars a year of taxpayers' money and if they want to be 

audited, well then the Provincial Auditor will come in and audit 

them.  That's accountability, Madam Minister? I want you to 

reconsider your answer. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The member opposite knows these 

boards are audited.  They're audited.  They're audited.  

Municipal and city boards that spend millions of provincial 

dollars are not audited by the Provincial Auditor.  And I'm 

checking out to see about education boards. 

 

Now the fact is, the fact is they spend millions of provincial 

dollars and the Provincial Auditor knows that these boards will 

be audited.  They'll be audited.  It's not a question of them not 

being audited.  The Provincial Auditor also knows that these 

boards are being audited today but not necessarily by the 

Provincial Auditor. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- No, Madam Minister, you are wrong.  You are 

wrong.  And that's what I want you to get up and tell me, that 

once those boards have elected officials on them and they're up 

and running, it becomes the responsibility of the Provincial 

Auditor, not agents, to do the auditing.  Now check that out.  

Now if you're telling me that the Provincial Auditor is wrong, 

what he has told me, then I guess you will have to take issue 

with the Provincial Auditor.  That's all I'm asking you to do. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I am informed that the member opposite 

should know that there are discussions going on between the 

Department of Health and the auditor about how the issue is 

going to be handled.  That is under discussion.  And I think 

those discussions are on an ongoing basis.  I have also been 

advised, the member opposite, that there is nothing with respect 

to the proposal that has been put forward; that it does not 

change the situation from where it is now because the 

Provincial Auditor does not audit all of these hospital boards 

and special care home boards.  He doesn't. 

 

We're not changing that.  However, these boards are required to 

be audited, and he looks at the Department of Health and gets 

accountability from, and through, the Department of Health.  

And that's the process that's there now and it's the process that I 

have outlined for the future. 

 

However, we want to make sure that the proper accountability 

is in place and there are ongoing discussions with the 

Provincial Auditor on this very issue. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, the fundamental issue is the 

mandate that the Provincial Auditor has for accountability of 

public spending.  Now I know all of these boards are going to 

be audited through private 



June 11, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2459 

auditors, and as long as the Provincial Auditor can rely -- or in 

his opinion can rely -- on this agency that is going out and 

doing the auditing, then he is prepared to accept those audits by 

private auditors. 

 

But he still comes in, in spite of that, and makes at least a 

cursory determination that indeed and in fact there is 

accountability and that he can rely on that individual auditor, 

the private auditor, that he has done a good job, and then he 

will recommend acceptance of that particular audit. 

 

Madam Minister, it's not only I that has a concern about this, 

but the Public Accounts Committee also has a concern about 

that, and they will be calling your officials into the Public 

Accounts for accountability and for determination.  But this 

ongoing discussion that you're having about the auditor 

meeting with your Health officials, Madam Minister, the 

bottom line is that he is going to be auditing these health 

boards.  I say that because he told me that.  So we can argue 

here, Madam Minister, back and forth.  But I submit to you a 

very scary thought, that you're going to be putting a billion 

dollars of taxpayers' money out there and yet you're not going 

to allow the watchdogs set up by this Legislative Assembly to 

have the wherewithal to hold that billion dollars accountable. 

 

Madam Minister, to continue on, what is the status of each of 

the 52 facilities that lost acute care funding?  Please detail what 

the plans are at the moment for each of these 52 facilities.  You 

can give me the precise answer at a later date.  I want your 

overall answer in terms of where they are standing right now. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- With respect to the auditor, it's my 

understanding that Public Accounts has had a very lengthy 

discussion on this issue and are going to be looking into the 

whole issue further to make sure that the proper mechanisms 

are in order.  And if the auditor has specific concerns, I think 

he should express them to the Public Accounts Committee and 

it will be dealt with in that fashion. 

 

I'm pleased that the officials from the Department of Health 

will be attending the Public Accounts Committee and 

discussing this in more detail to make sure that the proper 

mechanisms are in place. 

 

The member opposite snears and laughs in his seat.  I must 

remind him that it's his government that maligned the former 

auditor at some length, and want to say that we here want the 

accountability throughout the system and we are prepared to do 

what we have to do to make it work. 

 

And the member opposite says it's nonsense, but he's speaking 

about his government's behaviour when they were in power.  

And I simply want to say that we believe that this should be 

discussed in full detail.  I've asked the department to make sure 

that proper discussions take place, and if there are further 

discussions at Public Accounts, well then I think that's quite 

good.  And I have no . . . and we should sort through and set up 

a system that's most appropriate. 

Now the legislation, I'm told, is very clear on the board.  It will 

be . . . will have to appoint an auditor.  That's what the district 

boards legislation says.  And the period we're talking about 

right now is really the transition period and what obligation the 

auditor has during that transition period.  So I think it's 

important that that is sorted out. 

 

Now with respect to the 52 facilities and what is occurring with 

respect to those facilities, I want to just give this report which I 

have done in the past in the legislature. 

 

The facilities will be putting forward their transition plans by 

the end of June that will set out how they are going to move 

through the transition with respect to employees and patients 

for example.  The department is also having . . . working with 

them on what sort of alternate services will be provided in the 

facility, or in another facility if they choose to use another one, 

such as what sort of emergency services, what sort of alternate 

services beyond emergency services will be provided. 

 

Also the boards of these facilities are working with planning 

groups and are putting together a whole, a more detailed, needs 

assessment for the entire district in conjunction with their 

community and the district.  And so there's a substantial 

amount of work going on in that regard. 

 

However the most, not recent, but the earliest thing that will be 

happening is the transition plan which is supposed to be 

submitted to the Department of Health by the end of June, 

which will . . . And it's my understanding officials from the 

Department of Health are also working with these boards 

through these transition plans. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- There's one fundamental flaw in all of your 

answer that in itself sounds plausible and perhaps even 

commendable.  However the auditor ain't got the bucks, 

Madam Minister, to hold you accountable.  He's being 

short-changed and he tells us he can't do his job. 

 

That is not particularly the fault of the Department of Health or 

you as the Minister of Health.  I will acknowledge that.  But 

certainly you are a Treasury Board member, and as such you 

are part and parcel of that decision.  And when I say Treasury 

Board member, cabinet is usually considered to be of that 

calibre.  That's where these kinds of decisions are made.  And 

surely, Madam Minister, your voice is heard around that 

cabinet table.  That's the fundamental flaw that is pervasive 

throughout your government. 

 

Specifically, Madam Minister, how much money has been 

spent on travel and expenses regarding the new districts?  I'm 

talking about such things as travel for you, travel for your 

officials, travel for health board members and so on. 

 

And how much money has been spent on your NDP health care 

advertising and communications?  And I 



2460 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1993 

say NDP advertising because I've got examples of ads being 

run by your various MLAs trying to promote your wellness 

program and the health board districts.  Could you answer 

those questions, Madam Minister?  Or if some of the details are 

too detailed for the moment, a commitment that I will get those 

answers in due time, in short time. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We can get together information on 

travel and expenses with respect to health reform, and I don't 

imagine it'll be that difficult to do.  I certainly have been all 

over the province a number of times at meetings and have done 

very substantial travelling because I've been out talking to 

people and consulting with communities.  So we will get you 

that information. 

 

And as to MLAs' advertising, I don't keep track of nor does the 

government keep track of what each individual MLA does.  I 

understand that you've been doing some advertising with 

respect to health reform.  Any MLA advertising would be in 

that category.  So we don't keep track of what MLAs are doing 

nor do I think we have the obligation to do that. 

 

But with respect to any government advertising, we will let you 

know what that is, send that information over to you, and with 

respect to any travel and expenses as well. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1:02 p.m. 

 


