


















































Hansard: May 18, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1781 

 May 18, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Scott: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is my pleasure, Mr. 

Speaker, to introduce to you and through you to members of 

the Assembly, 17 grade 5 students from Dr. Isman elementary 

school at Wolseley, and they are seated in your gallery. 

 

Joining the students are teachers Tim Taylor and Donna 

Tourigny; chaperons Stacey Jeeves, Jill Blenkin, and Heather 

Martineau; and bus driver Mark Beliveau who took a day off 

from seeding to be here today. 

 

I'd ask all members to join with us in welcoming these people 

here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my privilege on 

behalf of my colleague, the member from Saskatoon Fairview, 

to have the opportunity to introduce to you and through you to 

the other members of the Assembly, 46 grade 8 students from 

Confederation Park School in Saskatoon, accompanied by their 

teachers, Ford Mantyka and Gery Ross. 

 

I will be meeting them after question period for photos and 

refreshments, and the questions I'm sure they will have about 

the proceedings in the Assembly.  And I ask all members to 

join me in welcoming them. 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce to and through you to the members of the Assembly a 

woman who works very hard for UNICEF (United Nations 

Children's Fund) through the sale of UNICEF cards, Betty 

Lewis, and with her today is a friend of Betty's and a woman 

who lives in Wascana Plains, Eileen Schuster, and I ask the 

members of the Assembly to join me in welcoming them here 

this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: -- I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure today 

to introduce two people, one seated in the west gallery with the 

Confederation Park group is Joanne Karolot.  Jo happens to be 

the daughter of my best friend in the entire world, Garry 

Karolot and his wife, Donna.  It is indeed an honour for me to 

welcome you to the legislature today. 

 

The other person, Mr. Speaker, that I want to make note of is 

seated in your gallery, Brodie Anderson who was the 

researcher/writer for the Standing Committee on the 

Environment.  And I noticed Mr. Anderson here today.  I think 

he has some interest in something that may be happening later.  

I ask all members to welcome these two people here. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

I'd like to introduce to you and through you to members of the 

legislature a group of 25 grade 9 students from Boucher School 

in Prince Albert.  Accompanying them today are teachers Bob 

Lawton, Lee Goodfellow, Linda Greyeyes and Steve Kasyion.  

I'd like to ask all members to give these young folks a warm 

welcome to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's 

my pleasure today to introduce to you and all members of the 

Legislative Assembly 25 grade 4 students from the Pense 

School and they are seated in the east gallery today, Mr. 

Speaker.  They are here to have a tour of the building and to 

watch proceedings here in question period. 

 

They're accompanied today, Mr. Speaker, by their teacher Mrs. 

Borsa, and chaperons Mrs. Simpson, Mrs. Murray, Mrs. Holt, 

and Mrs. Woods.  I'll be having the opportunity to have the 

young people question me after question period and join me on 

the steps for drinks.  So I would ask all members of the 

Assembly to help me welcome the grade 4 students from Pense, 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you today a friend from the 

constituency of Saskatoon Greystone who is also a regular and 

avid reader of Hansard, and that is Mr. Peter Knelsen sitting in 

your gallery.  And I'd like to welcome him and ask all members 

to welcome him as well. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

Assembly Mr. Jim Chase, the president of the Saskatchewan 

Construction Association who is seated in your gallery today, 

Mr. Speaker.  He is here to observe the proceedings of the 

Assembly as he often watches what we are up to in this 

Assembly on behalf of his organization. 

 

I would also like to welcome the ladies from UNICEF, and 

please help me to welcome these people today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Government Contracting Policy 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, yesterday in the 

House, the Minister of Labour was asked whether or not your 

government had a union-only 



1782 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 1993 

preference with awarding contracts, government contracts.  

And his answer was simply no, that no policy exists. 

 

Mr. Premier, I just wanted to ask that again today: does your 

government have a policy of union-only contracts for 

government contracts? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member asked 

that question or somebody did yesterday, and I believe the 

Minister of Labour replied that there is no union-only 

government contract policy. 

 

There is an interim policy which seeks to follow the model 

which worked successfully in the 1970s.  In the course of the 

development of that interim policy, discussions have taken 

place with both the trade union movement and the concerned 

employers.  What we're trying to do is to develop a policy 

which is fair to the taxpayers and fair to all of the business and 

union and non-union people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, we just 

want to be perfectly clear on this.  Does, for example, 

SaskPower have a policy in place that restricts SaskPower 

contracts to unionized contractors?  Does that policy exist, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, if you permit the 

question, obviously in question period, I'm prepared to do the 

best that I can by way of answer.  I think the answer I'll have to 

give the hon. member is, to be absolutely certain I'll take advice 

from the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, but I believe the 

earlier answer which I articulated is the answer both within the 

regular operations of government and the Crown corporation 

side as well. 

 

The Crown corporation side, in fact, I think, is working in its 

own internal analysis with a view to recommending an 

appropriate policy by sometime fall of 1993. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, I think 

appropriate policy's already been decided.  I have a letter here 

dated May 14 from Warren Elder who is the project and labour 

contract buyer with SaskPower.  It reads and I quote: 

 

Effective immediately, construction contracts at the 

corporation's four major thermal power plants will be 

awarded to unionized contractors who are headquartered 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Premier, I don't think you can be any more explicit than 

that.  SaskPower is only contracting to 

unionized contractors in this province.  Mr. Premier, why is 

your government trying to mislead this House and the people of 

Saskatchewan . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order. Order!  I have called for 

order and I ask the member . . . By insinuating that the 

government is trying to mislead you are using unparliamentary 

language, and I ask the member to withdraw those words 

"trying to mislead."  I ask the member to withdraw those words 

"trying to mislead." 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I will withdraw that 

comment. 

 

Mr. Premier, why are you saying that SaskPower does not have 

a unionized contracting program in this province when indeed 

we can see in their tendering calls that they do have that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, if the hon. member 

would have paid careful attention to my first answer in 

response for his first question, he would see that there is no 

contradiction in what I've said.  His first question . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . No, no, just listen to me for a moment and 

learn something. 

 

You asked the question of whether or not the government had a 

union-only policy, and I said that that was not the case and I 

gave you the description of the policy of the '70s, and I talked 

to you about the interim policy, and I talked about the Crown 

corporations policy being worked on now.  You take that 

example which may be a very large project involving the 

skilled work and the unionized specialty and expertise of the 

people involved in that, and translate that to mean a union-only 

policy in all instances.  And that's not right. 

 

That may be union, but it's not correct to conclude that 

everything is union.  And what you should do is be honest with 

the people and with this House when you ask these kinds of 

questions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, I'll be 

honest with the people of Saskatchewan if you'll be honest with 

the people of Saskatchewan, sir.  I think you've been caught not 

telling the truth on this matter, Mr. Premier, and now you're 

digging yourself in even deeper. 

 

I have another tender call from SaskPower.  This one has to do 

with the tank supply and erection at Queen Elizabeth power 

station in Saskatoon.  It reads, Mr. Speaker, and I quote: 

 

It is a requirement of this Contract that the Contractor has 

a collective agreement or will obtain a collective 

agreement with a trade union prior to commencement of 

the work. 

 

Mr. Premier, this is a major change in the policy of 



May 18, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1783 

SaskPower. There was no formal announcement of this policy 

change, and now you stand in your place and say that the policy 

doesn't exist.  Well, Mr. Premier, I believe, and I think the 

people of Saskatchewan believe, that you do have a policy with 

regard to union-only contracts in this province. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you come clean and admit to the people of 

Saskatchewan that you do have a union-only policy with 

respect to government contracts? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, the answer which I 

gave the hon. member before, stands.  We have taken the 

position as a government that the approach which worked so 

well in the 1970s, with modification and subject to consultation 

by the construction industry and the trade union movement and 

the people of Saskatchewan, can work very well in the 1990s. 

 

We think that the days of union bashing that you and your 

friends indulged in are gone.  The idea is to get Saskatchewan 

expertise, get the work done as efficiently and as capably and 

as well done as possible at the best price possible in fair and 

open tender.  We think it can be done.  It's been done in 

previous periods and that is exactly what we're working on. 

 

Now if you asked the question, is the government policy only 

union straight across the piece, the answer is as the Minister of 

Labour has said and as I have said in my first answer to you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, I wonder 

if you could let the Assembly in on this this afternoon.  Do any 

other Crown corporations have a union-only policy?  For 

example, does SaskTel have a union-only policy with regard to 

government contracts right now? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the issue is very clear, 

very clear.  The question is: does the government have a 

union-only policy?  The answer to that is no.  No, we don't. 

 

You do not accept that.  You and your friends don't accept that.  

No.  So there's nothing that I can say other than to repeat it 

again what I've told you, what our policy is, and that is across 

the piece and working on an approach which is fair to 

everybody in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I know fairness is a word that's foreign to the Conservative 

Party.  I know that integrity with respect to public finances is 

foreign to the Conservative policy.  But I tell you these are the 

hallmarks of our tendering policy in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, what is 

very clear is you are not being straight with the people of 

Saskatchewan.  That's what's clear. 

 

Mr. Premier, I have another tendering package from SaskTel 

this time, project number 982850 for leasehold improvements 

at 8th Street in Saskatoon.  Section 2.1 of that contract tender 

call reads: 

 

Contractors should note that in awarding the work for this 

project SaskTel's preference is to award to Contractors that 

are unionized.  In analysis and comparison of Tender 

Responses (Bids), SaskTel will consider as an evaluation 

factor whether or not the Contractor is unionized.  

Contractors should note that whether a Contractor is 

unionized may be the determining factor upon which a 

decision to award the work for this project is made. 

 

I don't think it can be any more clear, Mr. Premier.  Your 

government does have one.  Why don't you stand in your place 

and admit that you have a union-only preference? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member simply 

refuses to accept the statements of the government and the facts 

of the government.  He simply refuses to do this. 

 

Look, if the question is that on particular projects the bid is 

made on the basis of union preference, based on documents that 

you have there, that's always been the case -- even during your 

regime.  If you seek to extend that to say that it's union only 

under all circumstances, you're wrong -- you're wrong. 

 

So I mean that's the simple truth of the matter.  I've said this to 

you before; that's the way you operated.  And you people just 

simply ignore the facts.  So please, why don't you wake up and 

smell the coffee?  Get real for a change. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, Mr. 

Premier, how . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I just want to ask the people in 

the galleries not to participate in the debate either by clapping 

or whatever means that you use.  Please do not participate in 

the activities on the floor. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, how 

many more examples do we have to bring forward in this 

legislature before you'll admit that that is your policy?  How 

many more do we have to? 

 

I have the project agreement here, Mr. Speaker, that went out 

for the second tender calls for both the Melfort to Weldon and 

the Melfort to Codette pipelines.  And it reads: 



1784 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 1993 

. . . every new Employee whose employment commences 

hereafter shall, within thirty (30) days after the 

commencement of his employment, apply for and 

maintain membership in a Union as a condition of 

employment . . . 

 

That's what that tender call said, Mr. Premier.  That's what the 

tender call said that went out with respect to those two projects, 

Mr. Premier.  Mr. Premier, why do you continue to tell the 

people of this province that there is no such policy when after 

example after example after example it is clear that is indeed 

the policy of your government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I should ask the hon. 

members opposite, when they were in government, whether or 

not they had a union-only policy when it came to constructing 

the upgrader.  What was the answer to that?  The answer is yes. 

 

I should ask the hon. members opposite, when they had a 

tender out, whether it was a union-only operation when they 

were building Shand, Rafferty-Alameda.  You know that 

project, the one there's no water behind, the one they look 

down from the satellites and say what in the world's going on 

down there.  You understand that project. That was union-only 

too.  That was you.  You people insisted on it. 

 

And for me to conclude under those circumstances that all that 

you had was a union-only policy would have been ludicrous, 

just as ludicrous as your questioning is today on case by case of 

our policy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, it was you 

who made the promise at the SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association) convention that your government 

would not impose a union-only contracting policy in this 

government.  It was you who made that promise, sir, not 

anyone else.  You and your government, that's who made the 

promise to the SUMA convention, Mr. Premier. 

 

When will you come clean with the people of this province and 

admit that that is your policy?  Why have you implemented 

discriminatory tendering practices when both union and 

non-union companies in this province are opposed to that? 

 

At the Saskatchewan chamber . . . or Saskatchewan 

Construction Association, their policy is clear.  Their 

membership says . . . and it is also made up of both union and 

non-union contractors, and both groups have consistently 

voiced strong opposition to union preference in every survey 

conducted on the subject. 

 

Their policy goes on and says that it should not exclude 

workers or contractors from freely and fairly competing with 

public work support by all taxpayers of Saskatchewan and must 

be condemned by all 

fair-minded people. 

 

Mr. Premier, please, please, sir, admit to this Assembly this 

afternoon that that is indeed the policy of your government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- It's not the policy of the government, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, that is 

exactly why business groups all over this province are calling 

for an opportunity to sit down and talk with you, sir, because 

they don't believe you.  And the people of Saskatchewan don't 

believe you any more when you talk about these kinds of 

things, Mr. Premier.  They don't believe you because you say 

one thing and you do exactly the opposite. 

 

That's the way your government has been right from the start, 

sir, and that's the way you continue to operate here.  We bring 

forward example after example after example of union-only 

contracting that your government has put forward and you say 

no policy exists. 

 

Mr. Premier, I'll give you one last opportunity.  Will you now 

admit that you do have a union-only contracting policy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I tell you, Mr. Speaker, I'm terrified to 

know that this is my last chance given to me by the member 

from Kindersley.  Boy oh boy, he strapped on his six-shooter; 

he's got his cowboy boots on and his cowboy hat on -- not quite 

sure in the right position; maybe it's facing South, maybe it's 

facing East -- and he's ready to pull the gun out, and he's saying 

to me this is your last chance. 

 

Well you know something?  Even with that last chance, I'm 

going to give you the same answer that we've been giving you 

the last couple of days -- that is not the policy.  Our policy is 

fair employment for people in the province of Saskatchewan, 

union and non-union.  And we're in consultation with the 

construction association and the chamber and with the union 

movement, and we're doing what is right for the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan.  And you know something?  That's 

a happy change after nine and a half years of your bungling up. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Negotiations on Co-op Upgrader 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is directed to the 

Premier.  Mr. Premier, your approach to the NewGrade 

upgrader is sending some very strong signals throughout the 

investment community.  And I had the opportunity to meet 

yesterday with Mr. Empey prior to your officials meeting with 

him, and it seems to me that the issue here is your government's 

approach to so-called negotiations. 



May 18, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1785 

There appear to be contradictions from the former minister 

responsible for CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan) who said a few months ago that breaking this 

deal, and I quote, was not a desirable way to do business, 

because it is basically a betrayal of trust.  Your Finance 

minister stated, and I quote, politically it would have been far 

more expedient if it would have been a multinational. 

 

And this morning I read that negotiations haven't been going 

well because the new minister in charge has supposedly been 

negotiating since January and has never seen a copy of the 

proposals made by Federated. 

 

Mr. Premier, who is running the show, and how can 

negotiations be serious if you're government hasn't informed 

itself of what the other party is offering? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, unfortunately the hon. 

member's question is based on a wrong understanding of the 

facts.  The offer which was made yesterday by Mr. Empey, I 

believe, on behalf of Federated Co-ops Limited, was an offer 

which was not submitted to the Government of Saskatchewan.  

It was an offer which was submitted to Mr. Justice Estey as part 

of the terms of reference of the Estey Commission, which terms 

of reference was mediation of the dispute.  Mr. Justice Estey 

considered that offer and presumably in his finding, rejected it, 

because what he said in his finding was the layout of how this 

deal could be salvaged and saved. 

 

I remind the hon. member what Mr. Justice Estey concluded 

was that the project had run financially aground, that it was not 

able to sustain itself.  And I might add was entered into 10 days 

before the vote in 1986, contrary to all of the advice, 

documents, legal and otherwise -- which documents will be 

made public very shortly -- by the government opposite, as it 

was the government opposite in their haste to get re-elected. 

 

Now that's the situation.  We saw that for the first time 

yesterday.  So from that point of view, I will be making a 

response in due course with respect to that document. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, I 

take it from what you're saying that you have not met 

personally with any team of people or individuals from 

Federated Co-op, given your comments, that you are unaware 

of Federated Co-op's proposal to come to the table with $50 

million.  And can you explain why, after paying hundreds of 

thousands of dollars for the Estey report, the government, 

yourself, and the minister responsible who had supposedly met 

with representatives from Federated, would not know what 

options Federated had ever put forward? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I think the hon. member 

is absolutely confused on the facts -- I say 

this with the greatest respect to her; I don't mean this in any 

political sense or demeanour -- the facts are very jumbled there. 

 

You have to understand that since the appointment of Mr. 

Justice Estey, the process was under judicial or semi-judicial 

proceedings; that is the situation.  When we met . . . for 

example, I met once in concert with Mr. Justice Estey at his 

request.  Mr. Thompson and Mr. Empey were there from FCL 

(Federated Co-operatives Ltd); Mr. McKnight was there from 

the federal government; we had one or two of our officials.  

Those are the kinds . . . that was the one discussion which took 

place under the aegis of Mr. Justice Estey. 

 

Now you have to understand that we set up the Estey inquiry 

because prior to Estey we simply couldn't get any indication 

whatsoever from FCL that they wanted to renegotiate this deal 

-- none.  And I want to tell you, if FCL is of the view that the 

deal is such a good deal, I'm prepared to sell it to them for $1, 

obligations included.  They can take it right now.  There's the 

offer for $1.  No?  If that's not acceptable to them, they should 

tell us why not. 

 

So my point is, your facts are wrong here.  I mean the process 

is there was negotiation that was going on, then Estey took 

over, mediation, and then the Estey report.  And what we've 

undertaken here is a situation of taking up this proposal of Mr. 

Empey's yesterday, which is interesting and we welcome it.  

And we're going to look at it seriously and we'll be responding 

in due course. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Premier, it's interesting that you used 

the word "process."  Mr. Premier, can you tell me that you have 

carefully assessed the economic consequences of threatening to 

break legal and binding contracts through legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well I say to the hon. member that this 

is not our preferred route, by a long shot.  I don't want to even 

consider this.  I endorse the words of the Minister of Labour of 

several months ago, we want a negotiated settlement.  And if 

someone says that it would be immoral to break a contract, 

perhaps so; but there's another immorality here and the 

immorality is a $600 million obligation, Madam Member -- 

$600 million on everybody, every man, woman and child in 

this Chamber in the province of Saskatchewan which every 

rating agency and every bank knows about. 

 

We have all the obligations.  Now under the circumstances, if 

you were in this chair you would have no other choice but to 

seek a change.  I want a negotiated change on a fair solution 

recommended by Estey.  It doesn't have to be in every detail, 

but as long as the principles are there.  And you might just tell 

us, not only yourself but the Leader of the Conservative Party, 

whether you people endorse Estey, because if you do this 

would be to the advantage of the taxpayers and also to the 

advantage of putting this project on a viable, sound financial 

and economic basis as Mr. 



1786 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 1993 

Justice Estey recommends. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Premier, your approach to attracting 

new investment in this province has been to shout from the 

rooftops just how bad our financial situation is, and you have 

succeeded in convincing people that we're bordering on 

financial bankruptcy.  And now you seem intent on convincing 

them that Saskatchewan is not only bankrupt of money, but it's 

bankrupt of principles as well. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you agree to back off with threats of 

expropriation and passing legislation that will nullify legal and 

binding contracts before you end up scaring off the entire 

business world, whose attention you have indeed attracted by 

the kinds of threats that have been made. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. members 

in this House cannot have it both ways or all ways.  They 

cannot say on the one hand that they stand for fiscal 

responsibility and attack us on the basis of having too many 

taxes or too many cut-backs . . . and too many cut-backs.  And 

as the hon. member would in her question now, attack us by 

saying that in the absence of an agreement, legislation should 

not be implemented . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, in the 

absence of an agreement.  I'm talking about in the absence of 

an agreement. 

 

Now if the hon. member and the members opposite are saying 

that the taxpayers of Saskatchewan should remain on the hook 

for $600 million-plus, if you're saying that's the position, then I 

say to everybody in this House, that is the height of 

irresponsibility. 

 

Look, I want to ask you and I want to ask the Leader of the 

Conservative Party: do you endorse the recommendations of 

Mr. Justice Estey to get out of this quagmire?  Because we do.  

It's going to cost us money, but we do.  And if FCL agrees, the 

federal government will agree, and we can put this chapter 

behind us and go on to build the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Don't tell us that we should walk away from a $600 million 

obligation.  Tell us, do you support Estey, yes or no? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Premier, I'm delighted that you raised 

the words fiscal responsibility.  Consider this possibility . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I ask the members to let the 

member have her say and ask her question without any 

interruptions. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Consider this possibility, Mr. Premier, that 

if Federated Co-op could put this project into insolvency today, 

if the courts declared that the liabilities were greater than the 

realizable assets -- and it's important to know exactly the 

position of the province and the taxpayers -- if that were to 

happen 

today, would we be left holding the bag for the entire debt with 

no refinery to hook onto should the government decide or think 

that it could operate without Federated?  Or would we then be 

faced with buying the refinery at Federated's price and carrying 

the entire debt anyway? 

 

Now what is your plan in the event, Mr. Premier, that this 

happens?  How are you going to legislate that one away? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Again I say with the highest of respect 

for the hon. member, I say this very sincerely, there is high 

confusion on the part of the member about this deal. 

 

First of all, the deal is this: that if NewGrade goes bankrupt or 

insolvent, in default, we pick up the liabilities -- $360 million, 

plus the 250 we've already pumped into it.  And we have to 

return to the FCL, the refinery, whole and safe.  The only thing 

we can do is scrap the parts of that deal and pick up whatever 

we get by salvage.  That is what the contract says.  That's the 

deal. 

 

Now if they're not prepared to renegotiate . . . that's the deal 

that the Conservatives made.  If they're not prepared to 

renegotiate that, hard to believe that they'd be prepared to 

negotiate to sell the refinery.  That doesn't make sense. 

 

So you see we are caught, all of us, not the government.  You're 

caught . . . oh, poor Roy, the hon. member says opposite there.  

Because exactly this is it: the approach of the Conservative 

Party was, going into the 1991 election, of a scorched earth 

policy and in 1986, and what they did is they ran up bad deal 

after bad deal after bad deal.  In the words of the former deputy 

premier, Eric Berntson, they wanted to make this province 

ungovernable by their financial dealings, and we're here to 

clean up the mess.  And I'm calling on them to acknowledge 

that fact and join us in helping to clean up the mess. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Price Club Canada Inc. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to thank you in 

advance, and I'm pleased to rise to inform the Assembly of an 

announcement today by Price Club Canada Inc.  This 

well-known company has selected our province, Mr. Speaker, 

as a site of the new 120,000-foot warehouse now under 

construction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Price Club has chosen Saskatchewan as a site of 

it's first such facility in western Canada.  Another first for 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, by a well-known national 

company that sees our province as a superior location from 

which to do business. 

 

As the members know, a major goal of the Partnership for 

Renewal economic strategy I announced last fall was to 

enhance the business environment in 



May 18, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1787 

Saskatchewan to enable companies to locate here and to be 

globally competitive. 

 

Through partnership, Mr. Speaker, government, business, 

labour, communities, all working together, are able to achieve 

this, and by the kind of fiscal responsibility that creates 

confidence in the future of our province. That is exactly what 

we are doing here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are already seeing results.  Sears announced 

plans to locate its western Canada call centre in Regina with a 

total employment of 900 expected by 1995.  A $20 million 

agreement between Atomic Energy of Canada and the province 

was announced in December bringing 140 jobs to Saskatoon.  

And now with the Price Club announcement more than 100 

workers are at work on the construction site and more than 150 

full-time and part-time employees will be required when the 

store is operating. 

 

Price Club Canada demonstrates the initiative and the 

entrepreneurial spirit that has built Saskatchewan's private 

business sector into a strong, productive element in our 

provincial market-place.  The business sector is a powerful 

force in job creation and stimulation of the local economy. 

 

Most of Saskatchewan's economic growth comes from small 

and medium-sized businesses.  This sector, the co-operatives, 

are in many ways the backbone of our economy and they offer 

tremendous potential for growth.  Price Club will give these 

businesses the opportunity to benefit from wholesale prices 

even when purchasing in smaller quantities.  Again, Mr. 

Speaker, another way to enhance their competitiveness. 

 

I would ask the members to join with me now in welcoming 

Price Club Canada to Saskatchewan.  I know they will be 

valued members in the business community and I ask you to 

join with me in wishing Price Club many years of successful 

business in our province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, certainly 

we would join with you in welcoming Price Club Canada to 

Saskatchewan.  It's always indeed a pleasure in certainly an 

important time when a company decides to select 

Saskatchewan as a place to do business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the question has to be though is what did 

your government possibly have to do with this . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . And the minister responds from his seat, a 

positive attitude.  Well, Mr. Speaker, the positive attitude 

exhibited by the government opposite and particularly the 

Premier is to stand up and tell everybody that the province is 

almost bankrupt, to tell everybody that they're going to create 

jobs ad infinitum across Saskatchewan, 16,000 jobs, none of 

which have been created.  We're down in jobs in this province. 

So, Mr. Premier, even though there are initiatives that are 

coming forward, none of them are a result of anything you had 

to do with, Mr. Premier.  I would remind you that the AECL 

(Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.) agreement was a part of an 

initiative of the previous administration, not anything you had 

to do with, sir. 

 

So while we certainly join with you, Mr. Minister, in 

welcoming Price Club to Saskatchewan, I don't think, sir, you 

can take any credit for it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- With leave to make comment, please, to 

the ministerial statement. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  I just wish to join 

with the colleagues in the House in congratulating Price Club 

Canada for coming to our province.  It's always in our best 

interest to have people in Saskatchewan being working people, 

being able to be part of our communities and paying taxes and 

contributing to our quality of life.  So I'm absolutely delighted 

that they've come to our province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 85 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Medical 

Care Insurance Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 86 -- An Act to amend Certain Health Statutes and 

to repeal Certain Other Health Statutes 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

Certain Health Statutes and to repeal Certain Other Health 

Statutes be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as it relates to motion 

for return (not debatable) 212, I would request it be converted 

to motion for return (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Motion for return debate. 



1788 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 1993 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that we stand 

items 1 to 5. 

 

The Speaker: -- . . . on private Bills. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, what I would propose 

and move is that we move to adjourned debates, government 

orders . . . or pardon me, the private members, item no. 6, 

concurrence on the report on the Standing Committee on 

Environment. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTIONS 

 

First Report on the Standing Committee on the 

Environment 

 

Mr. Trew: -- I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's my 

honour to address the Legislative Assembly with a few 

comments about the Standing Committee on the Environment 

and its first ever report to the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The committee was struck as we all know by the legislature in 

June of 1992 and the positions were filled, Mr. Speaker, with 

what are clearly the wisest and the best people available.  The 

proof is in the pudding so to speak, as before our committee 

even held its first public meeting, not one but two of its 

members were moved from the Standing Committee on the 

Environment into cabinet.  The member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow and the member for Prince Albert Northcote both 

moved directly into cabinet. 

 

We then activated the committee, agreed on the process, hired 

our researcher/writer who was Mr. Brodie Anderson, and we 

started holding our public hearings across the province.  

Shortly thereafter we lost yet another member.  The member 

from The Battlefords became a cabinet minister, and the betting 

then was rampant within the standing committee as to who 

would be the next removed from the Standing Committee on 

the Environment and moved into the Environment. 

 

(1445) 

 

The Clerk's office was responsible for the arrangements, 

accommodations, and so on, and did generally a good job, Mr. 

Speaker, although their judgement was called into question 

when we were flying from Prince Albert to Buffalo Narrows 

and Mr. Anderson made his way up to the front of the plane 

and asked the pilot, who was Ray Cameron, said, how's it 

going?  And Ray turned around and said, I don't know; I'm lost.  

Fortunately the plane made it to Buffalo Narrows and Mr. 

Cameron proved to be just an excellent pilot with a very quick 

wit that made our northern swing of the tour all the more 

memorable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the report has been bound and presented 

to the legislature.  The report itself is 44 pages and then there 

are appendices.  There's 33 recommendations made in it.  And 

it all culminates with a summary recommendation which is, it 

is our recommendation: 

 

. . . that the Minister should use this report as the 

foundation for further consultation and preparation of new 

environmental rights and responsibilities legislation.  The 

Committee recommends that existing government 

structures be used wherever possible to implement the 

recommendations in this report.  (And further) Bill 48 of 

1992 should not be reintroduced. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just before I take my place, I do want to give a 

special thanks to all committee members who worked very 

diligently.  The vice-chairman from Indian Head-Wolseley 

certainly pulled his load and then some.  The opposition 

member from Souris-Cannington was ever diligent and added 

greatly to the committee.  The member for Regina Lake Centre 

we could always count on.  The member for 

Qu'Appelle-Lumsden -- what can I say? -- there at every turn 

and always ready to help.  The member for Kindersley was 

diligent in his pursuit of getting the report finalized. 

 

After that, in terms of members, in our report we allow either 

one star for those who were snapped up by cabinet, two stars 

for those who were appointed to the committee but were unable 

to serve, and three stars for the most recent additions.  So our 

committee consists of the stalwarts who got no stars, and then 

all of the other members and former members are either one, 

two, or three-star members. 

 

The staff -- Greg Putz was Clerk to the committee, and I want 

to thank Greg for the work that he did in making this standing 

committee work so very, very well.  And in conclusion of 

course, Mr. Speaker, a very special thanks to Mr. Anderson for 

his diligence in being the researcher and writer as we prepared 

this, the first ever report by the Standing Committee on the 

Environment, a report of which all members are very, very 

proud.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm quite 

pleased to join with the chairman of the Standing Committee 

on the Environment to speak on this concurrence motion.  And 

I want to say from the outset, Mr. Speaker, that the fact that the 

committee's main recommendation is to throw out the Bill, 

should not be seen as a condemnation of the government.  I 

want, on the contrary, to commend the government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

One of the most important aspects of this report is not the fact 

of the contents of the report, as important as they may be.  

Rather perhaps the single most important aspect of this report is 

the fact that it exists at all.  By that, Mr. Speaker, what I mean 

is that the process involved in inquiring into the Bill, in 

discussing the many aspects of the Bill, and in hearing the 

concerns 



May 18, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1789 

of the affected people, that process, Mr. Speaker, is the 

importance of what we are discussing today. 

 

It is probably the first time -- certainly the first time since I 

have been a member -- that a committee was used for a fully 

and cooperative involving of the public and a coming to a 

consensus position that could be reported back to this 

Assembly.  This process and the cooperative spirit of the 

people involved should serve as a model to the government, 

Mr. Speaker, and I must say to each member in this House. 

 

There were two critical components that made this process 

work.  The first was the executive government's willingness to 

allow the Bill to go to a committee.  That often is a reflection of 

politics and therefore not a sufficient component.  By itself that 

willingness means nothing. 

 

But the second component that set this committee apart from 

the other existing standing committees and past practice, was 

the determination of the individual members to actually work 

on the Bill and not on collective partisan agenda, government 

versus opposition. 

 

With all due respect, Mr. Speaker, that is not happening in 

Crown Corporations Committee and it is not even happening in 

Public Accounts.  In those committees the pattern is that the 

NDP (New Democratic Party) members act as agents of the 

executive government.  There is no role for public input or 

hearings outside of testimony in those committees. 

 

In the Environment Committee, all members came to the task 

with a sincere desire for a good Bill that recognized the 

concerns of all the stakeholders.  And so that they do not get 

lost in the shuffle, I want to particularly recognize those 

members who could not serve the committee for having the 

questionable judgement to accept cabinet appointments. 

 

Seriously, Mr. Speaker, the approach of the member for The 

Battlefords was very helpful in setting the tone for the 

committee, and he deserves some credit for the final product.  

Perhaps the Premier would consider shifting him again to the 

back benches where the Environment Committee could 

continue to use his talents. 

 

But the point, Mr. Speaker, is that each of the members made a 

solid contribution and as a result the process was productive.  

What we have in the report is not my ideal outlook on 

environmental legislation.  There are still areas that I think go 

too far and others that I think do not go far enough.  And I'm 

sure the report does not reflect the ideal of any one member nor 

of any one presenter.  But it can be said with certainty that the 

report represents a fair and comprehensive consensus 

document. 

 

One of the flaws in the process is that in part it was not allowed 

to fully operate by the government, and I'm sure that this was 

unintentional.  While the committee was working, while the 

process was going forward, 

the government was drafting legislation that should have 

waited -- waited for the recommendations from the committee 

before bringing forward new legislation affecting the 

environment and natural resources. 

 

An example, Mr. Speaker, if you look at The Natural Resources 

Act currently before the Assembly, you will find that it 

contains much that is discussed by this report, some of it 

contrary to the recommendations of this report.  I would hope 

that that Act itself would be referred to the committee or at 

least withdrawn to give the drafters an opportunity to 

incorporate the committee's recommendations on those issues 

where there is relevance.  In future it would be a positive step if 

the government froze legislative action on matters related to 

items under study by a committee. 

 

That aside, Mr. Speaker, I want to implore the government to 

make greater use of this process.  Right now, Mr. Speaker, we 

have Bills 41 and 42 before other standing committees.  

Unfortunately, to get them into committee the opposition had to 

agree to deal with the Bills before the end of this session.  The 

government members come to the committee with material 

prepared by and on behalf of executive government.  There is 

no opportunity to visit with experts and interests, whether 

professional, academics, or advocates, like the taxpayers' 

association. 

 

Contrast that with the extensive work done by our committee, 

the Environment Committee, who sat down and asked the 

question, literally, Mr. Speaker, who can we invite to be a part 

of this process.  That was the question, and as a group we came 

up with an extensive list of people to notify and involve.  This 

is legislating at its best, Mr. Speaker.  It is the surest way for a 

government to stay out of trouble and for an opposition to serve 

an effective and constructive role. 

 

I say to the government that the sky has not fallen for any lack 

of any particular piece of legislation for the past hundred years.  

Another 30, 60, or 90 days will not remove the last pillar from 

the clouds.  What the additional days do mean is public input 

and public acceptance.  It is the best advice you will get and 

you would be well advised to accept it, although, Mr. Speaker, 

in my partisan capacities I would hope that the government 

would ignore such advice, particularly with the Crown 

corporations. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank our Clerk and staff who 

did a great job in providing us support in some pretty far-flung 

places.  I want to thank the Law Clerk who did likewise.  I 

want to thank and congratulate our research assistant who 

managed to get the sense of what the members wanted and for 

taking the word "iterative" out of the report.  And, Mr. Speaker, 

I want to thank my fellow committee members for whom I 

acquired a much greater appreciation than would have been 

possible had I simply listened to their front bench day after day. 

 

Simply put, Mr. Speaker, this report is a fine example of a 

process of cooperation and common purpose 



1790 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 1993 

which benefits the people and legislators of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to, 

as the minister in charge of the area in which the Bill was 

drafted even though the committee is reporting to the House, 

express my appreciation to all of the members of the committee 

and the staff that worked with them, and the staff of the 

legislature that worked with them in bringing forward this 

report. 

 

It is true about environmental matters and it is true about many 

other matters in society, that the best advice is that which is 

sought broadly and done in the circumstance described by 

members speaking on both sides of the House where everyone 

is able to share their views and blend their views with the views 

of the others around the table. 

 

I commend the committee for its work, thank them for their 

recommendations, and, as one member of the legislature, 

receive with pleasure the report of the standing committee. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly I 

would move that we go into Committee of the Whole for 

consideration of private Bills No. 01 and 02. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

PRIVATE BILLS 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 01 -- An Act to amend An Act to Incorporate 

Aldersgate College 

 

Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Preamble agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

(1500) 

 

Bill No. 02 -- An Act to incorporate the Bethany Bible 

Institute and to amend An Act to incorporate Mennonite 

Brethren Church of Saskatchewan 

 

Clauses 1 to 14 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Preamble agreed to. 

 

Schedule A agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 01 -- An Act to amend An Act to Incorporate 

Aldersgate College 

Ms. Murray: -- I move, Mr. Speaker, that Bill No. 01, An Act 

to amend An Act to incorporate Aldersgate College be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 02 -- An Act to incorporate the Bethany Bible 

Institute and to amend An Act to incorporate Mennonite 

Brethren Church of Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 02, An Act 

to incorporate the Bethany Bible Institute and to amend An Act 

to incorporate Mennonite Brethren Church of Saskatchewan be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- By leave of the Assembly, I move that 

we proceed to government orders, starting with second 

readings, item 6, Bill 82. 

 

Leave granted. 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 82 -- An Act to amend The Change of Name Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to 

move second reading of The Change of Name Amendment Act, 

1993. 

 

By way of background, the Uniform Law Conference of 

Canada provided each province a draft of a model change of 

name Act.  Provinces in turn were invited to review their 

legislation in the light of this non-binding model Act.  With 

respect to Saskatchewan's change of name legislation, three 

areas were recommended for change. 

 

The first set of amendments, Mr. Speaker, revise the definitions 

of parent and lawful custody in connection with name change 

applications submitted by adult persons on behalf of a child.  

These revisions will permit a person other than a parent to 

apply for a name change on behalf of the child, and they will 

also permit a parent who is under the age of 18 to apply for a 

name change on behalf of their child. 

 

The second set of amendments deal with the removal of 

requirements for spousal consent in the name change 

application of a married person and before children's names can 

be changed.  These amendments are being proposed because 

the requirement for consent of spouse is not defensible under 

Saskatchewan human rights legislation. 

 

The third amendment will provide a clearer definition of what 

constitutes a legal name.  It will require that a name must be 

written entirely in characters of the 



May 18, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1791 

Roman alphabet, thereby not permitting persons to use numbers 

or other symbols in their legal name. 

 

The forementioned amendments, Mr. Speaker, are in keeping 

with accepted social patterns and ought to be adopted in order 

to accommodate community values and needs.  Legislation in 

British Columbia, Manitoba, and Ontario reflect these changes 

and legislation in other provinces is under review.  These 

amendments are very positive because they will result in 

reduced hardship and clearer definitions of legal requirements. 

 

There is also a fourth area with respect to Saskatchewan's 

change of name legislation where changes are being 

recommended.  The Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission 

has received complaints alleging that Saskatchewan's name 

change legislation discriminates on the basis of marital status. 

 

Current legislation permits married persons to resume their 

previous surnames without formal application and fee.  

However, Mr. Speaker, once a person ceases to be married, 

either upon divorce, widowhood, or annulment of marriage, 

reversion to the previous surname requires formal application 

and fee. 

 

To correct this situation the amendment will permit persons 

who are widowed, divorced, or whose marriages have been 

annulled to resume their previous surnames without formal 

application and fee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendment is very positive because it will 

result in reduced confusion and hardship, and it will also settle 

a complaint on this issue which is currently before the 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission.  I note as well, Mr. 

Speaker, that the commission suggested and endorses this 

amendment. 

 

Lastly, the amendment will bring Saskatchewan legislation into 

line with that of the other western provinces where it is 

working satisfactorily. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hereby move second reading of The Change of 

Name Amendment Act, 1993. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I think 

what the Bill is trying to do is simplify the process of name 

change.  I think there's an area or a few areas that we should 

take a little more of a broader look at and therefore I move to 

adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 83 -- An Act respecting Registered Psychiatric 

Nurses 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to stand today 

to move second reading of The Registered Psychiatric Nurses 

Act, 1993.  Psychiatric nurses are currently regulated pursuant 

to The Psychiatric Nurses Act; however, the Act is outdated. 

 

The current Act contains few provisions for the 

investigation and handling of public complaints regarding 

psychiatric nurses who may commit misconduct or be 

incompetent.  In effect the association's hands have been tied 

when it comes to regulating the profession.  The new Act will 

better regulate psychiatric nurses and assure more 

accountability to the public. 

 

The new Act is consistent with newer health profession 

legislation in this province, and I would like to highlight some 

of those features. 

 

The Act provides the association with the power to make 

by-laws.  However, consistent with other regulated professions, 

by-laws that could potentially impact the public require the 

approval of the Minister of Health before taking effect. 

 

The Act will also ensure that complaints of incompetence or 

misconduct are acted upon in an effective manner.  The 

association's responsibilities with respect to investigation and 

discipline hearings are clarified in the standard provisions.  An 

investigation and discipline committee are established.  The 

committees have the necessary authority to investigate 

complaints, apply to the court for subpoenas, and apply a 

variety of discipline penalties, including fines up to 2,000. 

 

As is standard with other professional legislation, the 

psychiatric nurse will be able to appeal disciplinary decisions to 

the Court of Queen's Bench.  The psychiatric nurse will also be 

able to apply for reinstatement if he or she has been expelled at 

some time for misconduct or incompetence. 

 

A number of newer standard provisions have been built into the 

Act to make the profession more accountable to the public.  For 

example, up to two public representatives may be appointed by 

the Lieutenant Governor in Council to sit on the council of the 

association.  A public representative will also be on the 

discipline committee.  The person who laid a complaint against 

a psychiatric nurse will now be informed of the outcome of that 

complaint, and the person will be entitled to attend the 

discipline hearing. 

 

Discipline hearings will no longer be automatically held behind 

closed doors.  The association also will be required to file an 

annual report on its activities with the Minister of Health. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no changes have been made to the registration 

requirements for members.  A slight change to protect the title 

"psychiatric nurse" as well as "registered psychiatric nurse" 

was made to be consistent with accepted practice in the health 

system. 

 

The Saskatchewan Psychiatric Nurses' Association has been 

consulted on the Act and is fully supportive of it.  

Saskatchewan Social Services and the Saskatchewan 

Registered Nurses' Association have also been consulted and 

are supportive. 



1792 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 1993 

The Act adheres to the standard format for professional 

legislation and contains no provisions which have a policy 

influence on existing programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, to allow my colleague a little more 

time to review the Bill and take a closer look at it, I move we 

adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 84 -- An Act to amend The Litter Control Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, after my remarks I will be 

moving second reading of An Act to amend The Litter Control 

Act. 

 

This Act was originally introduced to protect the environment 

by making it an offence to litter or abandon waste.  The Act 

also created an approval system for certain types of containers 

in which beverages could be sold.  Subsequently, the Act 

allowed for the establishment and operation of the province's 

beverage container collection and recycling system. 

 

The environmental protection fund was created by this Act to 

manage the deposit/refund system and to form a fund for 

certain environmental initiatives.  We are amending this Act in 

order to transfer the environmental protection fund to the 

General Revenue Fund. 

 

We are committed to eliminating the use of special-purpose 

funds and to increase the visibility of government expenditures.  

Environmental protection fund monies will become part of the 

Department of Environment and Resource Management's 

budget, allowing more scrutiny in the legislature. 

 

This will not effect the province's SARCAN recycling system.  

Environmental handling charges collected by distributors will 

be deposited directly to the General Revenue Fund.  Payments 

to SARCAN to operate the beverage container collection and 

recycling system will be made from this fund.  Refundable 

deposits will go into a consolidated revenue account and 

SARCAN will receive payments for deposits paid on returned 

containers.  We will be transferring any remaining surplus to 

the General Revenue Fund. 

 

Environmental projects will be paid for by this fund based on 

budget appropriation by the Legislative Assembly.  

Furthermore, amendments will empower the Minister of 

Environment and Resource Management to undertake a number 

of activities associated with the development of waste 

minimization initiatives. 

 

An expansion of the regulation-making authority will ensure 

that regulations may be passed to addressed the specific 

concerns related to new waste minimization activities.  Mr. 

Speaker, we believe this 

measure will further fulfil our commitment to providing open 

and accountable government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Litter Control 

Amendment Act, 1993. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, we're pleased to see that the 

government is, indeed, interested in controlling litter 

throughout the province of Saskatchewan.  We also feel 

though, however, that we should take a little closer look at the 

Bill, and therefore at this time, we'll move adjournment of 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 49 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 49 -- An Act 

respecting Correctional Services be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 70 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 70 -- An Act to 

amend The Urban Municipality Act, 1984 be now read a 

second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 71 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 71 -- An Act to 

amend The Local Government Election Act (No. 2) be now 

read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Environment and Resource Management 

Vote 26 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the minister at this time to please 

introduce the officials who have joined us here today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'm pleased to 

welcome, on my right, the deputy minister of the Department 

of Environment and Resource Management, Michael Shaw; on 

my left, the associate 



May 18, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1793 

deputy minister in charge of policy and programs; to Michael's 

right, Randy Sentis, the assistant deputy minister in charge of 

environmental protection; immediately behind me, the assistant 

deputy minister of operations, Mr. Ross MacLennan; and to his 

right, Robert Blackwell, the assistant deputy minister of 

management services. 

 

Excuse me, Mr. Chairman.  Apparently I neglected the name of 

my associate deputy minister of policy and programs, on my 

left, Les Cooke.  But I also wanted to say that I appreciated the 

opportunity to respond in advance to questions the members in 

the opposition have asked.  I think, in anticipation of their 

cooperation in dealing forthrightly with all of these things, I'd 

like to send over to the members of the opposition and the 

member from Saskatoon Greystone packages of information 

responding to those questions that were asked. 

 

And I'd like also to correct an answer I gave in the first session 

with respect to personal service contracts where at that time I 

gave the incorrect information that there were none in the 

department.  There are actually 30-some, I'm informed.  It's not 

as big a sin as the members opposite might want to make of it.  

Right up front, many of those are pilots on contract to our 

northern activities.  But there are four others and their names 

here are listed as well. 

 

So I will forward information both from the questions 

pre-circulated and from the questions asked in the last time that 

we took notice of.  So you'll have the complete package at the 

outset. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you, 

Mr. Minister, for the information you've sent over.  We'll check 

it over and see that it is complete.  But your omission sounds to 

me like a corporal sin so you'd better check that out. 

 

Mr. Minister, today we concurred in the report of the 

Environment Committee that was reviewing Bill 48.  And as I 

said earlier, I believe that was a very worthwhile and positive 

process that the committee members went through. 

 

Part of the reason I think that that was successful was because 

the committee members went into the process looking to try 

and achieve something.  All of the members did.  And it wasn't 

to be achieved on a political basis as one side scoring points 

against the other, but to do something really constructive for 

the province. 

 

And I would hope, Mr. Minister, that you will seriously look at 

the recommendations that the committee brought forward.  I 

believe that there are some very, very positive 

recommendations there that would serve anyone well if they 

utilize them.  And that whole process should be given some 

consideration for usage. 

 

One of the items that I didn't mention in my speech 

that I think made the process positive was the fact that there 

was a good number of new members on the committee, 

members that hadn't had their partisanship hardened by process 

in the House. That we did not have personal conflicts already 

involved, and so we could sit down at the same table and be 

objective as to what we were discussing. 

 

I would hope that the minister would take the recommendations 

that we have outlined and use them. 

 

I'm particularly interested in the one recommendation 2.3, 

where it talks of a balance between the environment and the 

economy.  And that's a balance on both sides, that the 

environment should not overweigh the economic interests of 

the province; and vice versa, that economic interest should 

totally override the environment.  I think that there are things 

that we can do that will accomplish both -- provide us with a 

good economic base and do it in an environmentally sound 

manner.  And I think that such considerations need to be looked 

at. 

 

When we look at the recommendations from the Environment 

Committee, I think that process . . . the recommendations 

themselves should be seriously looked at in context of 

legislation that your department may be bringing forward or 

that the other departments bring forward. 

 

I mentioned The Natural Resources Bill.  There is a number of 

things in there that should be looked at in context of the report.  

There is other legislation before the House that should also be 

given some consideration as to how it is implemented and what 

it does in context to what this report is all about.  So I think that 

is important, Mr. Minister. 

 

One of the things that this province has been talking about for a 

period of time is energy issues and the environment and how 

they interact.  We've talked about co-generation; we've talked 

about wind generation of electricity.  And I'm just wondering, 

Mr. Minister, what does the department see happening in those 

areas and what is the department doing to encourage 

environmentally sound energy development? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the comments 

from the member opposite with respect to both the work of the 

standing committee and its impact on government actions for 

the future. 

 

I want to say as well that it is good to see a cooperative effort.  

And I appreciate his comments about the need to discipline 

ourselves when we live in a combative atmosphere to in fact 

engage in this kind of cooperation, and appreciate the work of 

the members on both sides of the House who did the excellent 

work they did on the standing committee on the charter. 

 

(1530) 

 

I want to say as well that the fact that the public had a chance to 

comment on that Bill also gave them an 



1794 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 1993 

opportunity to comment on themes much more broadly than 

was being taken out, and I think reflects that the public values 

that opportunity to address government with respect to their 

policies and programs. 

 

I think if anything could sum up the work that was done and the 

public comment was your comment that the public wants to see 

a balance between the environment and the economy.  Clearly 

our business sector is actively pursuing that, recognizing that 

they cannot function in absence of our long-term sustainability 

and people with keen environmental interests also recognize 

that the economy must be able to function within those terms 

that are set. 

 

So the whole notion of sustainable development I think was 

confirmed by what the members heard in their exercise of 

public consultation, and I appreciate the manner in which that's 

been communicated back to the House. 

 

With respect to the direct application of that to the issues of 

energy, I want to say a couple of things.  First of all, this is an 

issue of national importance.  You may be aware, last week as 

president of the Canadian Council of Ministers of the 

Environment, I chaired a meeting of the council here and one 

of the achievements of that meeting was to forward to energy 

ministers a proposed draft document on further development of 

joint policies between energy and environment ministers.  And 

we're seeking a joint meeting with energy ministers across 

Canada and environment ministers next fall. 

 

And hopefully we can make some public responses jointly to 

the kind of concerns that grew out of the Earth Summit in Rio 

where out of two agreements -- one was on climate change, the 

other on biodiversity -- the climate change convention has 

caused all of us in Canada to come together and to propose 

actions that will address those concerns.  Clearly energy 

ministers and environment ministers have a common interest in 

that regard. 

 

Within the province you're aware, I think, that we had earlier 

taken the lead on that by establishing the energy options panel 

which then resulted in the establishment of the Saskatchewan 

Energy Conservation and Development Authority, whose 

report we're awaiting.  From that will hopefully grow a 

comprehensive energy strategy for Saskatchewan.  The . . . 

appreciate that it's important to have broad public input into 

these kinds of policies and integrate them in that fashion 

nationally and within the province, but then also to integrate 

them with other resource management issues, which is another 

goal of our new department as we've amalgamated 

Environment and the Resource Management to put forward an 

integrated resource management strategy that ties all of our 

resource management initiatives into a broad policy that 

supports sustainable development in all regions of the province. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  I 

mentioned co-generation, and I believe that that is an 

interest that a lot of people have across this province.  But from 

what I've seen from the government up till now where they 

have talked of a 25-megawatt limit on co-generation and a limit 

of 5 megawatts per project, I think you're restricting items too 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I understand why SaskPower wants to have the ability to be 

able to maintain their lines and their services because 

co-generation, depending on how it is done and what is being 

done, may not be able to supply peak needs.  But there is some 

possibilities available with co-generation, and I don't know 

why the government would want to say, we are going to limit it 

to 25 megawatts, or why they would say, we're going to limit 

any project to 5 megawatts. 

 

If it's capable of developing greater than that, why not utilize 

that potential?  Most of those cases where people are talking of 

co-generation, they are putting up the capital.  The government 

is not putting up any upfront money.  The government will 

simply . . . or SaskPower would buy from that co-generator at a 

negotiated price.  And it has to be a realistic price that 

everybody makes money at it. 

 

But I believe, Mr. Minister, that there should be a greater 

allowance available there on that issue, rather than simply 25 

megawatts or a 5-megawatt project. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, again thank you for the 

address of that issue.  Clearly as people living in a conservation 

society, the first goal for all of us is to identify strategies for 

energy conservation before we get into additional development.  

And I think there is not a limit to how much co-generation can 

be developed in the province, but it has to be done within the 

framework of sustainable development that we talked about 

before and clearly you've identified a number of the advantages 

that co-generation offers. 

 

And I think that, as in other areas of development in the 

province, we need to measure the positives and the negatives of 

each of the strategies relative to each other, clearly to the extent 

that co-generation can be used; that will be part of the analysis 

that our conservation . . . or that our Energy Conservation and 

Development Authority will advise us on. 

 

In the meantime, we've outlined some targets for ourselves 

from which we will work together with Crown corporations 

and other departments of government in achieving a target of 

cost-effective and sustainable energy supply for Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'd like to 

move on to another issue.  Your department has assigned two 

regional waste-management pilot projects.  I believe one of 

them is up in the Humboldt area and the other is down in the 

Shaunavon-Frenchman creek area. 

 

Why were those two particular sites chosen as opposed to the 

other sites?  I know . . . How many -- perhaps you can answer 

-- how many people applied for these pilot projects and why 

were these sites chosen? 



May 18, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1795 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, appreciate the attention 

given to that regional waste-management project because that 

is clearly one of the challenges for our local governments 

particularly and for us as a province in collecting our waste, but 

also hopefully identifying strategies to reduce it and to use 

those streams of waste for which it's possible as a resource in 

the province. 

 

There was a great deal of interest in that project.  There were 

17 proposals made to the Community Environmental 

Management Steering Committee for analysis.  This 

committee, which involved a number of agencies and 

representatives of SUMA, SARM (Saskatchewan Association 

of Rural Municipalities), and the school trustees in the province 

then assessed all of those proposals on a standard format and 

selected these two sites, one a smaller-scale project than the 

other, but selected them on the basis of a number of criteria that 

they had established in advance, and then they recommended 

them to the minister for appointment. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Would you 

give us list of all those that made submissions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, I'd be happy to forward that to you. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Now why 

were those two particular site that were chosen . . . what was 

the criteria that made them more suitable than some other 

location? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't have with me the 

list of specific criteria that were used, but we will forward 

those. 

 

But let me say that, in general terms, the object of these pilot 

projects is to identify models that other people in the province 

can use and to identify what works and doesn't work with 

respect to minimizing final waste in terms of landfills, 

identifying streams of waste products that can be used as a 

resource for other purposes.  And therefore there was some 

attention paid to the size of the system, the number of 

municipalities cooperating because there are some areas where 

a larger model works and other areas where a smaller model 

works.  So there were two . . . there was a distinct choice of a 

large and a small area. 

 

And then there were criteria with respect to how much waste 

reduction was achieved, the effectiveness of the collection 

system, the cost effectiveness of the collection system, and the 

degree to which these pilot projects could be models for other 

municipalities in the province working together to achieve their 

waste reduction and waste collection goals. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  In your 

answer though, you have not provided any definite criteria as to 

why the Humboldt region was chosen and why the Shaunavon 

one was chosen over whatever other people put in submissions. 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I'm sorry if I didn't make it clear.  I said 

we will forward those specific criteria.  Each of the proposals 

was measured on the same grid of criteria and then scored.  So 

what you will have when you get the grid is an identification of 

the criteria that were used, to which a score was applied and 

then accumulated to get a final score.  And there will . . . we 

can identify for you possibly the areas of where those projects 

were especially superior to other proposals. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay.  Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. 

Minister, there was a bit of controversy three or four or five 

months ago, back in the late . . . early winter, dealing with 

wildlife land, that hunters and fishermen pay a fund into the 

government which in turn is given to the Saskatchewan 

Wildlife Federation to buy wildlife lands.  And there was talk 

at that time that that money would be taken from that fund and 

given to the Consolidated Fund. 

 

Can you make a commitment today that that fund will remain 

in place and that the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation will be 

allowed to continue to purchase wildlife lands with those 

monies that are specifically being collected for them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, thank you for the 

opportunity to lay out what is happening with that fund.  The 

money in that fund is not given to anyone in particular.  The 

government collects it on behalf of the agencies that have an 

interest in wildlife development and government then spends it.  

But they spend it in an advised fashion by these agencies. 

 

What we've done at this point is committed ourselves to leave 

the fund as it stands for this year, to involve the interested 

agencies in discussions about the long-term management of 

those funds during this year. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'm sure that the 

people involved will be pleased to hear it will stay in place for 

this year.  But that is a voluntary contribution that people 

initially asked to make.  It may not seem to be voluntary any 

more, because you don't have a choice as to whether you pay it 

or not; it's part of your licence.  But initially the wildlife 

federations asked that that fund be put in place and that 

contributions be made from licences to support that program. 

 

And I think it's very incumbent on the government to leave 

those funds alone, that they be used strictly for what they were 

originally intended, Mr. Minister.  And I think that you should 

make a very strong recommendation to your cabinet colleagues 

that that is what happen, that those funds remain dedicated for 

the purpose they were originally intended.  And I'd ask you if 

you would be prepared to make that kind of a commitment. 

 

(1545) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I appreciate those 

comments, and we'll make sure that they are relayed 



1796 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 1993 

to the people at the table as we're discussing this issue during 

the next year.  I'm sure that they also will communicate the 

feelings of wanting to make sure that the purposes collected for 

that fund, that the expenditure matches the purpose for which 

they were collected. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, on that very same topic that we were just discussing, 

could you outline for me please how the money that is collected 

into that fund, where is that money kept, how does it come into 

the government, and then how is it dispersed?  Could you 

discuss with me the mechanism that you are employing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, thank you for that question.  

I will try to answer it briefly but comprehensively. 

 

The funds that are collected from fish and other licences are 

collected into the general revenue account, the Department of 

Finance.  There is an appropriation equal to 30 per cent of the 

total licence revenue which is transferred to a fish and wildlife 

development fund account.  This is maintained as a distinct 

account and audited independently. 

 

Now in terms of the expenditures of the funds from that 

account, there are two kinds of expenditures.  There are 

expenditures that flow from the 30 per cent arising from fish 

licences which are . . . There is a fish advisory committee 

which establishes an expenditure plan for that 30 per cent 

which arises from fish licences, and there is a Saskatchewan 

Upland Protection Enhancement and Restoration Committee 

which works with the department in establishing the 

expenditure plan for the other game licences . . . funds. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- How, Mr. Minister, is that 30 per cent . . . how 

did you arrive at 30 per cent of the fish licences as the amount 

that is being appropriated for that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I appreciate that question.  

As nearly as my officials can tell, that it was in the beginning 

30 per cent, and for ever thus has been.  And while at various 

times in the history of this fund over the last 20-some-odd years 

there have been caps applied at different levels so the 30 per 

cent applied up to a cap, presently there is no cap in terms of 

what might be accumulated in those funds. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Let me understand this clearly, Mr. Minister.  

What you're saying is the process is that hunters and fishermen 

who buy licences, that money as revenue from those purchases 

is turned into the Consolidated Fund and then it is taken out of 

the Consolidated Fund through an appropriation through this 

legislature, and that that is in keeping with good bookkeeping 

and accountability procedures as recommended by the auditor.  

Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- That, Mr. Chairman, I think that's an 

accurate summary. 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, just to quickly move on. I have 

a question regarding game licences and upcoming and so on.  

Where are we at?  We had a discussion about this last year, I 

recall.  But could you give me a brief summary of what the 

licence outlook is for this year in terms of big game in 

particular?  Are there more; are there less? 

 

I know that some of the things last year -- antelope -- there 

weren't as many as there were anticipated and so on.  Just give 

me a brief summary of what you can expect, and also some of 

the dates.  When are the draws going to be held?  When are the 

applications coming out?  Those kinds of things that the hunter 

population generally would be interested in. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd just like to report that 

the stocks of the wildlife numbers are strong in all categories.  

The information is listed in this 1993 Saskatchewan big game 

draw information sheet.  And I think rather than . . . It's out 

already.  Do you want us to forward it to you or will you just 

access it on your own? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I would like a copy; I'll read it tonight. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Okay.  Well I will in fact, since this is the 

only copy I have, with apologies to the member from 

Saskatoon Greystone, I'll ask someone to take this over to you 

so you can actually read it right now. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well not right now, Mr. Minister.  We have 

some unfinished business to attend to first. 

 

But a question that has been asked of me fairly often -- and my 

colleague here just reminded me of it and I'll ask you to get an 

official answer on the books as far as hunting big game in the 

big game season coming up -- the talk out there is that a week 

before a season opens, in antelope for example, or elk perhaps 

close to a park, that the officials from the wildlife branch hop 

aboard their helicopters and their leased airplanes and spread 

havoc amongst the game population to disperse as much as 

possible.  Could you verify or could you deny any such 

practice, please, officially now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the 

opportunity to publicly and unequivocally deny that our 

department either has the resources or the time to engage in 

those kinds of activities which are directly contrary to their 

own sense of their duty, which is to manage these resources in 

a sustainable way to identify appropriate hunts and to facilitate 

this exercise of wildlife management. 

 

The officials do from time to time use aircraft for the purpose 

of managing inappropriate hunting practices and those kinds of 

things.  But clearly that kind of practice that's suggested would 

be completely counter to the purpose for which the department 

establishes its practices. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, I would hope then that 



May 18, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1797 

these special flights and so on taken for management purposes 

would not occur just a week before hunting season. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, they clearly would not 

because they would only be taken in monitoring what's 

happening during the hunt. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- To continue on, Mr. Minister, on page 46 of 

the Saskatchewan Estimates for the year under forest fire 

management, I understand it's dry; we've got a lot of fires up 

there.  I'd like you to give me a little bit of a summary as to 

where we're at currently as far as how many fires are burning, 

any out of control, and so on. 

 

But also the officials may look up . . . the question that I have 

on recoverable fire suppression expenses -- recoverable.  Does 

that mean that we now have an income of $1.4 million?  What 

does that 1.4 indicate?  And if that is, from where do you 

recover those expenses? 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I would answer the last 

question first, with respect to the recoverable fire suppression 

amounts. 

 

Saskatchewan operates in agreements with other provinces and 

with the federal government with respect to fire suppression 

and this is then . . . There used to be a fund into which this 

money was collected; it now comes directly back to a revenue 

account as a revenue to the department when those funds are 

paid for our activities on others' behalf. 

 

With respect to the forest fire situation, I can make available to 

you possibly later the current state of the fire report here.  

Saskatchewan has never had such high fire ratings as it's 

presently experiencing, coming out of winter with very little 

snow, very little moisture.  This has resulted in the predictable 

very, very large number of forest fires to date -- 221 at this 

point compared to a five-year average of 132.  There are 

presently 28 fires burning in the province, although 15 have 

already been extinguished in the last 24 hours.  And in the last 

24 hours, eight new fires have been reported. 

 

This brings me to the theme of another concern with respect to 

managing forest fires.  It's extremely important that the 

department have an ability to address a new fire within 15 

minutes of its occurrence, its first identification, in order that it 

can easily be controlled. 

 

We have today expressed concern to the federal Minister of 

Defence, the Hon. Kim Campbell, in charge of the Primrose 

Weapons Range, that we have not received the kind 

cooperation that's necessary to do that under the . . . and so 

we're asking in these emergency circumstances that in fact they 

do give us the access to that range so that when fires are begun, 

which are often begun as a result of the activities of the 

Defence department there, that we actually have 

immediate access to extinguish those fires, so they do not end 

up in the out-of-control situation that is presently occurring in 

the Primrose Air Weapons Range. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Chairman, I 

want to turn to one other section, and that's the commercial 

revolving fund.  According to this, the department uses this 

fund or you use this fund to finance an account for the 

commercial operation of government-owned parks and 

renewable resources, Mr. Minister. 

 

Last year, you had a revenue of $6.9 million.  Of that amount, 

$387,299 was from leased land, as I understand it.  Could you 

explain to me from what leased land this is; and if $387,000 

came from that, where did the rest of that $1.6 million come 

from as revenue that was entered into commercial revolving 

fund? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, thank you for that question.  

I will try to answer it briefly but comprehensively. 

 

The funds that are collected from fish and other licences are 

collected into the general revenue account, the Department of 

Finance.  There is an appropriation equal to 30 per cent of the 

total licence revenue which is transferred to a fish and wildlife 

development fund account.  This is maintained as a distinct 

account and audited independently. 

 

Now in terms of the expenditures of the funds from that 

account, there are two kinds of expenditures.  There are 

expenditures that flow from the 30 per cent arising from fish 

licences which are . . . There is a fish advisory committee 

which establishes an expenditure plan for that 30 per cent 

which arises from fish licences, and there is a Saskatchewan 

Upland Protection Enhancement and Restoration Committee 

which works with the department in establishing the 

expenditure plan for the other game licences . . . funds. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- How, Mr. Minister, is that 30 per cent . . . how 

did you arrive at 30 per cent of the fish licences as the amount 

that is being appropriated for that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I appreciate that question.  

As nearly as my officials can tell, that it was in the beginning 

30 per cent, and for ever thus has been.  And while at various 

times in the history of this fund over the last 20-some-odd years 

there have been caps applied at different levels so the 30 per 

cent applied up to a cap, presently there is no cap in terms of 

what might be accumulated in those funds. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Let me understand this clearly, Mr. Minister.  

What you're saying is the process is that hunters and fishermen 

who buy licences, that money as revenue from those purchases 

is turned into the Consolidated Fund and then it is taken out of 

the Consolidated Fund through an appropriation through this 

legislature, and that that is in keeping with good 



1798 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 1993 

bookkeeping and accountability procedures as recommended 

by the auditor.  Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- That, Mr. Chairman, I think that's an 

accurate summary. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, just to quickly move on. I have 

a question regarding game licences and upcoming and so on.  

Where are we at?  We had a discussion about this last year, I 

recall.  But could you give me a brief summary of what the 

licence outlook is for this year in terms of big game in 

particular?  Are there more; are there less? 

 

I know that some of the things last year -- antelope -- there 

weren't as many as there were anticipated and so on.  Just give 

me a brief summary of what you can expect, and also some of 

the dates.  When are the draws going to be held?  When are the 

applications coming out?  Those kinds of things that the hunter 

population generally would be interested in. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd just like to report that 

the stocks of the wildlife numbers are strong in all categories.  

The information is listed in this 1993 Saskatchewan big game 

draw information sheet.  And I think rather than . . . It's out 

already.  Do you want us to forward it to you or will you just 

access it on your own? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I would like a copy; I'll read it tonight. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Okay.  Well I will in fact, since this is the 

only copy I have, with apologies to the member from 

Saskatoon Greystone, I'll ask someone to take this over to you 

so you can actually read it right now. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well not right now, Mr. Minister.  We have 

some unfinished business to attend to first. 

 

But a question that has been asked of me fairly often -- and my 

colleague here just reminded me of it and I'll ask you to get an 

official answer on the books as far as hunting big game in the 

big game season coming up -- the talk out there is that a week 

before a season opens, in antelope for example, or elk perhaps 

close to a park, that the officials from the wildlife branch hop 

aboard their helicopters and their leased airplanes and spread 

havoc amongst the game population to disperse as much as 

possible.  Could you verify or could you deny any such 

practice, please, officially now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the 

opportunity to publicly and unequivocally deny that our 

department either has the resources or the time to engage in 

those kinds of activities which are directly contrary to their 

own sense of their duty, which is to manage these resources in 

a sustainable way to identify appropriate hunts and to facilitate 

this exercise of wildlife management. 

 

The officials do from time to time use aircraft for the purpose 

of managing inappropriate hunting practices and those kinds of 

things.  But clearly that kind of 

practice that's suggested would be completely counter to the 

purpose for which the department establishes its practices. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, I would hope then that these 

special flights and so on taken for management purposes would 

not occur just a week before hunting season. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, they clearly would not 

because they would only be taken in monitoring what's 

happening during the hunt. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- To continue on, Mr. Minister, on page 46 of 

the Saskatchewan Estimates for the year under forest fire 

management, I understand it's dry; we've got a lot of fires up 

there.  I'd like you to give me a little bit of a summary as to 

where we're at currently as far as how many fires are burning, 

any out of control, and so on. 

 

But also the officials may look up . . . the question that I have 

on recoverable fire suppression expenses -- recoverable.  Does 

that mean that we now have an income of $1.4 million?  What 

does that 1.4 indicate?  And if that is, from where do you 

recover those expenses? 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I would answer the last 

question first, with respect to the recoverable fire suppression 

amounts. 

 

Saskatchewan operates in agreements with other provinces and 

with the federal government with respect to fire suppression 

and this is then . . . There used to be a fund into which this 

money was collected; it now comes directly back to a revenue 

account as a revenue to the department when those funds are 

paid for our activities on others' behalf. 

 

With respect to the forest fire situation, I can make available to 

you possibly later the current state of the fire report here.  

Saskatchewan has never had such high fire ratings as it's 

presently experiencing, coming out of winter with very little 

snow, very little moisture.  This has resulted in the predictable 

very, very large number of forest fires to date -- 221 at this 

point compared to a five-year average of 132.  There are 

presently 28 fires burning in the province, although 15 have 

already been extinguished in the last 24 hours.  And in the last 

24 hours, eight new fires have been reported. 

 

This brings me to the theme of another concern with respect to 

managing forest fires.  It's extremely important that the 

department have an ability to address a new fire within 15 

minutes of its occurrence, its first identification, in order that it 

can easily be controlled. 

 

We have today expressed concern to the federal Minister of 

Defence, the Hon. Kim Campbell, in charge of the Primrose 

Weapons Range, that we have not received the kind 

cooperation that's necessary to 



May 18, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1799 

do that under the . . . and so we're asking in these emergency 

circumstances that in fact they do give us the access to that 

range so that when fires are begun, which are often begun as a 

result of the activities of the Defence department there, that we 

actually have immediate access to extinguish those fires, so 

they do not end up in the out-of-control situation that is 

presently occurring in the Primrose Air Weapons Range. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Chairman, I 

want to turn to one other section, and that's the commercial 

revolving fund.  According to this, the department uses this 

fund or you use this fund to finance an account for the 

commercial operation of government-owned parks and 

renewable resources, Mr. Minister. 

 

Last year, you had a revenue of $6.9 million.  Of that amount, 

$387,299 was from leased land, as I understand it.  Could you 

explain to me from what leased land this is; and if $387,000 

came from that, where did the rest of that $1.6 million come 

from as revenue that was entered into commercial revolving 

fund? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the commercial revolving 

fund -- just for the interest of the public who is not aware of 

what purpose it serves -- is the fund into which all park fees 

and rental fees for cottages and those kinds of revenues for park 

management is deposited and from which it is spent.  So the 

lease fees are, as they are identified, fees from cottage 

properties, and the residual amount of the money in that fund 

comes from park fees and other of those kinds of fees, and the 

province makes up the deficit in the fund for the total purpose 

of managing parks in the province. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, The Renewable Resources, 

Recreation and Culture Act says that this is how the funds in 

that fund shall be used.  And I quote: 

 

. . . the minister may sell, rent, lease or otherwise dispose 

of property and assets acquired by him through the 

revolving fund. 

 

Now I'm quoting here from what the Provincial Auditor has to 

say about this.  He says that you . . . that your department 

records this lease revenue as revenue of that fund -- of the 

revolving fund.  However the department did not acquire the 

assets that earned the revenue through the fund, the auditor 

says.  And therefore the auditor is here saying that the 

department does not have the authority to record commercial 

leased revenue as revenue of that fund, but rather that that 

money should then be recorded as part of the Consolidated 

Fund.  Now that is the opinion of the auditor and his legal 

beagles, and apparently the department has some legal advice 

to the contrary. 

 

But I'm just going to simply summarize this by the auditor's 

recommendation where he says the department should record 

commercial lease revenue as revenue of the Consolidated Fund.  

And if you're not prepared to do that, 

and if you're not willing to do that, the auditor says 

alternatively the department should propose changes to the Act 

that I just quoted -- The Renewable Resources, Recreation and 

Culture Act -- to say clearly commercial lease revenue belongs 

to the fund. 

 

In other words, Mr. Minister, what the auditor is saying, the 

way you're doing it now is wrong because you do not have the 

statutes that give you the legal authority to do what you're 

doing.  So the auditor says either you take those revenues, don't 

put it into the commercial revolving fund, but rather into the 

Consolidated Fund.  But if you want to put it into the revolving 

fund, then change the Act that makes what you are doing legal. 

 

Now you're aware of this for quite a period of time already, Mr. 

Minister, and I want your commitment now as to what you're 

doing to act upon the recommendation of the Provincial 

Auditor. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, yes, the member opposite 

correctly identifies that this is a concern that has been 

expressed for a long time, in fact a long enough time that it was 

expressed during his administration. 

 

And I inform the member now that the new resources Act that 

we have introduced clarifies the point that you asked about so 

that it will be clear that these revenues can be collected into the 

fund as the present practice is -- just to confirm that the 

interpretation that has been used by the department is clarified 

so that there will be no difference of legal opinion any more. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, a couple of questions that I have.  

Number one, regarding the cottage fees or the fees affecting 

cottage owners, I think the minister is very well aware of the 

concern in the cottage industry and in a number of parks.  And 

what I'm wondering is the rationale behind the significant 

increases other than trying to find more revenue.  It seems to 

me you're looking at a small resource for that additional 

revenue.  And just looking at the major park in my area, the 

number of for-sale signs that have appeared are very 

significant. 

 

What I would suggest -- well I've asked the question -- I would 

also suggest that the department take a serious look at 

addressing the difference between a seasonal cottage owner and 

a yearly . . . or a cottage owner who spends . . . is a year-round . 

. . lives year-round in the park. 

 

And a lot of people have raised the fact that year-round resident 

has indicated they have no problem in paying a fair and 

reasonable rate, taking into account that they provide their own 

services.  And they're also arguing for the seasonal persons that 

their rate should be adjusted accordingly, that not everybody 

should be treated the same.  And I wonder if the minister would 

comment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, appreciate the question and 

the reflection of concern by cottage 



1800 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 1993 

owners about the increase. 

 

And clearly the purpose of this aspect of park management is 

that we want to provide a recreational facility for the whole 

public, and this includes the residents of the parks.  And in 

order to do that we have to try to on one hand collect revenues 

adequate for the operation, which we do not yet do fully, of 

these parks.  But we also have to have some sense of fairness 

that someone residing on Crown lands inside parks does not 

have an advantage over people residing externally. 

 

That equity question has been raised by a number of the local 

government bodies.  It may be that they raised it hopefully 

from the perspective of tax relief outside of the park, but 

clearly they raised the inequity as an issue.  And so the 

increases on lease properties inside the park are meant to bring 

the inside park fees for cottagers closer to the costs to live 

outside the park.  We still have not gotten there.  It is still 

cheaper to live inside a park in terms of those fees than it is to 

live externally. 

 

With respect to the comparison between seasonal residents and 

permanent residents, that issue has also been addressed in this 

year's budgeting.  And the increases to permanent residents 

have, on top of the increases to seasonal residences, have 

increased by an additional 25 per cent to try to address the 

question of equity between seasonal and permanent residents. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Just a couple of 

comments on that, Mr. Minister.  I would suggest that first of 

all when you're looking at the differences and looking at what it 

costs to live outside the park rather than inside the park, you 

must remember the fact that first of all, down in Kenosee 

anyway, I know the people there pay for their bus service for 

education.  They also provide their own water and sewer and 

that. 

 

And I would think those things have to be taken into account.  I 

don't think you want to raise them to the point . . . because then 

you're just going to send everybody back to the communities.  

And so I think that's what I'm saying about fairness and 

addressing some of those issues.  I trust that there's a 

consultation process taking place with the cottage owners to 

come to a workable agreement on this. 

 

I've got two more questions.  Actually if we weren't under a bit 

of a time constraint I could take a lot more time on this.  But a 

couple questions here. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Minister, we talk about deficit reduction, we talk 

about spending our dollars equitably and wisely.  Kenosee park 

is a good example of how I think parks could save a few 

dollars.  Number one, we have postal service in the village of 

Kenosee.  Number two, you've got fuel available and yet I hear 

from residents and business people in the Kenosee area that the 

Parks people are driving 20 minutes to Carlyle to fuel up the 

vehicles and get postal service.  And it would seem to me that 

if we're going to be 

responsible and if we're going to spend our dollar wisely, why 

are we not taking advantage and utilizing some of the 

businesses and the services that are in the village.  And that's 

just my area; I don't know what the other areas . . . or what's 

happening in other areas.  So I would ask you to look into that. 

 

Secondly, regarding heritage sites, I understand that there's a 

heritage site just north of . . . or has been applied for just 

north-east of Whitewood, Pense School.  And I've had a 

number of people questioning the fact of public dollars being 

spent to upgrade an old school that's falling down, to redesign a 

barn, an old barn, just to build a heritage site when we do have 

a museum in the community of Whitewood. 

 

And it would seem to me that the communities and some of the 

folks should be working together to develop the museum on 

one site, preferably in a community, rather than all these little 

heritage sites where you're spending taxpayers' dollars. 

 

And down the road three, four, five years, if the individual who 

brought the issue to the forefront is not there to manage and to 

look after that facility, vandals take over, well what have you 

done?  We just wasted public money.  So I'm just wondering 

what's happing there as well, and I would suggest we take a 

serious look at how we're spending our public dollars.  Thank 

you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the comments 

of the member opposite on all those themes.  Clearly we want 

to work with our cottagers to make sure that we consider all 

those factors, and we need to have consultations in order to 

achieve that. 

 

With respect to the comments on the practices of our officials 

in the Kenosee area, I'll ask the department to examine that and 

to recognize the local investment.  I had a visitor in my own 

office over the weekend on a similar theme with respect to the 

proper recognition of services that are provided there by the 

private sector, and concerned that we in the department might 

be duplicating service and making an investment that was 

unnecessary. 

 

So I appreciate when people can draw those kinds of things to 

our attention, because it's important that we do work with the 

local community to give us the most effective . . . cost-effective 

and efficient recreational opportunities. 

 

And in respect to heritage sites, that's a matter that is not within 

our department but clearly the question you raise is worth 

exploring and I thank you for raising it.  We'll look into that 

question with the other minister responsible.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, I've had a number of phone calls dealing with sewage 

lagoons and the problems arising there.  I wonder what some of 

the regulations are in dealing with this.  How close are sewage 

lagoons allowed to be from residences, from water wells and 

from waterways? 



May 18, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1801 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the member 

opposite would agree that I simply forward the regulations 

because they are broad and complex, and I will forward them to 

the member opposite so he has that information in complete 

form. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Yes, Mr. Minister, that would be fine.  

With the sewage problem, is the government looking at any 

remedial efforts to assist communities that are having problems 

with their sewage treatments? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, there are no financial 

resources available from the department to assist communities 

with respect to those projects, but the department's regional 

staff are available for consultation and help in planning the 

sewage management systems and examining existing 

difficulties if it is an existing facility. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  You're 

not the only one though that has some financial problems, and a 

lot of these communities that are in a situation where maybe 

their systems are not up to standard, don't have the financial 

capabilities to improve the situation.  I would recommend that 

the government take a serious look at seeing if something 

couldn't be worked out with those communities that are having 

a problem. 

 

Another one of the problems that comes up that I get quite a 

few phone calls about from my area is wildlife depredation.  

There's a number of areas where deer are a serious problem.  

I'm thinking of the Oxbow area and the Carievale area.  Also 

we have elk problems around the Moose Mountain Provincial 

Park.  Does the government . . . does the department provide 

any assistance for those farmers when they have problems 

dealing with wildlife. 

 

It's not just a problem with big game animals, but also 

problems with ducks and geese in various parts of the province, 

Mr. Minister.  I know that Crop Insurance is involved in this, 

but Crop Insurance seems to be very reluctant to make any 

payment to farmers with problems with wildlife. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the emphasis within our 

department now is to try to use our available money to plan 

strategies and to use the funds for loss prevention, because it is 

a much more effective use of money than trying to pay 

compensation.  So there are $330,000 of new money in this 

year's budget on prevention where fencing materials are 

provided for farmers that are experiencing difficulties in order 

to help them with their prevention. 

 

With respect to damage by waterfowl, that is the responsibility 

of the Crop Insurance Corporation.  While I am generally 

familiar with the program, I wouldn't want to answer on their 

behalf in terms of the detail of that program.  But I know that 

last year it was very much oversubscribed and resulted in a 

deficit in the program of compensation because of the nature of 

last fall. 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'm sure 

that there's a number of farmers out there who are quite 

interested to know that additional funds will be available for 

fencing.  In those funds, would that also include interdiction 

stations for feeding deer, particularly in the wintertime when 

they're coming up to people's grain piles or their feed . . . where 

they might have feed stored in their yards.  Is that also part of 

the program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, what we've established is a 

committee of producers who are working with the department 

to identify what the best strategies are for minimizing losses, 

and the concept that you talk about of intercept feeding is 

certainly one of the concepts that will be part of that 

examination. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, that program worked 

well in the past and I realize it's been gone for now one or two 

winters, and has not been in place and a number of people are 

suffering the consequences of that, having their hay destroyed, 

or having grain that's been piled on the ground fouled by the 

animals. 

 

One of the suggestions that has come forward to me is that 

when big game animals become a problem in an area and 

remedial measures don't seem to be available that solve the 

problem, and that the farmers are not being compensated 

properly, or at least in the minds of the farmers they're not 

being compensated to an adequate level, would it be possible to 

issue special hunting permits in those areas, the funds for which 

would go to that particular farmer?  The department could 

determine that perhaps 10 animals out of this herd should be 

eliminated and that would maybe ease the problem, maybe 

solve the problem, and then that funds would be 

proportionately given to the landowner to compensate him for 

his losses. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I appreciate the concern raised by the 

member from Souris-Cannington.  That's one of a number of 

ideas that are worth examination with respect to the proper 

management of our big game populations. 

 

One of the real dilemmas -- and this is where again the whole 

question of the integration of policies in various areas of 

government becomes really important -- one of the facts about 

wildlife population is that while the numbers are down to about 

a half of what they were a number of years ago, they are living 

on about one-third of the habitat because of our continuing 

removal of land from its natural state. 

 

And so I think we need to be working cooperatively between 

agriculture and our resource management areas to integrate our 

policies, to maximize our goals for wildlife populations for the 

natural habitat that supports that.  That gives us other economic 

opportunities in the community, and I appreciate any 

suggestions that you and others who may be listening would 

have for us with respect to proper integration of wildlife and 

agricultural policies. 



1802 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 1993 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  The whip has 

informed me it's my last question so I'm going to have to make 

it a multi-purpose question here. 

 

One of the items that came forward, that you brought forward, 

Mr. Minister, was the question of environmental taxes, that 

there would taxes on diapers and batteries and tires and this 

type of thing.  I believe that would cause some very serious 

problems, Mr. Minister. 

 

We don't live in isolation in this province.  Now while it may 

not have a dramatic impact on Regina and Saskatoon, if you 

lived in my constituency and you had to pay $5 extra for a 

package of diapers or for a battery or tires, there is available 

shopping just within minutes from you where you would not 

necessarily being paying those fees, and the net result would be 

people would shop across the border some place to avoid 

paying that taxes.  Saskatchewan would still have the problem 

of the disposal. 

 

We've seen that happen with the drink containers, with the 

SARCAN sites.  We pay a high deposit fee in this province.  

We give some of that deposit money back, but what's 

happening is we're getting a large amount of cans and bottles 

coming in from Manitoba.  Now perhaps the same thing is 

happening on the Alberta side; I don't know.  But I've heard of 

people bringing in semi loads of cans.  One particular person is 

reported to have brought in $15,000 worth of beverage cans in 

a month.  Now I don't think that particular person drank all that 

pop themselves.  And it just happened to be at a location fairly 

close to the Manitoba border. 

 

So when you put on a tax like that you're creating problems for 

this province also, Mr. Minister, and I would suggest you 

consider that very, very carefully before you implement such a 

program. 

 

The other part of my question deals with the underground 

storage tanks which have been a problem.  I knew you were 

expecting questions on that and so I hated to disappoint you on 

this.  You have suggested that there would be a one-year 

moratorium on the implementation of the regulations dealing 

with the underground storage tanks. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Minister, those tanks that are leaking definitely need to 

come out of the ground.  It's not a question.  But those tanks 

that are not leaking, they should be tested and perhaps there 

should be test holes put in beside those tanks that could be 

monitored on a regular basis.  And if those tanks are not 

leaking, then, Mr. Minister, there are a good number of people 

across this province who see no reason why those tanks should 

be removed. 

 

If there is a leak, fine.  If there's no leak, they should be 

monitored and maintained.  And then at some point in time 

those tanks will be removed.  But it shouldn't happen 

immediately, Mr. Minister, and to do so will 

have a very severe impact on the economy of this province.  

It'll have a very, very severe impact on a good number of small 

communities who only have one service station who can't 

afford to go through the expense of replacement. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, maybe I will begin from 

the end of this question, which was your last and of which you 

took advantage to make several sub-points. 

 

As the member opposite I think is aware, this is a . . . the policy 

in underground storage tanks was initiated in 1988, and when I 

took over the ministry about eight months ago, was one of the 

very first concerns I had expressed to me.  And I immediately 

put a working group together to try to correct some of the 

insensitivities of the regulation that had come . . . that we had 

inherited. 

 

You've made some valid observations.  They are the very same 

observations people have made to me.  And if you stay tuned, 

hopefully within the next couple of weeks we'll be able to make 

an announcement defining the changes that are coming forward 

and that will detail those changes and hopefully address most 

of the concerns that have been expressed. 

 

With respect to the environmental taxes, again I'll start from the 

tail-end of that sub-question.  We have a very good program in 

Saskatchewan that goes back a number of years that does deal 

with cans and bottles.  And you've correctly identified one of 

the problems with that process, which is the bootlegging of 

cans and bottles from other provinces. 

 

The SARCAN people have addressed strategies that minimize 

that, and the ingenuity of business people -- not generally but 

the ingenuity of people who want to do this kind of business -- 

requires continued creativity on the part of SARCAN to avoid 

the abuse of the system as it's constructed.  And we work with 

them in trying to minimize those losses. 

 

But what that problem accentuates is the fact that we need to 

work as western provinces together to have common strategies 

on environmental management.  And to that end I called a 

meeting of western environment ministers last week.  We met 

with representatives of each of the western provinces, the 

Northwest Territories, and the Yukon to look at a number of 

issues including the waste management issues you describe. 

 

I think you cannot make an unequivocal statement about the 

use of environmental fees and levies.  They are a tool that can 

be used in managing a waste challenge as they have been used 

with respect to cans and bottles.  In terms of the equity, one 

could make the argument that equity doesn't exist right now 

because there are strategies in Alberta and Manitoba for fees 

with respect to tire management.  I don't know what the 

numbers are exactly; I think it's $3 in Manitoba, $4 in Alberta.  

So in some sense we are inequitable now because we have no 

fee.  Manitoba has a tax on diapers.  I think that's not a strategy 

that we would 



May 18, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1803 

easily contemplate. 

 

But there are strategies going on, and they are not in 

themselves evil or bad.  In fact I've had a lot of public comment 

from the business community and the public at large that they 

would be willing to pay fees if they could be assured that those 

fees are used to address the environmental problem for which 

they're collected.  And I think that needs to be the defining 

characteristic of those kinds of strategies. 

 

I think the strategy that is uppermost with respect to the waste 

stream in our mind right now is the used-oil strategy.  We have 

a working group working on that, and hopefully within the next 

year we'll define some policies. 

 

With respect to . . . We've also put a larger working group 

together to look at priorizing these waste items in terms of 

address and what strategies we should use and whether the 

issue you raise of environmental fees and levies should be a 

part of the strategy with respect to any number of these items in 

the waste stream.  Link all of this back to one of your 

colleague's first questions which was the regional waste 

management projects.  These two go hand in hand because 

regional waste management depends on taking those waste 

streams and carrying them through to a new life or to final 

disposition. 

 

And so we need to work cooperatively with the municipalities 

who are looking at their solid-waste management strategies, 

using the provincial strategies with respect to which tools we 

use in terms of taking our plastics or our tires or our cans or our 

oil or our batteries, combine those strategies to effectively 

minimize the total waste and reduce the total landfilling to a 

minimum to reduce the cost to our municipalities. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 26 agreed to. 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the minister at this point to thank his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like at this point to 

express my thanks to officials for making themselves available 

and for supporting me in answering the questions of the 

opposition.  I'd like to thank the members of the opposition for 

their very good questions; for giving us the opportunity to 

explain a number of our policies to the public.  Maybe another 

time we can take a little more time and talk about more of 

them.  And so I thank the members of the opposition for their 

contribution to this session. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  On behalf of 

the member from Moosomin and the member from Rosthern 

and myself, I would like to thank you for your responses and 

for the assistance of your officials today. 

The committee reported progress. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 38 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 38 -- An Act to 

amend The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code be now read 

a second time. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's 

my pleasure to rise and speak to Bill 38, The Saskatchewan 

Human Rights Code Amendment Act. 

 

There are certain basic characteristics which set human beings 

apart from other species on earth.  Our ability to socialize has 

given rise to identifiable cultures and the creation of separate 

and distinct nations.  Our ability to emote makes us different 

from other species; makes us capable of understanding one 

another's feelings.  Beyond that, we have the intelligence to 

choose to recognize and resolve our differences through 

negotiation and compromise, rather than confrontation and 

violence.  It is from these choices that the notion of human 

rights has arisen.  Our world is a mlange of cultures, all with 

varying histories and collective memories.  In Canada we are 

extremely fortunate to be blessed with the resources which 

make it possible to recognize the rights of each of our citizens 

to the most basic needs of life: food, shelter, and clothing.  

There are too many countries in which those are not taken for 

granted. 

 

In Canada and in Saskatchewan we've come to recognize 

certain other things as being basic rights of humans.  We are so 

blessed as to think that health care and education and a clean 

environment are the rights of our citizens when they are truly 

privileges to which we have become so accustomed that we 

regard them as inalienable.  Our record in providing rights to 

material goods, the staples of life, is envied the world over. 

 

But what of our record where the rights of people are 

concerned?  Have we done enough to ensure that the heart of 

each and every citizen can swell with pride as we think of the 

freedoms we enjoy as Canadian citizens?  Have we done 

enough to ensure that any man or woman in this country can 

seek the security of shelter, the dignity of employment without 

scaling the hurdles of discrimination?  Each of us can 

remember or has learned from history that there were times 

when it was socially acceptable to exclude aboriginal peoples 

from the basic right of access to public places.  Each of us 

knows of the atrocities of war in which Canadian soldiers gave 

their lives to ensure that our rights would not be threatened by 

forces abroad who cultivated hatred and discrimination. 

 

And each of us knows that there are still people who suffer 

from discrimination and hatred and vicious campaigns designed 

to bring terror and sorrow to their 



1804 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 1993 

lives.  We as Canadians know that prejudice is wrong.  We 

know that every individual in our nation should be entitled to 

the rights as laid out in the Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  

Some will argue that no group should get special mention or 

special treatment.  I would argue that we must take whatever 

action is necessary to ensure that equal rights are truly equal, 

not just in perception but in practice, not just in theory but in 

day-to-day life. 

 

And I come from this because of my personal experience.  

Over 20 years ago, I was in a facility in Saskatoon which was a 

dine and dancing facility in a hotel, and during that time I was 

unable to walk and was in a wheelchair.  And my partner and I 

were asked to leave because of the people who were running 

this establishment stating that the people who had come there 

to dine and to dance would be disturbed by my being in a 

wheelchair.  I think that people who have not experienced 

discrimination firsthand probably don't think very much about 

it.  But it meant a great deal to me as years went on that actions 

were taken so that such things couldn't happen to others. 

 

This Bill before this Assembly identifies three groups as being 

discriminated against through numerous cases addressed by the 

Human Rights Commission.  Those groups include 

homosexuals, welfare recipients, and single parents. 

 

(1645) 

 

I'm not here to argue for or against homosexuality any more 

than I am here to argue for or against receipt of public 

assistance or single parenthood.  What I do wish to make clear 

is that I believe wholeheartedly in removing barriers which 

prevent any individual from enjoying life without 

discrimination or persecution from any other individual who 

may consider him or herself more deserving of basic human 

rights than a homosexual, a welfare recipient, or a single 

parent. 

 

I am clearly on record as saying that people should be free from 

harassment, free from prejudice.  It is my firm belief that we as 

a society should be the beneficiaries of the strengths of 

individuals being developed to their fullest.  It is the duty of 

government to ensure that this happens, the responsibility of 

government once it has decided to address such an important 

issue as amendments to the Human Rights Code, to ensure that 

the changes proposed will, if passed, achieve the intended 

objective. 

 

Philosophically I agree with the speech presented by the Hon. 

Minister of Justice about a week ago.  However a great speech 

cannot be mistaken for a great piece of legislation. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan should not be asked to trust 

political rhetoric no matter how well meaning, no matter how 

judicious.  The people of Saskatchewan who have expressed 

generosity tempered with caution about this legislation have a 

right to be heard.  They have a right to have their concerns 

addressed too.  And as a politician I have promised my 

constituents and others who have written to me about 

this Bill, that I would ask legal authorities to determine whether 

this legislation would serve its purpose and no more than its 

intended purpose. 

 

What my constituents do not want to see is for this legislation 

to become a legal testing ground for demands which exceed the 

intent of freedom from discrimination.  Like the majority of my 

constituents, I am prepared to support legislation which 

prohibits discrimination against homosexuals from obtaining 

and maintaining their employment on the basis of their sexual 

orientation.  Like the majority of my constituents, I am 

prepared to support legislation which prohibits the exclusion of 

homosexuals from housing or rental accommodation. 

 

But it is incumbent upon me to indicate what the majority of 

my constituents do not want this Bill to include.  Mr. Speaker, 

my constituents are not prepared to support legislation which 

will recognize same-sex marriages, spousal benefits for 

homosexual partners, or the rights for homosexuals to adopt 

children.  What is of great significance then to the majority of 

Saskatoon Greystone residents is whether this legislation 

includes, or is open to the inclusion of, additional rights. 

 

The problem which we have here, Mr. Speaker, is that while 

any reasoned individual may be inclined to write off criticism 

of this Bill as bias or outright prejudice, there is some 

significant reason to believe some of these concerns which 

have been raised.  Mr. Speaker, there is significant reason to 

believe that what the Minister of Justice is telling us is not 

exactly the case, and there is reason to believe that this Bill 

could indeed lead to additional other rights. 

 

The significant reason to believe some of the concerns that 

have been raised originate with the highest court in the land, 

the Supreme Court of Canada.  Comments made by the Chief 

Justice of the Supreme Court, Justice Lamer, demonstrate that 

the Minister of Justice has not fully explained the issue to the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Justice minister's speech on second reading of 

this Bill included two major arguments.  The first of those 

arguments is that the amendments he is proposing are only 

intended to make Saskatchewan's Human Rights Code measure 

up to the common law developed through the legal battles in 

the courts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister's second argument is that Bill 38 does 

not extend to homosexuals further rights, including pension 

benefits, marital status, or the right to adopt.  And while the 

minister gave an articulate, and indeed a passionate speech, the 

problem is that the content may not be accurate. 

 

The minister's arguments and assurances are suspect in light of 

recent decisions in journal articles addressing constitutional 

law.  In the last year, four significant decisions were rendered 

that have some bearing on sexual orientation issues.  And while 

that sounds as though all of the legal bugs have been worked 

out, the reality is quite far removed. 



May 18, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1805 

The first legal problem is that there were two cases on sexual 

orientation which came to opposite and conflicting conclusions.  

Unfortunately the minister only referred to one of these in his 

speech.  By doing so he avoided explaining all the factors that 

affect sexual orientation as an issue. 

 

The Haig case, about which the minister spoke, came down last 

August.  It ruled that the Canadian Human Rights Code should 

be interpreted in spirit to include sexual orientation.  The 

justices involved in this case at the Ontario Court of Appeal 

went one step further.  They cited the Schachter judgement 

from the Supreme Court of Canada which stated that in certain 

quite confined circumstances courts could make legislation 

conform to the charter.  Under this decision, courts can achieve 

this by, and I quote: "reading in."  Or in other words adding to 

the text of legislation.  In this case they felt they should add 

sexual orientation to the list of prohibited grounds for 

discrimination. 

 

If that were the only case, the minister would be correct in 

saying that we must change our Human Rights Code to ensure 

that it conforms with the charter.  However, it is not the only 

case. 

 

The minister failed to refer to the other case which conflicts 

with the ruling in the Haig case.  The other legal case to which 

the minister did not refer was the Nielsen case which dealt with 

the constitutionality of the Canadian Human Rights Act.  As 

the Act current reads, it does not include sexual orientation as a 

prohibited ground for discrimination.  This case was decided in 

the trial division of the federal court.  The justices of the federal 

court decided that the Charter of Rights and Freedoms did not 

include sexual orientation as a prohibited ground for 

discrimination.  Contrary to the judgement in the Haig case, 

Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Human Rights Act was considered 

to be valid and constitutionally sound. 

 

So what we have here, Mr. Speaker, are two cases, each dealing 

with the same piece of legislation on the issue of sexual 

orientation.  They were fought at the same level and both came 

to opposing conclusions.  While one cited the Supreme Court's 

ruling that courts can add to legislation in confined 

circumstances, the problem remains that the constitutionality of 

sexual orientation and section 15 of the charter has not been 

resolved. 

 

And contrary to the Minister of Justice's assurances, Mr. 

Speaker, the reality is there is no definitive answer on the issue 

because in both cases both sides failed to appeal to the Supreme 

Court of Canada.  They did not appeal despite invitations to do 

so by the court itself.  Hence we have a situation where we do 

not know whether our Human Rights Code is unconstitutional.  

If sexual orientation is ruled to be a prohibited grounds for 

discrimination under the Charter of Rights, then Saskatchewan 

will have to quickly change its code to make it conform.  Until 

someone challenges this to the highest court in the land, the 

Supreme Court, we will never know. 

The second and more serious of the problems with the 

arguments presented by the Minister of Justice relates to the 

Mossop case, dealt with by the Supreme Court of Canada in 

February, 1993. 

 

Unfortunately this case did not deal with the constitutionality of 

sexual orientation but instead with family status under the 

Canadian Human Rights Act.  The issue at hand involved a 

federal civil servant who was denied a day of bereavement 

leave to go to a partner's father's funeral.  He argued that family 

status, which is included in the code as a prohibited grounds for 

discrimination, included sexual orientation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the court ruled and the court ruled four to three 

against interpreting family status to include sexual orientation.  

The justices were as divided as they could get on this, and what 

is of most significance, however, are the comments made by 

Chief Justice Lamer in his ruling. 

 

After giving his ruling, Justice Lamer said, and I quote: 

 

This decision should not be interpreted as meaning that 

homosexual couples cannot be interpreted as a family for 

the purposes of legislation other than the Canadian Human 

Rights Act.  In this regard each statute must be interpreted 

in its own context. 

 

The judge also did not rule out the possibility that concepts of 

individual prohibited grounds for discrimination may overlap.  

An example of this is that if sexual orientation is a prohibited 

grounds for discrimination, then it might have some bearing on 

the interpretation of family status for this Act and other Acts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what the justice of the Supreme Court was 

implying is that if we were to add other grounds for 

discrimination to our Human Rights Code, other grounds like 

sexual orientation, it will be open to the interpretation of the 

courts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we have is the Saskatchewan Minister of 

Justice trying to assure the people of our province who are 

concerned about this Bill that adding sexual orientation will 

only affect hiring and employment practices, will only affect 

accommodation and housing.  On the other hand, we have the 

Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Canada, an individual 

who will have great influence in how the amendments of this 

Bill are determined, telling us that he may interpret it to mean 

more. 

 

What does all this mean, Mr. Speaker?  Well it means that if 

Saskatchewan is to add the term sexual orientation to the 

Human Rights Code, despite the minister's assurances, there are 

no guarantees that Bill 38 is limited to just offering protection 

in the workplace and place of residence.  This possibility is 

confirmed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of 

Canada. 

 

Adding sexual orientation to the code, as the Supreme 



1806 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 1993 

Court Chief Justice warned, does not rule out the possibility 

that in a legal challenge the court might interpret it to mean a 

change to the idea of family status.  If that happens, this could 

have a bearing on Acts such as The Adoption Act, a variety of 

pension and tax Acts, as well as The Marriage Act.  The 

definition of family could change contrary to the wishes of 

people who live in my constituency.  And there are no 

guarantees, and Justice Lamer's comments confirm that. 

 

Add to this the questionable constitutionality of sexual 

orientation because of no Supreme Court ruling, and there is a 

recipe for confusion, which is really what we're here to make 

more clear. 

 

Another legitimate concern made by some individuals can be 

found by reading the Bill itself.  In the words of one lawyer 

who reviewed the proposed legislation out of several on my 

behalf, a person could draft amendments to this Bill for a 

month and it would not provide adequate reassurances that 

other Acts would not be affected. 

 

While section 47 is a concern because it may allow for 

affirmative action programs, it also raises other concerns.  This 

concern deals with education.  Under section 47 or clause 18 of 

the Bill, the Human Rights Commission can force someone 

contravening the Act to implement a program to redress the 

damages and ensure they cannot be committed again. 

 

The problem is that there is no limit on what program the 

Human Rights Commission might introduce.  It is a judgement 

call on what they could do to re-educate people committing an 

offence.  It is an indisputable fact that many Saskatchewan 

people could benefit from programs that would reduce 

discriminatory and intolerant thinking.  However, this section 

requires greater specificity. 

 

A similar difficulty is found in section 25 of the Act which is 

amended under this Bill.  Section 25 lays out the 

responsibilities of the commission, one of which is education 

against discrimination.  Could that responsibility involve seeing 

the board do what many fear and have raised, and that is to 

promote a particular lifestyle? 

 

Well I imagine that individuals like Donna Greschner, the chief 

commissioner of the Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Commission, would exercise common sense.  There are 

grounds to imagine that these concerns have a foundation, 

however reasonable or unreasonable they may seem. 

 

Another real concern in the Act is in the new section 38(3).  

Under this section anyone can bring an action against anyone 

contravening the Act or attempting to contravene the Act 

through the courts.  The amendments in Bill 38 . . . 

 

(1700) 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Why is the member on his feet? 

Mr. Koenker: -- Mr. Speaker, my understanding is that 

reference to specific sections of legislation is not to be made in 

second-reading speeches.  Would you clarify that, please. 

 

The Speaker: -- I want to speak very briefly to the point of 

order that is made, the point of order that the member speaks 

to.  I think in this legislature there has been always a broad 

interpretation, and the Speakers have allowed the members to 

refer to sections of the Bill.  I do want to advise the member 

from Saskatoon Greystone that she should not get into the 

clauses of the Bill.  And I think in one reference she did refer to 

a clause of the particular Bill. 

 

Don't get into the detailed arguments of the clauses of the Bill.  

Those should be reserved for Committee of the Whole, and in 

second reading we really should be referring to the principle of 

the Bill.  So if you refer to any sections, do it in general terms. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am sorry if I 

was being too specific.  I actually thought I was making general 

comment. 

 

The amendments in Bill 38 include making attempts to 

contravene the Act an offence, and that is probably a just 

reform.  The real problem with portions of this Bill, however, is 

that previously the judge was only allowed to restrain 

offenders; now a judge can make any order he sees fit.  Does 

this mean they can introduce any kind of action that they 

choose, affirmative action programs, etc.? 

 

Questions are left unanswered, Mr. Speaker, and they represent 

gaping holes in this particular piece of legislation.  For the 

minister to leave gaping holes in an Act such as this is quite 

unacceptable.  While most people want to see people, 

homosexuals, protected from discrimination in seeking 

employment, in protection in their jobs, and in housing, they 

want to be fully aware as to how far this will go. 

 

Given the legal turmoil and the possibility expressed by the 

Chief Justice that this could be interpreted to mean something 

different with sweeping ramifications, I must conclude that the 

minister failed to provide important public reassurances within 

this Bill. 

 

When analysing and consulting on this Bill and through the 

letters and the many telephone calls about this Bill, I really am 

impressed by the fairness expressed by most people in 

Saskatchewan toward protecting their fellow citizens from 

discrimination and denial of the right to fair employment and 

housing. 

 

I find it most unfortunate that the government has intentionally 

or unintentionally given two different groups of people entirely 

different impressions of what this Bill may or may not do.  In 

speaking with many members of the gay community, I am left 

with the feeling that they fully expect that the Bill may provide 

for recognition of family status in same-sex 



May 18, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1807 

relationships as time goes on.  Yet the Minister of Justice stood 

in this very legislature and assured the public that this is not the 

case. 

 

I see that as some evasion of responsibility on the part of 

government which has an obligation to clearly define the 

parameters of legislation, particularly on a sensitive issue such 

as this, so that people are comfortable with what is being voted 

upon and what its complete implications will be, without 

having to rely on the courts for ongoing interpretation. 

 

The most unfortunate thing in all of this is that the government 

has now brought two separate issues to the table, Mr. Speaker: 

the issue of family status which is the desire of so many 

same-sex couples, and the issue of discrimination against gays 

in the workplace and in living accommodation. 

 

Now I recognize that there are issues supposedly not 

encompassed by this legislation which are of tremendous 

importance to the gay community.  There are many in society 

who have fears and suspicions about homosexuals largely, I 

believe, because they have not knowingly been associated with 

gay individuals in their careers or in their family and social 

interactions.  Most often those fears and misgivings are based 

on a lack of exposure and knowledge. 

 

I have personally known, worked with, and become friends 

with a great many people in my life in numerous careers and 

activities.  Some of these people are homosexual.  Some are 

open about their homosexuality; others must hide it from their 

employers out of fear of losing their jobs, even their families, 

out of fear of rejection. 

 

I understand because of my interaction with these individuals 

that they have the same emotions, the same concerns, the same 

dreams in their lives as any other individuals in society.  I 

understand that sexual preferences aside, same-sex couples 

experience the same intensity in their relationships as those of 

us in our heterosexual relationships.  These men and women 

enjoy the same joys, the same disappointments, the same pain 

when relationships fail, the same fears when a partner becomes 

ill, the same sorrow and grief when a partner dies.  Many in 

society think that it is only people in heterosexual relationships 

who have cornered the market on what they term "normal" 

emotions. 

 

It is difficult for me to do what I feel must be done in opposing 

this Bill in its present form because no matter how my 

argument is presented, there will be some in society who will 

believe that any recognition of homosexuals is wrong.  And 

some who will believe that it does not matter if the government 

misleads the public about the potentialities of this Bill, because 

it does not go far enough.  And there will be some in this very 

Assembly and in society who are more interested in the politics 

of the issue than in its humanity. 

 

But public policy making is difficult and I accept my 

responsibility in it.  I, like you, am not elected to promote or to 

oppose homosexuality.  This is an issue 

that should be left to the individual.  I am not interested in 

engaging in battle with extremists on this or any other issue.  I 

am elected to ensure that our society is as fair and just as it can 

be and to reflect the wishes of the majority of the people who 

reside in my constituency. 

 

The majority of the people in my constituency, the people I am 

elected and paid to speak for, have given me a very clear 

message.  They are willing to support Bill 38 if it protects 

homosexuals, single parents, and welfare recipients from 

discrimination respecting their employment and their living 

accommodation.  I believe that to be reflective of the 

humanitarian and religious make-up of my constituency.  And I 

am proud to stand and represent the points of view today in this 

Assembly of those men and women. 

 

But I want to ensure that what I am voting on, what my 

constituents think I am voting on, is a Bill which does what the 

government purports it will do.  Therefore I see this as much of 

an issue of public trust as I see it as an issue of human rights. 

 

If the government with its overwhelming majority does not 

wish to present a Bill which may be the subject of court 

challenges on the issue of family status, then it should be 

willing to offer the public some assurance other than that of 

politicians that the Bill does no more and no less. 

 

If it is the intention of government to present a Bill which 

leaves itself open to the interpretation of endless court battles, 

then government should have the courage to be straight with 

people about whether those possibilities exist. 

 

This is not a case, Mr. Speaker, of my lawyer is smarter than 

your lawyer or I have more legal opinions than you do so I 

must be right.  This is a case of having within our system an 

authority in the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal which can give 

us a legally technical and objective opinion which will be 

accepted by the public as being at arm's length from politics. 

 

We have such a tool and I am saying that we should use it.  

When there is a reasonable doubt, as I believe there is in this 

case, then extra measures should be undertaken to remove 

those doubts one way or the other.  Failure to do so is in large 

measure the betrayal of public trust. 

 

If we as MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) are to 

attempt to represent the wishes of our constituents with respect 

to legislation of a sensitive nature, then we must be absolutely 

clear as a collective body about what the legislation does. 

 

No matter what the issue, there will be differing opinions.  That 

is democracy.  But I believe that all of us must be able to 

explain without any doubt what the impact of this legislation 

will be before telling people that it does nothing beyond its 

intent.  From this perspective, the rights of the majority which 

must be respected as fully and as dutifully as the rights of those 

against whom discrimination is levelled. 



1808 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 1993 

Some have raised the use of a referendum or plebiscite on this 

issue, and I ask the question why.  Why would we incur the 

expense when all that is required is for each member in this 

Assembly to do the primary job they have been elected to do, 

namely represent their constituents. 

 

This leads to the use of a free-standing vote which the 

Saskatchewan Liberal Party promoted during the election on 

issues such as this.  We as a group of candidates chose because 

of a wide range of personal views of how we would approach 

any kind of issue of a sensitive nature, and we said we had a 

primary responsibility to our constituents and needed to 

reconcile our own personal views with those of our 

constituents. 

 

Why?  Because, Mr. Speaker, this is not simply about an 

individual member's personal point of view.  This is about 

giving a voice to the views of one's constituents and reconciling 

the difference between the convictions of the member and his 

or her constituents, if there is one. 

 

Most importantly, this is about public trust, which I guess is not 

a topic that's of terribly great importance to the members 

opposite, in other words, ensuring that the government is 

presenting the contents and implications of this Bill accurately 

and honestly to all of the public. 

 

The government is on record for saying that it does not support 

through this Bill, and I quote "the recognition of homosexual 

marriages."  It says, quote: "there is nothing in this Bill which 

speaks to the question of the entitlement of homosexual 

partners to spousal benefits." 

 

The minister speaking on behalf of the government says, and I 

quote: "there is nothing in this Bill which affects the adoption 

of children."  The government indicates that, and I quote: "this 

is not the thin edge of the wedge on the question of the legal 

position of homosexuals.  So far as this government is 

concerned, the law will go this far and no farther." 

 

The government is on record for saying that it wishes for this 

Bill to only protect homosexuals from discrimination in the 

workplace and in seeking living accommodations.  It is on 

record for saying that Bill 38 does that and only that with 

regard to rights for homosexuals. 

 

If indeed they believe all of these things, they should not 

hesitate to send the Bill to the Court of Appeal for review.  This 

would not have to tie this Bill up forever.  It would provide 

assurance to everyone as well as providing support to the 

government, if the government is correct in its own analysis. 

 

I know that gay and lesbian people would prefer that the Bill 

did go further than its intent as outlined by the Justice minister.  

If the government in fact agrees that there should be spousal 

benefits, if they agree there should be adoption rights, if they 

agree that there should be a recognition of same-sex marriages, 

then it 

should have the courage to entrench those rights in its 

legislation. 

 

It is unfair to all people to have government either misrepresent 

its intentions or make legislation obscure enough to result in 

endless court challenges. 

 

But we in this Assembly should not have to second-guess 

legislation.  My job is to examine the contents of the proposed 

legislation, to determine whether it is going to do what it is 

stated it is intended to do, to make public the contradictions 

and/or implications and to make recommendations, and I am 

doing just that.  How can, and why should, any member of the 

public trust the government if they discover that the 

government is forcefully telling them one thing with assurance, 

but valid questions dictate that they may not be telling the 

truth? 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, it is not out of a lack of sensitivity for 

barriers faced by same-sex couples, not out of prejudice or a 

lack of understanding for the discrimination faced by gays that 

I am withholding my support of this legislation pending its 

clarification.  It is simply a matter of balancing the intended 

objective of this legislation with protection of the public trust in 

the institution of government, to pass legislation which does 

what politicians promise it will do. 

 

(1715) 

 

This is an underlying foundation of democracy and should be 

of paramount concern to us all regardless of the issue under 

discussion at any time in our history.  As British author 

Charlotte Bront said in the 1800s, and I quote: 

 

Prejudices, it is well known, are the most difficult to 

eradicate from the heart whose soil has never been 

loosened or fertilized by education: they grow there firm 

as weeds among stones. 

 

I am pleased to say that the constituents of Saskatoon 

Greystone want to see homosexuals protected from 

discrimination in employment and in the procurement of 

housing.  They want those protections placed in the Human 

Rights Code, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It is clear from the legal confusion in the courts, the lack of 

clear constitutional answers on this issue, and clear comments 

made by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court that this Bill, 

Bill 38 may do precisely what the minister says it will not do.  

This is unacceptable to my constituents and to many other 

residents in this province who want solid assurances that this 

Bill will do what the minister claims it will do, and nothing 

more. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is unfortunate that in the government's 

undertakings to introduce change in Saskatchewan, whether it 

is in health care, agriculture, education, or human rights 

legislation, and in spite of the time that they have had to 

prepare and the resources at their disposal, they've done a less 

than adequate job of providing legislation which ensures that it 

will deliver 



May 18, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1809 

on its intended objective as presented to the public. 

 

As someone who has supported health care reform for the last 

several years, I had to vote against Bill No. 3, An Act 

respecting Health Districts, because it would not accomplish 

the stated objective and was, in my opinion, a poorly drafted 

piece of work granting far too much power to the minister. 

 

As one who supports equality and freedom from discrimination 

no matter what the group in question, I would not in good 

conscience support a Bill which without amendment leaves 

gaping holes for legal challenges -- legal challenges which may 

in the end extend the scope of the Bill to do far more than the 

minister and his government intended it to achieve. 

 

Mr. Speaker, having resolved this issue between my 

conscience, the desires of my constituents, and the leadership 

role we each hold as legislators, I must stand in my place and 

ask the Minister of Justice to refer Bill 38.  I urge the members 

opposite and the minister to refer this Bill to the Saskatchewan 

Court of Appeal through The Constitutional Questions Act. 

 

By using this process the government can determine whether 

sexual orientation is covered by the equality provisions of the 

Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  What is required is for the 

court to determine the parameters of the term "sexual 

orientation" as it is contained in Bill No. 38. 

 

Referring this Bill to the Court of Appeal would provide the 

guarantees sought by the constituents of Saskatoon Greystone 

and many residents across this province that this Bill will do 

only what it is intended to do.  If the government is confident 

of this, it should have no qualms about doing so. 

 

Should the minister and the members opposite fail to withdraw 

Bill 38, I ask them to do the honourable thing and extend the 

privilege which I enjoy today.  I urge this government to allow 

each member a free vote.  That is what had been decided by the 

Liberal Party that each and every one of our members would be 

able to do if they were in this Assembly, and that is what I 

stand before you and request today.  Let each member vote 

according to his own conscience.  Let each vote according to 

the will of their constituents.  Let each vote according to what 

they believe is in the best interests of the people of the 

province. 

 

And it is incumbent upon each member of this Assembly to 

become educated about the contents of this Bill and not simply 

to accept the word from cabinet on high, as they do with 

everything else.  I would hope that we are all compassionate 

and charitable people, but we must be able to speak 

authoritatively and truthfully to the people of Saskatchewan 

based upon a full understanding of the implications of Bill No. 

38 and any other controversial legislation before this House.  

All Saskatchewan residents, be they homosexual or 

heterosexual, deserve for this legislation to be well drafted. 

 

Now I have spent some time in this legislature -- not a 

great deal of time -- but I am guided by a particular prayer and 

I shall end with it, Mr. Speaker:  God, please treat me 

tomorrow as I have treated others today. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move adjournment of the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 34 -- An Act to amend The SaskEnergy Act 

 

The Chair: -- I will ask the minister to introduce his official to 

the committee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have with 

me today Robert Haynes.  He is general counsel for 

SaskEnergy. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

appreciate the confidence you have in your help there; you just 

brought one.  So we'll try to be as easy on him as we can. 

 

First of all, Mr. Minister, could you explain to me what you 

hope to do with this Bill?  What is the purpose of this Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- There are two purposes for the Bill. First 

off, the proposed amendment to section 12 is necessary to 

clarify the corporation's position with respect to its exposure to 

liability.  The second amendment deals with section 59 of The 

SaskEnergy Act and it's necessary to clarify the corporation's 

position with respect to payments in lieu of taxes for direct 

sales customers.  Without the amendment to section 59 the 

corporation is obligated to make global payments in lieu of 

taxes to municipalities regardless of the corporation's ability to 

collect the surcharge from the direct sales customers. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, could we have an 

example of what you just explained there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- In regard to the amendment to section 

59 of The SaskEnergy Act, this came about with deregulation 

in the direct sale companies that operate within Saskatchewan.  

For example, right now there could be a case where a customer 

who is on direct sale could refuse or not pay the transportation 

charge.  We would have some problem.  We'd have to take 

legal recourse to go after that charge and we would still be 

obligated to pay the municipality in the . . . payment in lieu of 

taxes.  So this just makes it so that . . . it makes it very clear 

that the customer on direct sale has to pay the surcharge, which 

is in turn passed on to the municipality. 

 

In terms of liability, it was a bit of an oversight, I guess, in the 

original drafting of the Bill, and this gives greater clarification 

into when SaskEnergy would be liable and it could save, I 

suppose, some frivolous and 



1810 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 1993 

vexatious actions on behalf of individuals or I guess individuals 

or corporations that may end up taking us to court.  It clarifies 

where SaskEnergy would accept liability. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  In 59 I have a couple 

of things that I'd like to develop with you.  Who is a customer 

under this?  Who is a customer?  We're talking about customers 

of a subsidiary.  Is that oil companies? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- It could be a customer of SaskEnergy, 

for example, the many industrial, commercial, and residential 

customers that we have within the province that purchase 

natural gas and have it delivered through the TransGas system.  

It could also, I understand, mean a producer who uses the 

TransGas system to transport their gas from one point to 

another, from the producing area to the market. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  One other thing I'd 

like to draw to your attention.  You're saying here, in 

accordance with regulations, and you can pay such amounts as 

collected.  This appears to me to be taxation by regulation and 

not by legislation.  Don't you think that's a little bit of a 

slippery slope to get started on? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- The regulation basically, hon. member, 

sets out a formula by which the rate is calculated.  And within 

that rate of calculation there are some variables that move from 

time to time, for example, the price of natural gas, what 

SaskEnergy of course would have to pay for it from a producer.  

And I don't think we'd want to come back to the Legislative 

Assembly each time the price of natural gas changed on the 

spot market or medium- or long-term contracts. 

 

Therefore we'd want you to have some comfort in the formula 

itself.  We believe that the formula is fair.  And the reason it's 

in regulation is we wouldn't want to come back to the 

Legislative Assembly each time the price of natural gas 

changed. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  That helps a little 

bit.  From what you said I understand now is that based on the 

formula that's put into the Act is the only change that would 

happen to the payments made to . . . Okay. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I would correct you just a little bit if I 

understand what you're saying.  The formula is not in the 

legislation; the formula is in the regulations.  And you'd be 

more than welcome -- the regulations are public -- to look at 

that formula. 

 

If you had some concerns about the formula, I'd certainly be 

happy to hear those from you.  But both the formula and the 

rate would be set by regulation.  It's the formula though, I 

think, that's important to you, to have some level of comfort 

that the formula in fact is fair. 

 

(1730) 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Then I think the way 

I understand this is . . . the formula is in the Act? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- No. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- No.  It's not in the legislation?  No.  It's just 

done by regulation.  Then I come back to my original question 

-- that taxation can be changed by regulation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Yes, that's correct.  And I think I 

explained that in that the reason you want it in the regulations 

is because of some of the variable prices that we have no 

control over that move from time to time.  And as those costs 

change, we pass that on to the customer. 

 

There's an enabling section within the Act that allows the 

formula to be set in regulation and the rate to be set from that 

formula. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, what consultations do you have with the industry 

when you look at the formula?  Now I think it's fair enough to 

say that as the prices change, the amount of taxation will 

change on the formula because the price component will have 

changed.  But when you change the formula, do you have any 

consultation with the industry prior to that?  Or how do you 

handle that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- In this particular change we consulted 

with SIGUA, the Saskatchewan Industrial Gas Users 

Association and also with SUMA who are actually affected by 

this.  And they were consulted, I understand, prior to the 

regulation being put into place.  So there was that consultation 

with those two major user groups that would be affected by the 

regulation. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- What kind of a comfort level could you 

give those groups that regulations would not be changed simply 

by the government without consultation and without agreement 

by those groups? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well we do have a policy of 

consultation.  I would not want there to be a change in the 

formula without having consultation.  I would give you that 

commitment as the minister in charge, and I would instruct the 

employees at SaskEnergy not to change the formula unless 

there was consultation with those groups. 

 

I cannot assure you that there would be consultation when the 

rate changes because sometimes that rate can change because 

of the variables that we have absolutely no control over.  As 

much as we can, if we have advance warning that the rates are 

going to change, I have already in the past instructed the 

SaskEnergy officials to inform the stakeholder groups that 

some change could be coming down because of variables that 

we in fact don't have control over. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, if those variables are 

built into the formula, I believe that the 



May 18, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1811 

various groups then would understand and anticipate those 

changes.  But it's when you change the formula structure, when 

you change perhaps the percentages in that formula so that the 

government would get a higher percentage out of the taxes, that 

I think is where industry would have some very serious 

concerns, that before you change that, that you consult with 

them and you get their agreement on those changes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well I can't always promise you that 

we'd have total agreement, but we certainly will consult.  I've 

instructed the SaskEnergy officials that they would not be 

allowed to put a regulation through, which has to go through a 

regulations committee of cabinet of which I'm also a member.  

They would not be changing the regulations without extensive 

consultation with the stakeholder groups. 

 

As to whether or not there would be total agreement and arrive 

at consensus if there was a change coming, I can't assure you 

that.  But I certainly can assure you that there would be 

advance consultation that would be meaningful to the 

stakeholder groups. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 44 -- An Act respecting the Inspection of Gas 

Installations and Gas Equipment 

 

The Chair: -- When his officials join him, I'll ask the Minister 

of Energy to introduce his officials for consideration of this Bill 

to the committee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I have with me Tony Vournazos and Jim 

Mitchell.  Jim Mitchell is closest to me and Tony is the 

gentleman in the dark suit further down from him. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, could 

you tell me who the government consulted before you brought 

this Bill in. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- There was a good amount of internal 

consultation within government.  There was a lot of debate at 

one time whether or not part of the gas installation should go 

under SaskEnergy.  It was determined that there was potential 

conflict of interest there.  It was expressed to us by a number of 

people in the private sector.  They felt there was a conflict of 

interest.  We looked at the wisdom of their representations and 

decided that yes, the gas inspection should remain under 

SaskPower. 

 

We also consulted with the chief inspector and the 

superintendents who are involved in this work on a day-to-day 

basis. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Was the industry 

itself consulted? 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- There are meetings from time to time 

between the Crown and those people in the private sector, and 

it was raised at individual meetings.  There was no special, 

formalized consultation process, but there was an exchange in 

feedback at these meetings that are held from time to time with 

the chief inspector. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- I guess I was thinking in terms of the gas-fitters 

and those kind of people.  Have you had any feedback from 

them in opposition to this Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- We've had no negative feedback.  The 

feedback we have had is supportive, and the industry in fact -- 

I'm told by the officials -- supports the amendments we're 

dealing with here today. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Could I ask at whose 

request was these changes made, was the Bill introduced?  Who 

requested the Bill to be introduced? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Both chief inspectors because there was 

some ambiguity in terms of the carrying out of this service.  

And I guess basically it goes back to a period of time where 

there's a bit of a learning curve, I suppose you could view it as, 

when SaskEnergy was split off from their traditional place 

within the Saskatchewan Power Corporation.  Now that we 

have SaskPower and SaskEnergy as separate entities unto 

themselves as Crown corporations, it was determined that there 

was a need for this, and the chief inspectors basically were the 

ones who identified this need.  And it was identified also 

because of concerns of those people that are involved in the 

private sector. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Could you tell us 

what additional cost will be incurred by this Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- There are no costs incurred by the Bill 

that would be identifiable as extra costs because of the changes 

we're making here today. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Before I go on, Mr. 

Minister, I'd like to commend the government for section 10.  

Section 10 deals with search and seizure, and the NDP have 

made it necessary for a warrant to be issued before a search can 

be conducted.  We asked for that repeatedly last year, Mr. 

Minister, and I want to commend you on having put that 

section 10 in there.  We think it was needed, and we appreciate 

your taking our recommendations and inserted it into this Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well I thank you for that.  This Bill and 

also the one that follows are our response to being more 

efficient and taking into consideration the job that has to be 

done by the inspectors. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 31 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 32 



1812 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 1993 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In clause 32 of the 

printed Bill, I would like to: 

 

Amend clause 32 of the printed Bill by adding 

immediately after the words "subsection (2)" where they 

appear in subclause (1) thereof the following: 

 

", provided that no such fixing of costs shall be of any 

effect unless and until approved by the Legislative 

Assembly or any committee thereof established for the 

purpose of reviewing such fixing of costs". 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Yes, I'd just like to respond to that.  I 

appreciate the member's intent by the amendment.  I don't 

know that if we took it to its logical conclusion that the 

member would want the Assembly to get involved in the 

business of setting the fees.  Just by knowing, yourself, the 

process in the Assembly, it could become quite cumbersome. 

 

What I suggest to you as an alternative, that you're more than 

welcome to examine these, have full examination of them when 

we come before the Crown Corporations Committee with 

SaskPower.  And I think that we can have full examination. 

 

Right now when we look at the fees in Saskatchewan, to give 

some comfort, we are lower than most provinces.  In fact there 

are only three provinces that have lower fees than we do at the 

present time.  The province of Manitoba is lower, the province 

of Prince Edward Island is lower, and Yukon Territory is 

lower.  We don't have the data on the province of Quebec or 

Newfoundland.  But if you look at B.C. (British Columbia), 

Alberta, the Northwest Territories, New Brunswick, Ontario -- 

all of their fees are substantially higher than the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So based on the cumbersome process of passing fees through 

the Assembly, I'd say that I apologize for not being able to 

accept that, but I would want the minister . . . or the hon. 

member to put us through full examination when we come 

before the Crown Corporations Committee on the issue of fees. 

 

(1745) 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I want to point out 

something to you, and that is you have made an 

acknowledgement that fees would be going up on a regular 

basis.  You hadn't said anything as to whether there was a need.  

And I don't think that we can talk about the fees being lower 

than some other area.  That doesn't make them cheaper. 

 

I think what we have to look at is the cost to us for the product 

rather than compare it with Ontario for instance.  The cost to 

Ontario could be very high.  So we would like to have a little 

more say in the raising of fees rather than just do it on an 

annual basis whether you needed the income or not.  That's 

precisely what the amendment would do. 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well gas fees -- I'm not sure if I 

understand the member's line of questioning -- but gas fees 

have not gone up now for seven years, I believe it is, and we 

are actually running a deficit.  If the member is suggesting that 

we increase the fees, that may be something that we can look 

at, but we'd want some consultation on that. 

 

Right now the deficit in the gas inspection . . . or does that 

include gas and electrical?  If you include gas and electrical 

inspection fees together, we run a deficit currently of about 

$1.7 million a year. 

 

And as I said earlier and I repeat, for seven years the gas fees 

have not gone up.  So we don't expect to have regular and large 

increases, but I'd certainly be willing to sit down and talk with 

the member about how we recover the $1.7 million deficit 

within this inspection program. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  One of the 

reasons this amendment was brought forward, Mr. Minister, is 

that for the issue of accountability.  The Premier and a couple 

of the other ministers have stated that there will be regular 

increases in some of the costs such as SaskTel rates, SGI 

(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) rates, SaskPower rates. 

 

And our concern is that some of the fee schedules within this 

Bill that are controlled under this Bill may also be increased at 

a regular rate irregardless or regardless of the actual necessity 

for those fee increases, but simply that they will be raised on a 

regular basis.  And we believe that there should be some 

measure of accountability to the legislature, to the province, for 

those fee increases. 

 

Donald Gass in the Gass Commission report recommended that 

those kind of fee increases, those kind of fees be looked after 

by a committee of the legislature, that those fee requests go to a 

committee of the legislature and then to the the legislature itself 

through the committee.  And this amendment is proposed to 

work towards that -- that either it come to the legislature or that 

a committee be set up and structured to allow those fee requests 

to go to that committee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well I understand what the member is 

saying.  The comment that you're referring to deals with the 

actual rates charged to customers.  The last time I believe that 

the SaskPower rates went up for electrical users, it was stated at 

that time that there would rather be a move towards regular 

increases than waiting till we fall into a large deficit position 

and having a large increase that was unacceptable. 

 

What you're basically talking about now is a public utilities 

review commission or something similar to that.  And I know 

under the previous administration there was a Public Utilities 

Review Commission and it was abolished. 

 

I think that in the long term we have to look at review of utility 

rates.  I don't think there's any question about 



May 18, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1813 

that.  But to do that by bringing gas inspection fees before the 

Assembly, I just don't think you would find to be something 

that would be acceptable to you or to the public. 

 

If you're talking about something that's broader than that so that 

it's a public utilities review, then certainly that's something 

that's inevitable down the road.  And we have to work together 

to figure out the best way to do that. 

 

In fact I'd go so far as to predict that if we don't do something 

over time or show movement in that direction, that there could 

well be a federal regulatory body that would look at some of 

the things that happen within the province regarding our 

utilities, especially when we export outside of the province, 

whether it be to one of our neighbouring provinces or whether 

it's to the United States of America. 

 

But I think that what you're talking about is something quite 

different from the fees here for gas inspection and the next Bill 

being on electrical inspection.  It's a much broader picture that . 

. . I grant it; we do have to look at it.  And I think the better 

place to deal with that is in the Crown Corporations Committee 

and to try and work together there to decide the best format in 

which we have a more transparent system of looking at our 

utility rates. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to 

move an amendment to clause 32(a).  This is much the same as 

the other one, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to: 

 

Amend clause 32 of the printed Bill by adding 

immediately after the word "regulations" where it appears 

in subclause (2) thereof the following: 

 

", provided that no such fees or costs shall be of any effect 

unless and until approved by the Legislative Assembly or 

any committee thereof established for the purpose of 

reviewing such fees or costs". 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Again I understand the intent of the hon. 

member, but I find it to be not acceptable at this time for the 

same reasons as your previous amendment was.  I really 

appreciate your intent and what it is you're trying to do.  But I 

think when you narrow it into the specifics of one inspection 

fee, in this case on gas inspections, that it just becomes 

unworkable.  Because if you carry that through to the logical 

conclusion, that would mean that every rate and fee would 

come before this Assembly or some committee that's not yet set 

up. 

 

(1645) 

 

I'm willing to work towards what I think the intent of the 

member to be.  I'm willing to work with him on 

that, but not in this format.  It just becomes too unworkable, 

and we could spend all the time of this Assembly dealing with 

rates and fees and schedules.  And I don't think that's the intent 

of the member.  So I apologize for not being able to accept that 

amendment. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 32 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 33 to 42 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 45 -- An Act respecting the Inspection of Electrical 

Equipment, Installations, and Materials 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, again 

I would like to ask at whose request was this Bill introduced? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- It would be the same as the answers I 

had given to the previous Bill.  If not almost identical, the Bills 

are very, very similar. 

 

The most controversial thing that was talked about before the 

Bills came into place was whether or not the previous Bill that 

we just dealt with should come under SaskEnergy or the 

SaskPower.  And it was decided it should come under 

SaskPower, but there was the same consultation process that 

took place for the electrical inspection as there was for the gas 

installation Bill. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Again the question 

would be then, is there any additional cost to this Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- We anticipate no additional costs 

flowing from this Bill. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, some people in the construction industry have 

expressed some concerns about some of the items within the 

Bill, particularly section 18 where it talks about costs being 

charged back to contractors by SaskPower after they have bid 

on a piece of work; that some of the costs of the approval of 

some of the equipment could be charged back to the 

contractors, and the contractor under those circumstances 

would have no measure to recover some of those additional 

costs which he can't foretell what they would be. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- What section 18 does is it ensures that 

contractors do use equipment that's CSA (Canadian Standards 

Association) approved or the equivalent.  And what our thrust 

is here is really to get suppliers -- not necessarily the contractor 

but suppliers -- to provide CSA-approved equipment.  If in case 

a contractor does use equipment that is not approved by CSA or 

equivalent, then that contractor would be liable in the situation 

of a work deficiency. 



1814 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 1993 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well that may sound very well, Mr. 

Minister, but unfortunately the contractor here is caught in the 

middle.  He may not . . . he has equipment to do the job; he 

comes forward to SaskPower and bids on a tender to do the job, 

and then SaskPower turns around and says, well we have to test 

to see whether this equipment is approved, or is it approved, so 

investigations have to be made.  And that cost goes back onto 

the contractor, not onto the supplier. 

 

So there is a concern there, Mr. Minister, about additional costs 

that the contractor cannot anticipate until he's actually on the 

work site. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well it's very easy to identify what 

equipment is approved by the CSA; it all has a CSA sticker on 

the equipment or the machine that a contractor would be using. 

 

Myself personally, if I wanted personal work done, I would not 

want a contractor using unapproved equipment because I think 

that there is a system in place for making sure safety standards 

are met.  And I wouldn't anticipate any large costs to a 

contractor.  I'm sure that contractors currently who have 

equipment would know very, very well prior to doing any job 

as to whether or not the equipment is CSA approved. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, with SaskPower 

there are times when SaskPower has their own standards.  

When you look at electrical wiring . . . contractor who puts 

electrical wires into your home has to have CSA-approved 

wire.  When the electrical contractor goes out to do work for 

SaskPower, SaskPower has a separate set of standards, and at 

times those standards do not meet CSA approvals, but they 

meet SaskPower's approvals to use within their facilities. 

 

And in this kind of a circumstance, Mr. Minister, SaskPower 

could turn around all of a sudden and say, well you have to use 

this other equipment, when they have been providing 

equipment to SaskPower that had met SaskPower's regulations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I think we're talking about two different 

things.  The electrical inspection takes place after the meter.  

Okay?  And certainly anything after the meter, SaskPower does 

not have a different set of standards.  They follow the Canadian 

code and it's exactly the same code that would be followed by a 

contractor. 

 

Now if you're talking about generating stations or transmission 

lines, there may be something different there.  I don't know that 

and the officials here today wouldn't be in a position to answer 

that.  But what we're talking about is from the meter after, and 

SaskPower follows exactly the same Canadian building codes 

as what contractors would be obligated to follow. 

 

(1800) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister, 

for that clarification because the contractors are concerned 

about this issue. 

 

Also in section 19 they're concerned about the contractors 

being held responsible for any additional drawings that may be 

necessary for the installation, that those costs are passed on to 

the contractor; where if SaskPower asks for any additional 

drawings to be put in place, that that cost should be borne by 

the owner of the project and paid directly by the owner to 

SaskPower rather than by the contractor. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I'm told by the officials that there is not 

additional cost anticipated.  There's a review fee, and that 

review fee has not changed. 

 

When copies are requested, the policy is to request two copies, 

and one copy is returned.  If you know of situations where that 

is not the case, I would be more than interested in hearing about 

that.  But I'm assured and feel very comfortable that what the 

officials here they tell me is correct -- two copies are requested, 

one is given back.  There is a review fee -- we acknowledged 

that -- but the review fee by this Bill is not being changed. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I believe what the 

contractors are concerned about is where additional drawings 

are requested after the project has been tendered and accepted.  

If there are some changes made in there, then the contractor is 

responsible for those drawings under this Bill, whereas it 

should be the owner of the project who is responsible for 

paying for those extra drawings that go to SaskPower. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well I can't anticipate that happening 

unless there's some kind of a design change on the project.  

And if there's a design change on the project, then it should not 

be absorbed by the contractor. 

 

The contractor needs to know what ground rules they're dealing 

with at the start of the project.  And if someone, the owner or 

SaskPower, makes a design change -- and I don't see us making 

any design change because it would meet the building codes -- 

there should not be a situation like that, and the contractors 

should rest with some comfort that there's not going to be an 

additional cost to them. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well again it's an issue that seems to be 

of some concern to the contractors. 

 

Another issue that they have some concerns with is in section 

21 with the provisions for stop-work orders and the charging of 

costs related to investigations.  This stop-work order I'm 

assuming would be between the gas inspectors and the project 

going forward and SaskPower, with the contractor being caught 

in the middle and being forced to absorb costs while the 

stop-work order is in place. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I understand this provision is in the 

legislation in most of the other jurisdictions.  And what it 

basically is, if an inspector arrives on the scene 



May 18, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1815 

and work is in progress and the inspector identifies a hazardous 

situation, then the inspector can in fact shut the work down.  

And I would have to agree with that. 

 

If there is a hazardous situation that exists, we don't want it to 

cause a fire or cause an injury.  And I feel that inspectors have 

every right to that.  As long as contractors would be complying 

with the regulations and fair safety procedures, this provision 

of the Act would never be used. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, again 

I would like to commend your government for section 10(2).  

This again deals with search and seizure.  You now make it 

necessary for a warrant to be issued.  We agree with you on 

that.  We asked for that last year and we're really pleased that 

you paid a little attention and we commend you for that. 

 

Mr. Chairman, that is all I have until we get to section 13. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 13 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I 

would like to move an amendment to clause 13 of the printed 

Bill.  I'd like to: 

 

Amend clause 13 of the printed Bill by adding immediately 

after the word "corporation" where it appears in subsection 

(1) thereof the following: 

 

", provided that the fixing of such fees shall be of no effect 

unless and until approved by the Legislative Assembly or 

any committee thereof established for the purpose of 

reviewing the fixing of such fees". 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Chairman, again I appreciate the 

intent of the member.  But I would give the same response as in 

the previous Bill, that we really do appreciate the intent of the 

member but it's a bit unacceptable and unwieldy to have 

individual fees come before the Assembly. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 13 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 14 to 40 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

The Chair: -- If the minister would like to thank his officials 

on the record, as they are leaving, you may if you would. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I'd like to very much thank the officials 

from SaskPower for coming to answer 

questions today and providing me with their excellent advice.  

Thank you. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I too would like to 

thank the officials for their help in getting us through these 

Bills. 

 

Bill No. 75 -- An Act to amend The Freehold Oil and Gas 

Production Tax Act 

 

The Chair: -- It's the same minister but a different official, and 

I will ask the minister to introduce his official to the committee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have with 

me, Mr. Bruce Wilson.  He's the executive director of 

petroleum and natural gas division. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, I wonder if you could explain the reason for removing 

the word "prescribed" from section 3 of this Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- It takes away the regulatory-making 

provision that was there previously and puts it into section 32 

of the Bill. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I guess we'll 

discuss it when we get to 32. 

 

Section 4 of the Bill, my colleague has been commending you 

for including the use of a warrant to do any search and seizures 

in the previous two Bills that we discussed.  In this particular 

Bill that provision seems to have been left out.  You have given 

your officials the power to enter into premises and to record 

records, etc., but no place in here does it say that they should 

have a warrant to do so. 

 

I find it perfectly acceptable that they go onto the premises to 

do an oil inspection with the compliance of the owner.  But 

where that compliance is not there, particularly in the 

circumstances where they would go to get records, I believe 

that unless they have the approval of the owner of those 

records, that they should indeed have a warrant to enter into the 

premises and to secure those records. 

 

You did that in the other two Bills, and I believe that in this 

particular Bill you should also do that very same thing.  We 

went through this discussion last year on some of the 

Environment Bills about having to have warrants to enter into 

premises, and I believe it should be done also in this case. 

 

You talk in here about the use of: 

 

. . . any machinery, equipment, appliances or (other) things 

that the minister or the officer considers necessary while at 

any place mentioned in clause (a) or (b). 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, I would have to wonder what you plan on 

using this equipment for.  In the case of some 



1816 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 1993 

of the Bills previously in the other session, past session, the 

government was giving themselves the power to utilize any 

equipment to enter into premises. 

 

If the door was locked on your Quonset, or in the case here, of 

your treater at an oil installation or the gate is locked, they can 

use a bulldozer and run over it.  And the company has no 

recourse for compensation back from the department. 

 

In this particular case are you talking about the same thing?  If 

you use a piece of equipment, the department officials use a 

piece of equipment and they harm it, will any compensation be 

paid to the owners? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- On the issue of the equipment, we do 

not utilize any of the equipment without permission of the 

operators.  For example, what we mean by equipment is if there 

was an audit being done they might utilize the photocopy 

machine of the particular company.  If they were doing a 

production test on a well, they'd obviously need to use the 

producer's equipment to do that.  And it's in cooperation with 

the industry. 

 

I might also mention that the Canadian Association of 

Petroleum Producers has had full consultation with this 

particular piece of legislation.  In fact we were going to 

introduce it earlier in the session.  There were some concerns 

expressed by the Canadian Association of Petroleum 

Producers.  We drew it back and had further consultations with 

them.  So there's absolute full knowledge of what's happening 

here today with the industry. 

 

(1815) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well I'm pleased to know that the 

industry has been kept aware of what is going on, but we feel 

that it is improper for the government to enter into premises 

where they're not invited without a warrant.  Most oil 

companies, gas companies, have no problem with the 

department officials coming onto their property.  They 

welcome them. 

 

But there may be opportunities where they are not welcome, 

particularly in the case of the taking of records or the recording 

of records.  Those could be some trade secrets.  There could be 

some reasons why someone would not want their records 

recorded. 

 

If you feel that there is something criminal happening, if there 

is a problem, then you should have no problems in getting a 

warrant to get those records.  But it should be a reason to 

record those without permission from the owner.  If the owner 

gives you permission it's not a problem.  But it's when that 

owner may be reluctant to allow you onto the premises that I 

believe that then you should have a warrant rather than simply 

walking in and taking it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- There's a couple points I'd like to make, 

and I appreciate the member's concern.  The department 

officials would never enter a premises without permission of 

the company that they would be wanting to examine.  That just 

would not happen. 

In fact there may be situations where the department officials 

would in fact go and get a search warrant because they couldn't 

arrive at an agreement with the particular individuals or 

company that they needed to go in and examine, for example, 

records, production records maybe, of the company.  So that 

would happen in some cases.  We certainly would not enter 

unwanted into anyone's premises or office space without their 

permission to do so. 

 

The second point I'd like to make is that it's very important that 

The Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax Act is in line with 

the Crown minerals oil production Act.  And this is exactly the 

same wording in this case as in the other Act, and I'd be 

hesitant to bring that other legislation back here. 

 

The industry seems satisfied with the situation.  The people in 

the department are, for the most part, long-term professionals 

that have built up a working relationship with the industry.  

And again I assure you that they would never intrude in an 

unwanted situation without the cooperation of the person that 

they were doing the investigation on. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it's comforting to 

hear that you would not intrude where you're not asked to be.  

But you've nevertheless given yourself the power to do so if 

you wished. 

 

Under section 26 of the Act, 26.1 or clause 5, it talks of: 

 

Before commencing an appeal the taxpayer must pay to 

the minister any amount required to be paid as a result of 

the act or thing done by the minister . . . 

 

This seems rather odd to me, Mr. Minister, that you would be 

asking the taxpayer, the individual taxpayer in this particular 

case, to pay for the actions that you as the minister undertook, 

or your department undertook. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well I think it could cause us some 

problems with revenue flows.  This provision or this 

occurrence does not happen very often, at least in the situation 

you describe.  But we feel it's prudent in the province's interest 

if there's a tax amount owing, that in fact that tax amount 

should be paid. And if the person or the company being taxed 

wishes to appeal, they have every right to do that.  And I think 

that that's consistent with the industry standard throughout the 

country. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well perhaps, Mr. Minister, I 

misunderstood the word "taxpayer" in the context of this Bill.  I 

took taxpayer to be a general person at large who may have an 

interest in some freehold, rather than an actual person owing 

tax monies to the government based on freehold rights. 

 

If a person appeals who owes monies on freehold land, if they 

win that appeal, do they still owe money to the government for 

the actions taken by the 



May 18, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1817 

minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- No. If a tax was assessed and the tax 

was paid and there was an appeal launched and the taxpayer 

won the appeal, then there would be a rebate of the amount that 

was ruled on by the appeal process. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- But what of the costs incurred in that 

appeal, Mr. Minister? Would the taxpayer still be liable for 

those costs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I would stand to be corrected, but I 

believe that the costs would still fall on the taxpayer in this 

situation.  I'd want to draw it to your attention though that it 

does not go before the courts.  The process that's set up is to 

appear before the Board of Revenue Commissioners.  In fact 

it's a process whereby the individual, the taxpayer, could in fact 

represent themselves, so there aren't large legal costs and 

protracted appeals that would have to be absorbed by the 

taxpayer. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Well in the 

situation where the taxpayer won the appeal, it was obviously 

then that the government was at fault.  In that particular case, 

Mr. Minister, I feel that it should be the government that bears 

the costs of that appeal.  In the case where a taxpayer appeals 

and loses, then indeed the taxpayer should pay those costs.  The 

costs should be borne by the loser, the group that was at fault 

for the overassessment or underassessment as the case may be. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Are you making the case also then that 

the taxpayer, if the taxpayer's wrong, should pay the 

government's costs as well?  I need clarification on that, what 

you're saying. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, if the government 

appeals a tax ruling that they themselves have set a fee on and 

it's a legitimate cost to the business that further taxes should be 

paid, that the government has undertaxed them, then the appeal 

costs, I would say yes, that the company should pay for those 

costs.  But if the company appeals and wins, then those costs 

should be borne by the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I'm sorry, I can't give you a definitive 

answer.  I do not know the exact powers of the Board of 

Revenue Commissioners.  The Board of Revenue 

Commissioners may well have the power to award costs, but 

I'm sorry I can't give you a definitive answer on that here today.  

I'd have to check on that, and if it's acceptable, I'd get back to 

you at a later date with the answer on that. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister, if you 

would. 

 

Also in that section, in subsection 5 of that clause you deal with 

the onus of proof of the allegations of fact and law on which 

the taxpayer relies to support the objections is on the taxpayer.  

The onus is on the taxpayer for all the burdens of proof, and the 

taxpayer is therefore guilty until he proves himself otherwise. 

We have talked a great deal today about the environment in the 

legislature.  You were part of the Environment Committee.  

Part of the recommendations that came down from that 

committee was that the citizen should not bear the onus of 

proof and the cost when dealing with environmental issues. 

 

Again in this situation though, that citizen, according to the 

Act, has the duty to provide the burden of proof. The burden of 

proof is on him to prove that he was wrongly taxed.  I believe 

that there needs to be some adjustments in there, some fairness 

in line with what the recommendations came down with from 

the Environment Committee in dealing with burdens of proof, 

that you yourself sat on.  I think this is one of those areas 

perhaps where there can be some adjustments made or some 

considerations for adjustments made. 

 

Under the environmental regulations . . . or excuse me, 

recommendations, is that the government bears the cost of 

providing that burden of proof.  The citizen brings forward a 

concern and the government investigates it.  In this particular 

case I believe that should also be given some consideration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well I think in this case we're dealing 

with a little bit different situation than what you talked about in 

the Environment Committee.  The formulas are fairly 

straightforward.  They're interpreted by professionals within the 

department.  There's no advantage to a professional in the 

department to misinterpret the formula. 

 

And who else would the onus be on other than the taxpayer?  

The taxpayer, if they're to say that something is wrong with the 

interpretation or the formula or the amount assessed to them, 

they would be the only people with that proof.  So the onus has 

to be on them to show that in fact the department has been 

wrong in assessing the tax. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well when it deals in a particular issue 

with whether the oil production on a particular location is 10 

barrels a day or 100 barrels a day, then indeed that burden of 

proof should be on the producer.  But when it comes to whether 

or not the formula has been applied correctly, well that formula 

is defined and is set out by the government and the government 

should bear the responsibility to ensure that the formula is 

calculated and applied properly.  And there can be varying 

degrees in here, so I think some of that burden of proof does 

rest with the government. 

 

In part 6 of this . . . subsection (6) of this, (a) and (b), it talks 

about the burden on the taxpayer to . . . I'll just read it: 

 

. . . shall make production on oath of any documents, 

records or things that may be in the possession or under 

the control of the person or corporation and may be 

required to attend for examination and to make production 

in the 



1818 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 1993 

same manner as a party to an action in Her Majesty's Court 

of Queen's Bench for Saskatchewan may be required to 

attend for examination and to make production. 

 

Well it seems all the burden is on the taxpayer; none of the 

burden is on the minister or the department.  I think it should be 

equal, that both parties should have to be there, Mr. Speaker 

and have . . . Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, and have to make 

the productions of their documents. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well I'd want to make a couple of 

points.  Previously there was no appeal; in this Bill now there is 

an appeal process and it's to the Board of Revenue 

Commissioners.  It makes this legislation consistent with the 

Crown minerals legislation which has been passed by the 

Legislative Assembly with your blessing and with the blessing 

of the industry. 

 

This basically does the same thing which represents about 5 per 

cent of the lands that have production or exploration in 

Saskatchewan.  And I don't know whether the member or not 

can give me a case where the department officials have been 

accused of interpreting the formula incorrectly, but I don't 

believe there is such a case, and so I think we're talking about a 

hypothetical situation that's never existed before. 

 

If you can give me a case where in fact that has happened, we'll 

examine it for you, and I'll give you a response to it.  But I 

believe that it's totally hypothetical what you're talking about.  

And I repeat again, this legislation now has in place an appeal 

process which did not exist before, so it gives more recourse to 

the taxpayer in this case than has ever existed in the past. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, we are pleased that 

there is an appeal process in place.  And while freehold lands 

may only represent 5 per cent of the oil production in the 

province, freehold lands represent a significant portion of the 

production lands in my constituency.  The burdens should be 

equally under this section, Mr. Minister, on both the taxpayer 

and the government when it comes to an appeal to provide their 

documents and to be present at the time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well give me some situations where this 

exists, and I'll personally talk to the individual companies or 

individuals in your constituency where this is a concern.  We're 

sure there's not been a concern.  If you have some examples of 

it, please provide me with the examples, and we'll look into it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I do not have any 

examples.  And this House deals most of the time with 

hypothetical things, theoretical.  So we don't necessarily always 

happen to have an example. 

 

On clause no. 6, Mr. Minister, it deals with the setting of the 

fees and the taxes, etc.  Just how much consultation did you do 

previously on this, and how much consultation will you do in 

the future before 

making any changes under this section? 

 

(1830) 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- We've just finished providing a report.  

Members of the opposition have access to it.  In fact I believe 

that the critic was sent a copy of the task force on the 

regulatory measures, the fiscal measures.  That's never 

happened before.  So we have that consultation.  That's going 

to be an ongoing process, and I've assured the industry that 

there will be ongoing consultation. 

 

In this particular Bill, we had extended consultation with the 

Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers.  Most of the 

people that have freehold lands in your constituency that you're 

concerned about, that represent more than the provincial norm 

in terms of freehold oil and gas, would be members of the 

Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers.  And there's 

been wide consultation to date.  And there will be extensive 

consultation in the future with the oil and gas industry before 

any changes are made. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I did 

receive the copies of those surveys, and I thank you for them.  

It takes a little time to go through them, and I believe you will 

probably have some more conversation about that. 

 

The other thing I'd like to say to you, Mr. Minister, we applaud 

you for your new section in terms of the appeal.  But I think the 

point my colleague was trying to make is, if you're going to 

make a new section, that's great and good but it also should be 

fair.  And I think that's what the member was trying to point out 

to you. 

 

The new clause is good; we like it.  But I think, we think, that 

you could go back and make it better.  And the points you 

brought up, I believe, would also -- I agree -- would make it a 

little better. 

 

With that, Mr. Minister, I'm through. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I want to add one thing.  The other 

group that was consulted that would have many members in 

your particular constituency, the member from 

Souris-Cannington, is the small explorers and producers group.  

And they were also consulted with this particular Bill. 

 

And I mean it sincerely.  If they have concerns that they haven't 

expressed to date through the extensive consultations that the 

department has carried out in a very professional manner, then 

I'd be very interested in hearing about them. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

Clause 4 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like 

to move an amendment to clause 4. 



May 18, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1819 

Amend clause 4 of the printed Bill by deleting the general 

words preceding clause (a) of subsection 14(1) as being 

enacted therein and substituting the following: 

 

"14(1) On the oath of the Minister or any officer of the 

department authorized by the minister that there are 

reasonable and probable grounds to believe that an offence 

against this Act or the regulations has occurred, a justice of 

the peace or a judge of the Provincial Court of 

Saskatchewan may issue a warrant to the Minister or any 

officer of the department authorized by the Minister to (do 

so):" 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm wondering if the 

member has a copy of that amendment so we could have a look 

at it? 

 

Mr. Chairman, in regard to this . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  We just want to review the amendment 

for a moment to determine whether it's in order. 

 

I find the amendment in order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well we have some difficulty in 

accepting the amendment, Mr. Chairman.  For example, where 

it says ". . . probable grounds to believe that an offence against 

this Act or the regulations has occurred, . . ."  The vast majority 

of the time when the department goes out it's for a routine audit 

that's accepted by the industry.  I mean it's been standard 

practice for 30 years. 

 

And for us now to do a routine job and have to have a justice of 

the peace, through the Provincial Court of Saskatchewan, get a 

warrant issued, I mean the industry would wonder if we'd gone 

off the deep end and a bit goofy in terms of doing our regular 

job and all of sudden required to get a warrant for it from the 

justice of the peace or from a judge of the Provincial Court.  

We just don't accept the amendment, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 4 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 5 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 76 -- An Act to amend The Oil and Gas 

Conservation Act 

 

Clauses 1 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Chairman, before you allow the help to go, 

I'd like to thank them very much for helping us through this, 

this evening.  Thanks a lot. 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I too, Mr. Chairman, before we rise and 

report and ask for leave to sit again, would like to thank Bruce 

Wilson from the Department of Energy and Mines.  I'm sure 

the members opposite and also the former minister of Energy 

and Mines of the previous administration would recognize the 

very capable officials that we have in the Department of 

Energy and Mines. 

 

The Chair: -- The Chair thanks the members, and the 

committee will now rise and report progress. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 34 -- An Act to amend the SaskEnergy Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I move that the Bill be read now and 

passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 44 -- An Act respecting the Inspection of Gas 

Installations and Gas Equipment 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be read 

now and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 45 -- An Act respecting the Inspection of Electrical 

Equipment, Installations and Materials 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I move the Bill be read now and passed 

under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 75 -- An Act to amend The Freehold Oil and Gas 

Production Tax Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I move that the Bill be read now and 

passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 76 -- An Act to amend The Oil and Gas 

Conservation Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I move that the Bill be read now and 

passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 6:43 p.m. 


