




















































Hansard: March 16, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 365 

 March 16, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a 

number of petitions to table today which were sent to us 

intersessionally, concerning the closure of rural hospitals.  I 

won't read through them, Mr. Speaker, but just mention that 

they are from all over the province and these people felt it was 

very important that their expression be heard in the legislature.  

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Clerk: -- The following petitions are presented and laid upon 

the Table: by Ms. Murray for a private Bill of Aldersgate 

College of the city of Moose Jaw, in the province of 

Saskatchewan; by Mr. Neudorf for a private Bill of the Bethany 

Bible Institute of the town of Hepburn, in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order, the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7), they are hereby read and 

received: 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment. 

 

And 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate the farm fuel 

rebate program. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that I 

shall on Thursday ask the government the following question: 

 

 Regarding the government's management of video gaming: 

has the government in any of its manifestations engaged in 

business contact or dealings with Video Lottery Consultants 

Incorporated of Montana? 

 

And I also give notice, Mr. Speaker, that I shall on Thursday 

ask the government the following question: 

 

 Regarding the government's management of video gaming: 

has the government in any of its manifestations purchased, 

leased, or otherwise obtained interest in video lottery 

terminals; and if so, from whom was the interest obtained, at 

what cost, by what authority, and under what terms and 

conditions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that 

I shall on Thursday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

 Regarding the Department of Social Services: (1) how many 

children were forced to use government sponsored or 

supported child hunger programs in the last year; (2) how 

many meals were served; (3) how much did the government 

pay to support these child hunger projects; and (4) how many 

non-governmental agencies are involved? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is my distinct honour 

and pleasure this day to introduce to you and through you to 

my colleagues, members of the Legislative Assembly, a young 

public servant for a day, seated in your gallery.  The young 

public servant is Kara who attends Michael Riffel High School 

in the constituency of Regina Albert North.  Kara Stonechild is 

taking part in the Institute of Public Administration of Canada, 

Regina chapter's fourth annual "Young Public Servant for a 

Day" event. 

 

Seated next to Kara is her mentor for the day, Mr. Robert 

Cosman, our Legislative Counsel and Law Clerk.  Kara has 

been spending the morning and will spend the early part of the 

afternoon with Mr. Cosman, seeing what goes on in the 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

This event, Mr. Speaker, is very popular with both the students 

and the public service mentors because the students get a 

chance to gain an appreciation of the value of public service, 

but the public servants also get a chance to strut their stuff and 

show off what it is that we're all about here. 

 

Indeed I had a brief opportunity to speak with Kara earlier this 

day and she tells me she's interested in entering public life.  I 

asked her if it was from an elected or a more normal civil 

service perspective and Kara told me it was from an elected 

perspective, which makes me a tad bit nervous because as the 

MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) for Regina Albert 

North, I think there might be some competition there that I 

couldn't easily fend off. 

 

Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I ask you and others to join me in 

welcoming Kara Stonechild to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce 

to you and through you to the rest of the Assembly a friend and 

neighbour of mine from years gone by, at least a neighbour 

from years gone by, Blair 



366 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1993 

Wotherspoon who is a . . . and his family were friends and 

neighbours of ours back on the farm at Melville, and I'd just 

like all of the members of the Assembly to welcome you here 

this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Serby: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

introduce to you and through you and members of this 

Assembly a long-time friend and colleague of mine who 

worked in the Department of Social Services with me and is 

currently writing a book as well as doing some research work 

on the history of Batoche.  Seated in the west gallery, Mr. 

Speaker, Ms. Terrie Prince.  Ask you and members of this 

Assembly to welcome Terrie to the Assembly.  Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Impact of Tax Increases 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question today 

is to the Premier.  Mr. Speaker, on Thursday of this week we 

will see the fruition of an 18-month political campaign, an 

intensive PR (public relations), media, and political exercise to 

lay the blame for the betrayal of promises the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) members made during nine years in 

opposition. 

 

Every person in this province, Mr. Speaker, remembers the 

Premier's remarks that he could run this province with revenues 

of $4.5 billion.  No new taxes, was the message.  And you 

know what, Mr. Speaker, the people believed the Premier. 

 

Mr. Premier, you have raised the PST (provincial sales tax) to 8 

per cent.  You have raised income taxes -- personal income 

taxes -- by 10 per cent.  You have raised every utility rate -- 

power, gas, telephone, insurance.  You've raised every 

government fee that people thought possible and have even 

found some new ones to raise.  Mr. Premier, you are now 

telling everyone to get ready for more taxes.  This, after saying 

4.5 billion was enough.  My question, Mr. Premier:  has your 

government done any studies, any analysis of the impact on 

Saskatchewan of what your massive tax grab has done, and let 

alone what effect your new round of taxes will have this 

Thursday?  Will you do that, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the Department of 

Finance and the government of course tries its very best to get 

the best information available to it in the preparation of a 

budget, which is the only prudent and proper thing to do. And 

in these circumstances, no doubt there have been a number of 

internal and other examinations of the data which have been 

carried out. 

 

I point out to the hon. member opposite that the situation 

fiscally is serious, but that we have turned the 

corner beginning with the budget of last year.  And we think 

that the budget on Thursday will be in effect a confirmation 

that we have finally changed the direction of the 1980s, a 

direction which is marked by huge, extravagant expenditures of 

government, and waste and mismanagement, and that there is 

more hope for the people of Saskatchewan after the budget and 

in the months and years that follow from that, because the light 

that they will see will be not a train but that of the daylight of 

opportunity under a new government in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

Premier.  Mr. Premier, I'm not surprised that you and your 

government have been and will continue to keep Saskatchewan 

taxpayers in the dark about economic issues.  Mr. Premier, 

when you go about taxing people, don't you think it would be 

kind of handy if you knew ahead of time that you maybe were 

doing more harm than good. 

 

Mr. David Perry of the Canadian Tax Foundation I think has 

put it right on the money when he said taxpayers are facing a 

real brick wall when it comes to increasing taxes. 

 

I think people like Mr. Perry have done some 

honest-to-goodness research, Mr. Premier.  My question:  Mr. 

Premier, you can leave the rhetoric to your NDP Party 

functions. The question requires an answer. Has your 

government, your Department of Finance, your Department of 

Economic Development, have you done some analyses on what 

your taxes will have in the way of changes to the inflation rate, 

interest rates, and the decreasing population of our province?  

And if you have them, sir, would you please table them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the answer that I've 

given to the hon. member is the same one that I give to this 

second question.  Quite obviously the Department of Finance 

and the government has taken into account all the data which is 

available, and taking that into consideration in the preparation 

of the budget on Thursday. 

 

As the hon. member will know, and if he doesn't I simply 

remind him again, there is some hope that the economy is 

turning around, not only on my part but on the part of external 

experts such as the Conference Board of Canada who predict a 

growth of 3.2 per cent, and other agencies, all of which indicate 

that we have turned the corner from 1991. 

 

There's no doubt about it that the question of taxes is something 

which this government . . . no government likes to do.  But the 

reality is that the mountain of debt which has been piled up by 

you, sir, and by your colleague, the member from Estevan, the 

predecessor of this office, the highest debt of any province in 

the history of Canada -- a debt of $1 billion new debt each and 

every year from 1982 to 1991 -- has made 



March 16, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 367 

the task of getting a proper budget turn-around and economic 

development difficult and challenging. 

 

But you know something, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, we are 

up to it, and I think Thursday's budget will prove to you that we 

are. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

Premier.  Mr. Premier, that litany is beginning to sound like a 

broken record to Saskatchewan taxpayers.  I guess that's not 

much of a surprise to anyone out there, Mr. Premier, that's 

paying those taxes, because you have broken the record for 

broken promises in this province. 

 

Mr. Premier, it might interest you that you have done studies 

on the effect of increased taxes.  As a matter of fact you did 

three of them -- three studies on the effects of increased taxes 

on the Saskatchewan economy.  The only problem was that 

they were done in 1991 while you were in opposition, sir.  And 

they were done about tax harmonization. 

 

Mr. Premier, surely with the resources of your party caucus, 

your 18-member cabinet, a large Executive Council staff, and 

the departments of Finance and Economic Development, that 

you would have put together a report on the effect that your tax 

increases would have on Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Premier, I ask you once again, share with Saskatchewan 

taxpayers and table that report. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, again I say to the hon. 

member opposite who simply refuses . . . and if I were him I 

would be doing the same thing.  Denial I think is one of the 

most important psychological aspects that the Conservative 

Party can certainly engage in now.  And the small band or 

group that you have left can deny, deny, deny all that you want. 

 

But the reality is that what we promised to set out in this 

program card, it was to open the books and to restore sound 

fiscal management to the province, which is what we have 

done.  We tabled the study on the PST.  I have said to the 

member already that we've done the best analysis that we can 

internally in the preparation of the budget.  I think the budget is 

going to be fair and is going to be fair and is going to be a 

complete one which will both stimulate economic development 

and do what is imperative -- say to the people of Saskatchewan: 

we have finally, completely turned the corner, put an end to 

those days of waste and mismanagement and misplaced deals 

and misplaced priorities, and get this province moving again.  

Join us in that task of building.  End your career of destruction 

of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, question to the Premier.  I 

would take from that response, Mr. Premier, 

that you don't particularly want to talk about the things that you 

said in January of 1990, the goods and services tax in 

Saskatchewan by the New Democratic Party caucus; tax 

fairness for the '90s, Saskatchewan New Democratic Party 

caucus, January '91; the provincial GST (goods and services 

tax) and its impact on Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan New 

Democratic Party caucus, April of '91. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in there the now Premier and his economic 

analysis unit over there were talking about how the provincial 

government has continued to underfund Saskatchewan 

hospitals, nursing homes, schools, and universities.  It has 

recently announced a reduction in provincial funding for rural 

municipalities of more than 500 villages, towns, and cities.  

That represents a provincial government tax shift and a 

back-door tax increase on the backs of local property 

taxpayers.  Sounds kind of familiar, I would think, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Premier, in opposition you had the wherewithal to get 

together three fairly large studies on impacts on increased taxes 

to the taxpayers, to their villages and towns and the people in 

them.  Why today in government after 16 months, can't you 

share with Saskatchewan people the analysis of your tax 

increases on their backs right now, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, it is true that we did a 

very good job in opposition, a responsible job . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- And I thank the hon. member for 

rather belatedly acknowledging that, rather belatedly 

acknowledging that, because I full well remember all those 

billboards.  I think the former premier will remember them.  

Remember how they were?  Millions of dollars of billboards.  

Roy, Roy, it said, where is your plan?  Where is your plan.  

Where is the studies. 

 

Because we took the position that what we would do is we 

would open up the books, we'd find out the true position of the 

debt, and then work from there in a sensible, responsible, 

pragmatic way.  And that's exactly what we did. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Now you don't like it.  Well I'm sorry 

that you don't like it.  I think the majority of the people in the 

province of Saskatchewan understand the huge debt and 

morass that you have placed them into, the strait-jacket that 

you put them into. 

 

I can only say to you, sir, that this budget is going to be the 

budget that finally and completely turns the corner and builds 

or shows the way to build the province of Saskatchewan back 

to prosperity. 

 

I repeat again.  Join the building crew; leave the 



368 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1993 

wrecking crew. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

Premier.  Mr. Premier, you go on to say in the analysis that you 

did while in opposition, such inflationary effects will erode the 

real disposable income of Saskatchewan families and 

consumers, and will therefore put additional economic pressure 

on Saskatchewan small business and Saskatchewan jobs.  

During a national and provincial recession that just doesn't 

make sense. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, lots of independent analysis of this 

government's performance show that the only inflationary fact 

that the Saskatchewan people have to deal with today is the 

policies of the member from Riversdale.  The only inflationary 

pressure. 

 

Mr. Premier, given that you said these things in opposition, and 

that independent sources say that you are the cause of many of 

these problems, why don't you share some analysis with 

Saskatchewan people to refute your own words in opposition, 

sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I honestly think the 

Leader of the Opposition is not listening to my answers.  He 

persists in reading the questions, which I think is not a good 

habit if the questions don't relate to the previous answer. 

 

I want to say to the Hon. Leader of the Opposition this: that if 

the leader is referring to the study which we conducted -- 

which I think he is -- in opposition, in opposition to 

harmonization, he can refer to it and I accept it.  Because I 

think that study at that time was right. 

 

I note with some interest that the Conservative Party still 

persists in harmonization, judging by the undertone of their 

questioning, notwithstanding their stated words that they're not 

for the taxation increase.  But this apparently is some sort of an 

attempt to rehash the old election debate of 16 months ago and 

who was right and who was wrong in harmonization. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, as I 

take my chair: the independent experts indicate growth in this 

neighbourhood, as I've said to you in one of my previous 

questions.  It may or may not come about.  I don't know.  It 

isn't the greatest growth.  I'd like to see more growth.  But they 

know our debt position.  They know that we cannot reduce it 

by totally eliminating programs.  They know that we're going 

to have to have some tax increases.  Every responsible 

economist acknowledges that. 

 

And above all, every responsible, independent, outside 

economist rejects your position which is, sir, just like that of 

the Liberal Party -- no cut-backs and no taxes and reduce the 

deficit.  And if you can do that, you're better than Merlin the 

magician. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A question to the 

Premier.  Mr. Premier, maybe you should listen a little more 

carefully to the questions, because those are the questions, 

those are the questions of several hundred thousand taxpayers, 

Mr. Premier. 

 

I mean you were the person that said once you'd eliminated 

waste and mismanagement, that 4.5 billion was enough.  You 

could run this province, you could run this province, Mr. 

Premier, by cancelling harmonization; that you didn't need any 

revenue-generating measures of the '80s because you were 

smarter.  You could do it a better way.  You wouldn't have to 

cut back on health, and education and drive every farmer in this 

province out of business because you had the answers, sir. 

 

Well, Mr. Premier, you have raised taxes, utility rates, every 

levy under the sun, including getting divorced and getting 

married. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, Don Gass said you knew the economic 

situation all along.  Maybe you can answer this question then, 

Mr. Premier.  Did you say those things to Saskatchewan people 

only to get elected?  Maybe that's the answer you need, Mr. 

Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I will tell you, whatever 

the Leader of the Opposition can accuse me of in terms of 

wanting to get elected, you will never be able to accuse this 

government or me of telling the people in any one budget year 

that our deficit is only -- and by the way, Mr. Speaker, it sort of 

winces me to say this -- is only 300 million, as they did in 1986 

to get elected in 1986, only to come back a few months after 

being elected to tell the people of Saskatchewan that the debt is 

not 300 million but $1.2 billion. 

 

That's what you did.  That is an example of saying things to get 

elected. 

 

And I do remind the Leader of the Opposition, and the former 

premier, that I wrote to both of them in September, 1991, 

saying lets have an independent analysis of the books.  I got a 

letter back from your then Minister of Finance, Mr. Hepworth 

-- I've got a copy of the letter here -- and he said, don't worry 

about it, you're just politicking.  Our deficit is only 225 million. 

 

It turned out to be just about as accurate as 1986.  And when 

we opened up the books in Gass and the horror story of $15.5 

billion cascaded to the people of Saskatchewan, they knew that 

it's not this party that says things to get elected.  It is that party 

that says things to get elected and that's why you're sitting as a 

rump group. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

Premier.  It seems, Mr. Speaker, we're getting closer to the 

truth now.  The Premier is starting to talk 



March 16, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 369 

about politics. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, the Premier is starting to talk 

about politics.  And I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, to the 

Premier that in the absence of his government being able to 

produce any type of analysis to Saskatchewan taxpayers that 

shows that there's some validity in the heavy taxation load that 

he has placed upon Saskatchewan people, that means that we 

must be only covering up for the Premier's political agenda. 

 

Mr. Premier, part of your analysis said, if this province 

harmonized, that there would be 7,500 jobs gone and over a 

billion dollars in economic activity disappeared.  Well, Mr. 

Premier, the truth is that there's 9,000 jobs gone and I would 

guess there's probably over a billion dollars in economic 

activity gone because of the tax load and the unfair way that 

your government is handling Saskatchewan taxpayers.  Now 

that is the truth, Mr. Premier.  Why don't you come clean and 

show us the analysis? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member says in 

his closing remarks respecting the question that the tax load is 

responsible here.  I want to tell the hon. member that in our 

first budget last year we budgeted for a surplus of $225 million.  

You know why . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I saw 517 million. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Yes.  The hon. member said he saw 

517 million, and he's right.  You know why we ended up at 517 

million?  Because you subtract the surplus of 225 million from 

the interest payments on the public debt that you incurred, of 

$800 million, and you get a net deficit of $517 million. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- It's not the taxes, it's not the taxes.  It 

is the $760 million each and every year of your taxes which go 

to New York and to Hong Kong and to Zürich and to London 

when they should be going to Sturgis and to Preeceville and to 

Canora and Saskatoon.  And they're not, thanks to you.  So start 

telling the truth to the people of Saskatchewan in this regard. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

Premier.  The hon. member knows that if he wanted to 

calculate the interest on the 14 billion when he was 

campaigning, he knew exactly what it was.  And at that point, 

he says we don't need to raise taxes. 

 

He went on and said that we think four and a half billion is 

enough.  And he says tax increases won't be needed to pay for 

agriculture programs.  No new taxes will be imposed.  And he 

went on to say that the 

people of this province are fed up with taxes and we're going to 

change that.  And that was in the Leader-Post in 1990. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the hon. member and to the 

Premier is this.  You have academics now who disagree with 

you. Professor Anderson today . . . and they laugh, Mr. 

Speaker.  They laugh at people complaining about taxes.  You 

even have commerce students coming out today saying you 

don't need to increase taxes to balance the budget. 

 

The students, the professors, and others at the University of 

Saskatchewan are saying to the hon. member: didn't you 

promise you could do this without raising taxes?  Didn't you 

say you could do this without raising taxes, without 

harmonization? 

 

Well today in the paper, and previously in the paper, the 

academics at the university and the students, Mr. Premier, are 

saying you don't have to raise taxes to balance the budget in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  In fact, you could actually cut taxes 

and balance the budget. 

 

Could you show us the analysis, Mr. Premier, of how your 

research shows that tax increases are going to help balance the 

budget in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, it's still amazes me that 

even after defeat the former premier is like the Bourbons -- you 

know, he learns nothing and remembers nothing.  And even so, 

in the context of the newspaper items that he refers to, I've got 

a copy of that newspaper report as well.  It's a mock budget 

prepared by the university of Commerce students. 

 

And he just got up in his question and he said, he got up on his 

question and he said, you know, you don't have to increase the 

taxes.  Well the mock budget by this newspaper story does 

what?  It harmonizes the taxation systems, increase the taxes, 

does away with Crow rate as a method of payment, puts on 

premiums and user fees.  I think it advocates a 10 per cent cut 

right across the piece in the health care department. 

 

And the hon. former premier gets up and says, it's not a tax.  

Well, what in the world is it?  Is it a balloon?  Is it a flying 

machine? 

 

It's a tax.  No wonder we ran up the deficit of $16 billion with 

that kind of economic theory. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member should take the 

time to read Professor Anderson's analysis of saying that you 

not have . . . you can't just raise taxes -- you've got to create a 

tax base.  And what the students . . . even the students at the 

University of Saskatchewan are saying:  create a tax base; 

allow businesses to work and operate here; don't tax them so 

heavily that they're going to lose.  And that's why 



370 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1993 

they talk about harmonization, creating a tax base. 

 

Would the hon. member, would the Premier, please give us any 

inkling of research that shows all of his tax increases are going 

to help Saskatchewan build a tax base better than what the 

students have recognized here in the province of Saskatchewan 

today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to give two 

parts, if I may, very briefly, to that question by way of an 

answer. 

 

First of all, Professor Anderson's rather -- how shall I describe 

it? -- esoteric economic description of Saskatchewan is 

interesting to note.  When asked specifically by anybody, what 

would you do, she says, as the former premier says, is create a 

tax base.  How would you do that, the question is.  Right.  The 

question is: create a climate, a climate for entrepreneurial skill.  

In other words, translated another way, the climate is, open for 

business.  Has anyone heard that expression, open for business, 

before?  I tell you, we've had enough of Professor Isabel 

Anderson's and the member from Estevan's theories about 

improving the climate, because from 1982 to 1991, "open for 

business" bankrupted the province and the few multinationals 

walked away with all the money.  That is changed in this 

election.  We're not going to follow that approach. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- The second aspect to this question, 

Mr. Speaker, to sum up very quickly, is I think, important.  In 

this budget on Thursday you will see, among three or four 

themes, the question of creating a proper business environment 

and climate.  Last year we reduced the small business corporate 

tax.  We have adjusted our taxes with respect to the 

development with respect to Sears.  And there will be other 

initiatives. 

 

The difference, sir, between you and us is this:  whereas you 

gave the tax breaks and the grants and the unconditional loan 

guarantees to all of the large multinational corporations, 

making the choices that that's where the money should go, and 

not to schools and hospitals, we are reversing that by putting 

our faith in our entrepreneurs, our communities, our 

cooperatives, our small-business people, and the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan.  That's the difference. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, my question goes to 

the Premier.  The problem with your analysis, Mr. Premier, is 

the rating institutions don't agree with you, the professors don't 

agree with you, and the students don't agree with you.  And I'll 

tell you for sure, the taxpayers don't agree with you. 

 

Your credit rating has fallen from a AA to BBB with your plan.  

Your deficit is going up, your taxes are going up, and your 

credit rating is going down. 

What Professor Anderson is simply saying is this.  You have to 

create a base so that you can grow and have the revenue there 

to finance the kinds of things that you're wanting to do.  And 

you have no economic analysis to prove that you can do that.  

None. 

 

And today you fail to table in this legislature any plan or any 

research that shows that you can get the credit rating up and 

that you can get the deficit under control without these huge, 

huge tax increases which will wreck our economy. 

 

Mr. Premier, we ask you again on behalf of students, 

professors, the rating institutions, and taxpayers generally: will 

you please table your analysis that shows your kind of tax 

increases won't harm the province of Saskatchewan in its base 

to creating economic revenue? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I wish to make this 

response to the leader of the . . . the former leader of the 

Conservative Party, the member from Estevan, very simply as 

follows. 

 

First of all the question of ratings, again on a factual basis, the 

former premier is in error, either because he forgets or he 

purposely wishes to make them in error.  There was one drop 

very shortly after we assumed office in November, 1991 when 

we had not even introduced a budget, based . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . .  No, we hadn't.  Because . . . Well the former 

premier laughs. 

 

You walked out of this legislature in June, 1991 without even 

passing a budget.  We had to get elected in order to pass the 

budget.  And when the rating people did the analysis, they 

analysed the situation that takes place there.  Now that's a fact.  

And the member can live in denial all that he wants.  That's the 

fact, and the people of Saskatchewan know about it.  So we 

know that's the circumstance. 

 

Having said that, the issue about economic development is very 

important.  But I remind the hon. premier that my colleague, 

the Minister of Economic Development, has tabled a white 

paper.  There have been some modest successes on business 

attractions here.  There have been other benefits which have 

accrued to the economic sector of the province of 

Saskatchewan, and much more needs to be done. 

 

The difference between you and us, sir, is this: that we do not 

believe in fantasy land, we believe in telling the people the 

truth, and we believe in putting faith in the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- I would like to remind members in the gallery 

that they are not to participate in the activities on the floor.  

Order. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 



March 16, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 371 

Bill No. 35 -- An Act to amend The Certified Nursing 

Assistants Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move that An 

Act to amend The Certified Nursing Assistants Act be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 36 -- An Act to amend The Registered Nurses Act, 

1988 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that An Act to 

amend The Registered Nurses Act, 1988, be now introduced 

and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 37 -- An Act to amend The Urban Municipality 

Act, 1984 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that An Act to 

amend The Urban Municipality Act, 1984, be now introduced 

and read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 

 

Support of Government Efforts in Addressing Financial 

Crisis in Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Harper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, at the 

end of my speech this afternoon, I will be moving the 

following motion: 

 

 That this Assembly support the government and the ministers 

of Finance and Economic Development in their efforts to 

restore financial freedom and revitalize Saskatchewan's 

economy by, on the one hand, acting responsibly and 

courageously to address the current financial crisis, and, on 

the other hand, by developing through partnerships a 

coherent, comprehensive, and realistic economic strategy. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this motion will be seconded by my 

colleague and member from Regina Albert North. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government has started down a road of 

recovery in Saskatchewan.  We have embarked upon a journey 

of renewal.  But like in any journey, Mr. Speaker, you have to 

first plan the route that you're going to use and assess the 

resources that are available to finance your trip. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it was through good common sense that the 

first order of business of our new government was to ascertain 

the true financial picture of this province.  Much to our dismay 

after that picture came 

abundantly clear not only to us, but all the people of 

Saskatchewan, is that we were shackled and restrained by a 

horrendous debt, a debt, Mr. Speaker, of $15 billion; a debt that 

was costing the Saskatchewan taxpayer, you and I and every 

taxpayer in this province, a shade over $2 million a day. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, came about as a result of the former 

government not having a plan, not having any strategy, not 

having any idea on the routes that they were going to take to 

deliver this province into the mess that they delivered it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some of the first things that we have to do to turn 

the corner on the economy and to start to rebuild this province 

is to try to rectify as much of the damage that was done by the 

former government.  Of course, Mr. Speaker, this immediately 

required a revisiting of the deals that the former government 

had struck with the corporate sector, such as reviewing the sale 

of the Prince Albert pulp mill to Weyerhaeuser, the 

Bi-Provincial upgrader, the Meadow Lake pulp mill, and so on, 

Mr. Speaker.  That process has started, Mr. Speaker, and is 

well on the way to restoring some economic freedom for our 

people and the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: -- I think, Mr. Speaker, that we in this legislature 

. . . as the people across this province are indicating to me 

every day, that they are taking their hats off to our Finance 

minister.  Our Finance minister who has had the courage, the 

integrity, and the foresight to make the tough decisions, the 

right decisions, to get a handle on the economy of this 

province, to turn this province around from continually ebbing 

itself into debt as it has over 10 years of the former 

administration, so that we in this province once again can in 

due course of time soon enjoy a balanced budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that will you obtain in our term of government.  

That, Mr. Speaker, will be the real rebound of this province 

fiscally and financially -- the rebound that each and every 

citizen of this province will rejoice and enjoy in prosperity and 

opportunity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I have indicated earlier, in order to reach a goal 

or objective, you have to have a plan.  You have to map out the 

route you're going to use to reach your goal.  That, Mr. 

Speaker, we have done. 

 

Our Minister of Economic Development has released recently 

the map that's going to lead to economic recovery in this 

province and it's called Partnership for Renewal.  Our 

economics minister, Mr. Speaker, has laid out a clear and 

concise route for us to follow.  But what is really encouraging, 

Mr. Speaker, is it has been joined not just by government but 

by all segments of our society have joined in the rebuilding of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, as citizens of this great province of ours, 

and as those who've enjoyed the benefits of Saskatchewan, I 

would call on the opposition to set 



372 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1993 

aside their petty, political objectives and join forces with us.  

Join forces with the people of Saskatchewan to rebuild 

Saskatchewan to make it a better place for all of us to live. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Harper: -- Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, that has not been 

their record and that has not been their way.  Their way, Mr. 

Speaker, was not to operate and work and develop programs 

and policies on behalf of ordinary people in this province.  

They only looked after the fortunate few.  The unfortunate part 

of that, Mr. Speaker, is those few, very few came from 

Saskatchewan.  Most of them came from other parts of Canada 

and other parts of the world. 

 

But what they did do, Mr. Speaker, is they did take hundreds of 

millions of taxpayers' dollars and invest them in large 

megaprojects, megaprojects that in many cases failed -- 

GigaText, Supercart, just to name a few.  But leaving the 

people of Saskatchewan with not a meaningful investment, just 

leaving them with a meaningful debt.  That, Mr. Speaker, is not 

our way.  Because, Mr. Speaker, that is not Saskatchewan's 

way. 

 

We in this province, Mr. Speaker, in our government recognize 

the true strength of our economy.  That strength, Mr. Speaker, 

is our small-business people throughout this province. 

 

It is a well-known fact, Mr. Speaker, that nearly 80 per cent of 

all the jobs created in Saskatchewan are created in business 

places that employ 20 people or less.  It's often been said, Mr. 

Speaker, that the motor of our economy, the engine that drives 

our economy is our small-business sector. 

 

That is why, Mr. Speaker, we have developed the programs 

through our Partnership for Renewal that will assist in this 

development of small business, strengthening small business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are some success stories already in this 

province in only a short term of our government.  My colleague 

from Kelsey-Tisdale has told me about the success story of 

Majestic Paper.  Mr. Speaker, that is an example of a 

commitment of people to their community, of people to their 

province.  Those are the success stories, the success stories 

where people invest in their own community for the betterment 

of their community and thusly for the betterment of the people 

in that community.  As we through community-based industries 

develop strong community economies, we in turn develop a 

strong provincial economy.  That, Mr. Speaker, is what is 

known as doing it the Saskatchewan way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a great need for furthering the 

development through education, through developing markets. 

And that we have embarked upon.  We have set forth the 

formula for the increased educational development through 

industries teaching the latest 

technology required to their employees. 

 

And our minister has set forth a true plan of market 

development throughout the world by encouraging our 

entrepreneurs to make the visits and put the hand forth that has 

often brought back real productivity. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Name two. 

 

Mr. Harper: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member asked me to 

name two.  Well I will name one, Mr. Speaker, one that I'm 

very proud of -- one is Norquay Alfalfa, Mr. Speaker.  That is 

strictly a community-based industry that was brought about by 

the determination of the people in that community because they 

had a dream -- dream, and a willingness to invest in that dream. 

 

They invested in that dream, Mr. Speaker, and saw it become a 

reality, a reality now, Mr. Speaker, that it's harvest just last year 

in its first year of operation, over 11,000 acres of alfalfa in the 

Norquay district and is presently processing 18,000 bales, Mr. 

Speaker. And that product is being exported to Japan and 

Korea. 

 

That plant alone, Mr. Speaker, in its own small way has created 

40 jobs and has added over a million-dollar payroll to the 

community.  That, Mr. Speaker, is progress.  That, Mr. 

Speaker, is a success story. 

 

The hon. member from Morse keeps chirping in his seat that 

they started it.  Well, Mr. Speaker, we finished it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: -- Mr. Speaker, I suppose one can go on for a 

long time enlightening the people of Saskatchewan in the rather 

dismal track record of the former government -- and dismal 

certainly it is, Mr. Speaker.  But I think that they probably 

know, for the simple reason, Mr. Speaker, they've lived it; 

they've seen it.  And quite frankly, they're sad today because of 

it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are rebuilding this province and we're going to 

rebuild this province basically on three principles -- the 

principles of vision, the principles of goals, and the principles 

of reaching our objectives. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to conclude my 

remarks today by once again reading off the motion.  Mr. 

Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to move today the 

following motion: 

 

 That this Assembly support the government and its ministers 

of Finance and Economic Development in their efforts to 

restore financial freedom and to revitalize Saskatchewan's 

economy by, on one hand, acting responsibly and 

courageously to address the current financial crisis; and on 

the other hand, by developing through partnerships a 

coherent 



March 16, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 373 

 and comprehensive realistic economic strategy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It is indeed 

a tough act to follow, that moving speech from the member 

from Pelly.  I thank you for the enlightenment you've shed 

upon us here this day.  I say that as a friend and colleague. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what this motion is about, is about moving into 

the future as opposed to hiding in the past.  There isn't one of 

us here on government side of the legislature or on the 

opposition side, either of those two parties that would not wish 

the situation to be different than it is.  I've heard much ado 

from opposition members about, why are you raising taxes?  

Why are you cutting programs?  Why are you dealing with 

things? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the fact is, we were dealt a hand that 

included over thirteen and a half billion dollars cold cash debt, 

and an additional one and a half billion dollars roughly in loan 

guarantees over which we had no control.  That's the hand that 

we were dealt with when we formed government.  Total $15 

billion debt. 

 

Now you can't deal with a problem unless you acknowledge 

that you've got a problem.  So the first thing that this 

government did, implemented the Gass Commission.  And we 

said, find out exactly where we're at.  We know the history of 

the former government.  We know they would say that in an 

election year the annual deficit will be less than 300 million 

and it will turn out to be $1.2 billion, by that former 

administration's own admission.  We know that their track 

record was dismal, to put it politely.  But dismal is about as 

strong as I can say without getting kicked out of here. 

 

The situation that we've got is how do we deal with $15 billion 

debt?  We know we can't walk away from it.  It's, Mr. Speaker, 

much like many people have the situation as they're growing 

up, of having a friend that wants to borrow some money.  And 

of course being open and good-spirited, we lend the money. 

 

If that friend doesn't pay the money back and they ask you 

again, usually we're forgiving enough, we'll lend twice, 

assuming it's a fairly small amount.  But you know the credit 

dries up, it dries right up where that person comes and says, I 

need to borrow $5 for lunch.  Sorry, go hungry; you've not ever 

met your obligations in the past. 

 

We have to meet our debt obligations if we hope to ever be 

able to maintain any semblance of government programs and 

meeting our obligations.  So we must meet our debt 

obligations. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, with respect to a situation when you get too 

heavily levered, where you have too much 

debt payment, it reminds me of when my wife and I moved into 

Regina some years ago.  We bought a house, took out a 

mortgage.  We thought we could handle the mortgage.  

Hindsight says we could.  But I can tell you, we could just 

barely handle it in those early years.  We could barely handle 

it. 

 

We had too much debt.  It was to the point where, when 

pay-day was nearing, my wife and I would argue over whether 

milk or cigarettes would win.  Milk always won because we 

had small children.  Milk always won, but all we had . . . the 

only thing we could afford to do was fight over is it milk or 

cigarettes. 

 

We were house poor.  Saskatchewan is house poor.  But there 

was a couple of other things we could do, other than fight over 

what groceries came into the house or what came in to feed us, 

Mr. Speaker.  There was a couple of things we could do.  One 

of the things I remember very vividly -- it being fairly cold out 

right now -- I went the first year we lived in Regina without a 

winter coat.  Why?  So that we could have some food and so 

that we could try and maintain as good a style of living as we 

could.  And I thought it was the lesser of a number of evils for 

me to be without a coat. 

 

The second thing that happened . . . I'm maybe one of the only 

people, Mr. Speaker, in the world that for my 25th birthday I 

got a swing set.  My parents bought me a swing set so that my 

then two children would have a swing set to play with.  And 

that was sort of some of the things we did to manage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are some things that can be done.  The point 

is, they aren't all pretty.  The point is, they have to be done.  

You deal with the problem now or you die a death of a 

thousand slices. 

 

We're witnessing a death of a thousand slices.  The opposition's 

colleagues, the federal government, has been systematically 

gutting Canadians -- death of a thousand slices -- for the last 

decade.  When they took office, Mr. Speaker, the federal 

annual deficit was about $30 billion.  Here we are a decade 

later and it looks like the annual deficit is $34 billion annually. 

 

All the while tax increases.  All the while slice.  Death of a 

thousand slices.  And they still haven't dealt with the problem.  

And they're running out of room to deal with the problem -- 

running out of room. 

 

If that's the party that's got the answers, talk to cousin Brian in 

Ottawa.  Have him implement some of those answers.  Have 

the central bank take on some of Canada's debt.  Have the 

central bank buy some of the provincial debt.  Have the central 

bank lower interest rates.  Talk to cousin Brian in Ottawa. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are three kinds of people in this world.  

There's people that make things happen; there's people that 

watch things happen; and there's people that wonder what in 

the world's happening. 

 

Well I'm telling you, the government members are people that 

are making things happen, Mr. Speaker.  We're proud of it. 



374 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1993 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Saskatchewan's a happening place and we're 

making it happen.  We're dealing with the problems. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just in my final moments I want to deal with a 

similar matter, and that is, I keep hearing about the first 

socialist government that ever formed office in Canada right 

here in Saskatchewan, that of Tommy Douglas. 

 

And, you know, I was talking with an old time CCFer 

(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) just the other day in 

my constituency office.  And he said: you know, there was no 

premier in this person's -- in George's -- memory that . . . He 

said: there's no premier that was ever called a dictator more 

than Tommy.  There was no premier that ever had more 

predictions of dire consequences of the economy falling apart, 

of horrendous things happening, than Tommy. 

 

But what did Tommy do?  Started a box factory; it ultimately 

failed.  Started a shoe factory; it ultimately failed.  Started 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance organization that 

continues to be a model, a success model, not just in 

Saskatchewan, but for all of Canada and beyond, Mr. Speaker.  

It enables us to enjoy the lowest auto insurance premiums in all 

of Canada -- right here in Saskatchewan -- because of 

something that a socialist government implemented. 

 

STC (Saskatchewan Transportation Company) started under 

Tommy.  Saskatchewan Transportation Company built itself up 

over the years; wound up having a fleet paid for -- a relatively 

young fleet -- was breaking even over the years.  Folks 

opposite form government; run up $30 million debt; leave a 

decimated operation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm going to close by simply pointing out one 

fundamental that we seem to have forgotten in the heat of the 

moment.  And that is that what we're witnessing by our action 

on dealing with the deficit, what we're dealing with is the 

results of the plebiscite of the last provincial election where 

over 70 per cent of people that voted respecting balanced 

annual budgets, more than 70 per cent of the people that voted 

said yes, balance the annual budget.  So we're doing it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm delighted to say this government is 

responding to the people of Saskatchewan.  I will be supporting 

this amendment moved by the member from Pelly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it is a 

little sad that this motion brought forward today as rule 16, a 

little sad indeed.  Mr. Speaker, we are faced with a motion 

from the member from Pelly that should 

embarrass every member of this Assembly.  It is amazing that 

he has the audacity to commend his government for the utter 

betrayal that has been and continues to be perpetrated on the 

people of this province.  Absolutely amazing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The member from Regina Albert North talks about the hand 

that his government was dealt, Mr. Speaker, the hand that his 

government was dealt.  Well what about the hand that the 

previous NDP administration dealt the Conservative 

administration?  Four and a half billion dollars worth of debt in 

1992 dollars translates to $8 billion debt, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And at the end, Mr. Speaker, at the end of my remarks, I will 

be moving an amendment: 

 

 That all of the words after the word "Assembly" be deleted 

and the following substituted therefor: 

 

 condemns the government and the Premier for the betrayal of 

his election commitment to reduce taxes and cap government 

spending at no more than 4.5 billion, restricting the 

province's financial freedom as well as destroying the 

province's hope, economic vitality, by spreading excessively 

negative and unrealistic misinformation about the debt 

situation of this province. 

 

And I will be moving that amendment, Mr. Speaker, at the 

conclusion of my remarks. 

 

But let's first talk about the so-called financial freedom referred 

to in this sad little motion of the members opposite.  Mr. 

Speaker, I can only presume the member is referring to the 

freedom this government has taken with the way it throws 

around numbers, the great liberties it has taken to discredit the 

province's financial situation and void its own responsibility for 

the choices made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let us remember that the now Premier promised 

the people of Saskatchewan that there would be no tax 

increases under his government.  None.  That's what he 

promised, Mr. Speaker.  The now Premier won his election 

promising to get rid of taxes, not to increase them. 

 

He got elected on a promise to limit spending to no more than 

4.5 billion, Mr. Speaker.  And he went so far as to say that any 

government which could not manage on 4.5 billion does not 

deserve to be in government.  Now those are his words, Mr. 

Speaker.  Those are his words, the Premier now.  So by his 

own words, Mr. Speaker, by his own words the Premier of this 

province does not deserve to be in government.  And with that, 

Mr. Speaker, I can agree. 

 

Not only has the Premier betrayed his promise not to increase 

taxes, he has dramatically increased government spending in 

the province of Saskatchewan.  On both counts -- on both 

counts -- Mr. Speaker, by his own assessment, the Premier of 

Saskatchewan should resign, Mr. Premier.  He should 



March 16, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 375 

resign as Premier of Saskatchewan. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to do a little math following up to the 

earlier throne speech contribution of my colleague from 

Wilkie.  I did take a look at this research on the debt, Mr. 

Speaker, and some very interesting facts present themselves for 

consideration. 

 

An enormous proportion of the increase in the debt this NDP 

government has delivered to the people of Saskatchewan, 

almost the whole increase, can be traced to writing off 

advances and loans, Mr. Speaker.  Almost a billion dollars in 

advances to SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation) for capital construction primarily in schools and 

hospitals, Mr. Speaker, as well as other advances. 

 

The NDP government . . . Well did the NDP government leave 

behind any advances in the same categories?  Did they?  Well, 

Mr. Speaker, you bet they did.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, if you 

apply exactly the same rules to write-offs and write 

_downs to the budget of 1982, as this government is applying 

to the budgets of today, you'll find that there was an enormous 

debt in 1982. 

 

And I challenge the NDP government, if they disagree with 

this.  I challenge you.  If you disagree with this assessment 

which is all based on numbers from the NDP government 

documents, if the NDP disagrees with these numbers, it is a 

simple matter to contact Donald Gass again and have him 

complete the same exercise in 1982 as he did in 1992, Mr. 

Speaker.  Let him go over the same advances, Mr. Speaker.  

You'll find the NDP government under the member from 

Riversdale had 800 million in interest-free advances to Crown 

corporations on the books.  Poof! Wrote them off just like that. 

 

You'll find an additional 100 million in advances to Crown 

corporations that did bear interest, Mr. Speaker.  Write them 

off and now we're at 900 million increase in the debt. 

 

Then you'll find 130 million in interest-free advances to 

departments.  Write them off too, Mr. Speaker, and we're at a 

debt of more than $1 billion.  Then, Mr. Speaker, take the 3.5 

billion that the member from Riversdale himself acknowledges, 

3.5 billion in third party debt in the Crown sector.  That takes 

us to a total, Mr. Speaker, of $4.5 billion in 1982 dollars.  

Translate that into 1992 dollars, Mr. Speaker, and the debt 

compared in equal terms, apples to apples, the debt that was 

left in 1982 was in the order of $8 billion, Mr. Speaker -- $8 

billion of debt that clearly was left by the NDP government of 

the 1970s. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that $8 billion does not include the 

hundreds of millions of dollars of farm land that was bought up 

by the land bank, the program that was absolutely hated by 

Saskatchewan farmers.  I do not believe a genuine evaluation 

was ever done of those losses, Mr. Speaker, and for those the 

previous government can be rightly criticized.  I believe in 

evaluation of the massive losses due to the land bank should be 

done and should be made public. 

But here, Mr. Speaker, when you talk about land bank there's a 

whole host of other problems the government had.  We know at 

the height land bank owned over 1 million acres of 

Saskatchewan farm land, Mr. Speaker.  We know that most of 

the purchases were made at the height of land price inflation, 

an inflation that was clearly made worse by the existence of 

land bank bidding prices up.  So we do not include the losses of 

several hundred millions written off in land bank. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, even without considering those losses the 

NDP government of the '70s left behind a debt of at least $8 

billion in current dollars.  Having that information would be 

helpful to the public, Mr. Speaker, because it would help them 

have a perspective on the debt challenge we do face in 

Saskatchewan.  The fact is however that this government does 

not want the people to have perspective.  They only want them 

to have panic and fear, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Under the cover of that panic and fear the Premier hopes he can 

get away with this massive betrayal of his election promises.  

In the process, Mr. Speaker, he's destroying this province's 

hope for the future and that is something which can never be 

forgiven. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I therefore move the following amendment: 

 

 That all the words after the word "Assembly" be deleted and 

the following substituted therefor: 

 

 condemns the government and the Premier for the betrayal of 

his election commitment to reduce taxes and cap government 

spending at no more than 4.5 billion, restricting the 

province's financial freedom as well as destroying the 

province's hope, economic vitality, by spreading excessively 

negative and unrealistic misinformation about the debt 

situation in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so move this amendment, seconded by my 

colleague from Maple Creek. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm very happy this 

afternoon to be able to stand and second this motion which 

might in fact now provide some realistic meaning to being here 

today. 

 

I must admit, Mr. Speaker, that earlier today I was very 

reluctant to be involved in this debate.  I said to my colleagues 

that talking about this kind of a motion under the rule 16 after I 

read what was there just would be a waste of my time and the 

waste of the taxpayers' money to even bother standing up and 

talking about it. 

 

Then my colleague suggested that, well maybe we could put an 

amendment into it and give it some substance so that it can 

have some meaning and give 



376 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1993 

some meaning to the day so that the taxpayers don't feel that 

they're being ripped off by our being here discussing it. 

 

So that makes me feel better about getting involved in the 

debate, Mr. Speaker, because now the members opposite will 

have the opportunity to allow us to explain why we want to 

change their motion.  And they in their wisdom can stand up 

and vote in favour of it.  And as we debate this and show them 

the wrong ways that they were going with their opinion, they 

can fall into line, support our amendment, and make the day at 

least a little bit prosperous for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And the way they can do that, Mr. Speaker, is by supporting 

our amendment and saying to the people of Saskatchewan that 

they admit that not everything that they are really doing is 

exactly right and that there are other alternatives that we should 

be looking at. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I was disappointed in the 

mover of the rule 16 motion when he was challenged to give 

two examples of what this government has done for economic 

benefits to our province.  He could only think of one, and it 

turns out to be the one that the former administration, the 

Conservative administration, had almost set up and completed 

before the last election. 

 

It would be nice if they could come up with an example of 

something that they've actually done for themselves except to 

blame everybody for all their problems and to run the province 

down to the point that everybody in the world is now starting to 

believe them. 

 

(1515) 

 

We've got people so convinced in the world around us, Mr. 

Speaker, that our province is down the tubes financially, that 

our credit rating sits on the brink of falling in a terrible disaster 

for all of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

When that happens it is usually a lack of confidence, not 

necessarily so much in the figures but in the attitude of the 

people that are running the affairs of the province.  And the 

attitude of the people that run our affairs, Mr. Speaker, is that 

we are in terrible shape. 

 

And people around the world are now starting to believe them, 

because they don't trust this government to be able to manage 

the affairs.  They don't believe that they can bring economic 

diversification as this motion wants to compliment originally 

the government for doing. 

 

Financial freedom and revitalize Saskatchewan's economy -- 

can you believe it, Mr. Speaker?  We have stood here today 

through question period listening to talk about taxation and a 

budget, a disastrous budget that is being predicted in those 

words by the Premier himself.  A terrible, terrible black 

Thursday coming this week.  The Premier has gone all over 

telling everybody what a terrible, bad budget this is going to 

be for everybody, what pain it's going to inflict, how awful it's 

going to be.  And now people are beginning to believe him, and 

our credit rating is starting to go down.  What else could people 

do? 

 

But I want, Mr. Speaker, to just say this.  This one-term 

government of rural revenge has deceived and betrayed the 

people of Saskatchewan, and the people of Saskatchewan will 

be the ones that will give the final judgement on that betrayal.  

And they will give that judgement in just a couple of years.  It 

won't be long now.  We won't have to put up with this for ever. 

 

The Premier said some time ago $4.5 billion is enough to run 

this province.  Anybody that can't do that shouldn't be the 

premier, he said.  Well we're passed the 5 billion now.  The 

man's been in power for 15 months.  Where are we going to 

end up in another two years? 

 

A disastrous budget would be to put it mildly.  Even University 

of Saskatchewan, U of S students have figured out that there's 

an easier and better way to do things than the Premier of this 

province who told us: no more taxes; enough is enough; we can 

do it better. 

 

The Premier of this province deceived the elderly and he 

betrayed them when he told them that he was going to give 

them a better health care system.  And we can now predict 

from the statements made from the members opposite that the 

budget will certainly bring down the quality of our health care 

in many of our communities throughout the province. 

 

And if it doesn't bring it down, then the user will have to go 

somewhere else because there's going to be line-ups; hospitals 

are going to have close.  I predict that as a result of this budget, 

Mr. Speaker.  And that's a sad scenario for the old people who 

believed this Premier during his campaign in the last election.  

They believed that he was going to do the things that he told 

them. 

 

But I should, Mr. Speaker, as the critic for Labour, talk a little 

bit about the lack of opportunity for the workers in our 

province.  A few days ago I was introduced as the critic of 

Labour.  And that day I thought that was appropriate because 

the Minister of Labour was the speaker ahead of me and I 

wanted certainly to be in a position to criticize what he was 

doing. 

 

But in real terms, as time has gone by, I feel more and more 

that I am able to realistically become the critic for labour 

because they are being mostly betrayed by this government.  

They are deceived by the programs and the plans that have 

been put forward by this administration.  They were promised a 

lot of things before the last election, and now they're getting 

exactly the opposite. 

 

And at this point we have to start looking at the reality that the 

common, ordinary worker is not being fairly represented.  He is 

not getting a fair shake.  And as proof to that, Mr. Speaker, I'll 

refer to the Saskatchewan statistics from the Bureau of 

Statistics that we've received just this past week.  And it says 



March 16, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 377 

that: 

 

 The Saskatchewan unemployment rate for February of 1993 

was 9.6 per cent . . .  and is 1.3 percentage points higher than 

the 8.3 per cent unemployment rate of February 1992. 

 

That's a direct quote, Mr. Speaker -- 1.3 per cent below last 

year.  This was a government that bragged that they were going 

to come into the province, take over and create more jobs and 

give more wealth and prosperity to our working people. 

 

And now we hear the word "pink slip."  Everywhere I go I 

hear, pink slips coming on Wednesday.  The Premier himself 

has told the workers of this province and the people of this 

province that there will be massive lay-offs of people - 

_ in order to save his skin -- in the budget so he won't look so 

bad when he runs all of the taxes through the mill that are 

coming on black Thursday. 

 

Pink slips for the very workers that he promised in the election 

that he was going to help.  He was going to improve their lot in 

Saskatchewan.  He was going to give them better working 

conditions.  He was going to give them higher pay and he was 

going to do all kinds of good and great and wonderful things 

for the workers of this province.  And we have 9,000 less jobs 

this year than we had last year -- straight from the Bureau of 

Statistics. 

 

To be quite frank about it, Mr. Speaker, I thought that the 

working people of Saskatchewan had been doing fairly well.  

They were working their way up.  But it was only natural when 

a leader of an opposition party would campaign that he was 

going to give them more, that they would want that.  That's 

human nature.  You can't blame people for that.  That's the way 

it should be.  You should be driven by the incentive to gain 

things for the better job you do. 

 

And when the Premier, the now Premier, campaigned on that 

kind of promise, the reality, Mr. Speaker, is that the people 

believed him, and they followed him.  And now they know the 

truth.  Now they know that they are never going to be able to 

trust this administration ever again. 

 

It's not too often that I agree with the members opposite, but I 

want to agree on one item.  I want to agree, Mr. Speaker, that 

the NDP government of the day has had to make some tough 

choices, tough decisions.  But, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The member's time has expired. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Johnson: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm first going to indicate that I 

will not be supporting the amendment to the motion but will be 

supporting the motion as it was originally placed. 

 

I think that the members opposite in moving the 

amendment have really watched the program Dallas and 

picked up on the initial program of one year where they turned 

the last year's production into a dream, because the writers had 

written the program into a situation where it did not have any 

of the main characters left and the program appeared to be able 

to be run for another season to make some money. 

 

And the Conservatives opposite, Mr. Speaker, are attempting to 

come back and say that what we've seen in the previous six or 

seven years of their administration was only a dream and now 

they're coming back, presenting themselves as they actually 

are. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do not think that that is the accurate situation.  

The member from Maple Creek says that the economic benefits 

in the province of Saskatchewan, that there's only one 

economic benefit that has occurred under this administration.  

I'd like to just take a little bit of time to indicate some of the 

things that have occurred during the past year, 1992. 

 

If you want to look at receipts in agriculture, they've gone up 

7.8 per cent.  If you look at cattle, they went up 18 per cent.  If 

you move to the resource area, crude oil production went up 

7.5 per cent in the last half of 1992.  Natural gas increased 3.9 

per cent during the last half of 1982.  And uranium sales 

increased almost 20 per cent over the last half of 1992.  

Housing starts went up 87 per cent from January to September, 

and dwellings under construction up 76 per cent. 

 

The economic benefits are there in the province of 

Saskatchewan, and you can pick up the indicators all the way 

through, including the retail sales which went up 1.6 per cent 

January to July, whereas Canada as a whole dropped something 

in the neighbourhood of four and a half per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Estevan, when the leader of the 

members opposite said that you could afford to mismanage the 

province of Saskatchewan and still break even, but what he did 

not tell the people when saying that he was going to do that is 

that in order to achieve that -- and even . . . and if you look at 

the record he didn't achieve it -- he was going to have to 

dispose of a whole pile of assets that had been collected and 

put in place in the province of Saskatchewan.  And I have a 

short list here that I'd like to indicate. 

 

Sask Minerals was sold.  SaskMedia, Saskoil, SMDC 

(Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation) was 

partially sold, the Saskatchewan Potash Corporation, the 

provincial park facilities, highway equipment, natural gas 

reserves, the Estevan Coal to Manalta Coal, equipment for the 

school-based dental program, a highway equipment which I've 

already mentioned, Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation 

-- a part of that; the computer utility, the P.A. (Prince Albert) 

pulp mill, the saw mill at Meadow Lake, the saw mill at Big 

River.  The directory of SaskTel was sold out of the 

corporation of SaskTel.  And this list I know is not a complete 

list.  It is only a short list of what actually took place. 



378 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1993 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, when they were on their 

feet, indicated that they felt that the economic conditions in 

1982 were much worse than what they are today.  And I'd like 

to just point out to them that in 1982 the total combined debt -- 

that's both the self-liquidating debt in the Crown corporations 

and the debt that was being tax supported -- amounted to 26 per 

cent of the gross domestic product of the province of 

Saskatchewan.  And by 1992 when they were no longer in 

power and . . . but reflects what took place, that had increased 

to 73 per cent of the gross domestic product, Mr. Speaker, 

something very close to 50 per cent of the gross domestic 

product in increase. 

 

And that is what the disaster is.  At that rate of 5 per cent per 

year, in 20 years you would put the province of Saskatchewan 

into a debt that equals the total production of this province in 

one year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the interest charges as part of the consolidated 

Fund increased from 43 million in 1982 to 502 million in 1992 

under the Consolidated Fund, an increase of something in 

excess of 10 times, tenfold. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just as part of this I'd like to point out that, in 

looking back at some of the budgets in the 1940s, this amount 

of interest that we are now paying in 1992 and '93 because of 

the mismanagement that the former Conservative government 

did in this province, equals that that the governments in the '40s 

were paying based on what the governments of the '30s and the 

early '40s had increased the public debt. 

 

And it is for that reason, Mr. Speaker, that I am prepared to 

support the motion as put forward by my colleague and will be 

voting against the amendment.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1530) 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is an honour to 

rise in this House and participate in the debate on the motion 

brought forward by the member from Pelly.  The member from 

Pelly brings forward important issues to this Assembly, the 

economic future of Saskatchewan and the policies that we need 

in place to get our fiscal house in order.  And for that I extend 

my thanks to the member from Pelly. 

 

In his motion the member expresses his faith in the 

government's economic policies, and I feel a strong 

responsibility to reflect the views of many Saskatchewan 

citizens who do not feel as confident about the government's 

approach to fiscal and economic development in our province.  

My problem, and the problem, Mr. Speaker, overall with the 

member's resolution is that while the province is focusing its 

efforts on restoring what they term financial freedom, the 

course they are charting to that alleged freedom seems to be 

costing people dearly. 

It is costing investor confidence in Saskatchewan.  It is costing 

us our competitive edge.  It is slowing our economic growth as 

increased taxation has in every part of North America.  It is 

halting consumer spending.  And of greatest concern, it is 

costing many, many people their jobs in our province. 

 

It is disturbing how some of the members opposite will take 

credit for such things as housing starts, which are directly 

related to federal interest rates and the federal policy of using 

RRSP (registered retirement savings plan) monies as down 

payments, but they fail to accept responsibility for 

circumstances which are under their jurisdiction.  Since the 

government took power, according to its own statistics -- and 

these go from November of '91 forward to just this past year -- 

22,000 people in Saskatchewan lost their jobs, Mr. Speaker.  

Twenty-two thousand jobs represents 5 per cent of the total 

workforce of our province.  And while this loss of jobs cannot 

all be attributed to the government, much of it can. 

 

This government raised taxes in the last budget by some $340 

million.  It was the Premier who stated in May of 1991 that 

taxes are the silent killer of jobs.  And he was correct.  Many 

knowledgeable businesspersons throughout our province have 

turned a blind eye on Saskatchewan in favour of locations 

elsewhere, and they take job opportunities with them. 

 

And I have to wonder, Mr. Speaker, where the 700 companies 

are that the government said would relocate here.  Were they 

scared off perhaps by that $340 million in tax increases? 

 

An indication of how much faith we can have in our current 

government's fiscal and economic development policies can be 

found in the government's own mid-year financial report.  

Commendably, this report represents a step ahead in 

accountability.  But there is evidence presented which is quite 

damaging. 

 

Prior to the spring budget the Conference Board of Canada 

suggested that Saskatchewan would have a rate . . . a growth 

rate, of some 2.2 per cent.  Six months later, after a slate of 

unexpected and unwanted tax increases, the government had to 

revise that growth prediction to .5 per cent. 

 

A recent report from the Royal Bank has the member from 

Elphinstone somewhat excited because it predicts that 

Saskatchewan's economy will grow by more than 3 per cent.  

That article, however, Mr. Speaker, states that this growth is 

contingent upon whether or not the government's budget 

forthcoming will include many government tax increases. 

 

I fear, as many Saskatchewan residents do, that it will be 

difficult to achieve a significant level of growth if the 

government chooses to raise taxes further on Thursday, as the 

Premier has announced it will.  Clearly it challenges the 

people's confidence when the government's financial policies 

are taking jobs away and preventing people from creating 

wealth in our province that will eventually put taxes back into 



March 16, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 379 

the hands of government. 

 

Well the members opposite accuse me of being simplistic.  I 

can only say that the people of this province cannot see why 

they don't understand.  Taxes are no way to create wealth.  

Economists the world over have taught us this.  Dr. Vajder of 

Harvard has acknowledged this in all of his research.  They are 

never going to help Saskatchewan chart its course to financial 

freedom through this method. 

 

Yesterday and last week I raised the issue of Canadian Pacific 

bringing their customer service centre to Saskatchewan.  I did 

so because there's a possibility here of creating more than 650 

jobs for the people of Saskatchewan.  If we're not successful in 

attracting this centre, what is even worse is we not only will not 

have the new jobs, we will be penalized by losing the 61 jobs 

we have and the $2 million payroll with it. 

 

This opportunity, this one more opportunity for jobs is going to 

slip through our fingers just like the 700 or so companies that 

the provincial government had indicated in its last year's 

Speech from the Throne, if the provincial government 

continues to be stubborn in its position on fuel tax. 

 

When tax monies are left in private hands, Mr. Speaker, in the 

hands of employees, they use it.  They put it through the 

system when they buy goods and services in their communities.  

They pay for lunches at their coffee shops.  The money is used 

by people to purchase their everyday needs in grocery stores 

and retail shops all throughout our province.  Money is also 

used by people to create jobs for all people in our province, and 

that of course should be the objective - 

_ to take people off the misery of the unemployment rolls. 

 

Instead, Mr. Speaker, I do believe that the government is 

misguided in its approach.  If it's going to continue to increase 

taxes, it's going to be the people of our province who continue 

to suffer. 

 

I'm going to use the 15 cent per litre fuel tax on CP (Canadian 

Pacific) Rail just for illustrative purposes.  It's the railway 

worker and the farmer and the potash worker who suffer 

particularly from this tax.  The fuel tax, as you know, the 

average across Canada is 6.6 cents per litre, and in 

Saskatchewan it's 15 cents. 

 

This makes it much more expensive for farmers to get their 

crops to the coast.  It makes it more difficult for potash to get to 

its markets.  And it forces railways to actually lay off their 

workers.  Even more extraordinary is it puts all of the rail travel 

moving below the 49th parallel. 

 

This kind of attitude toward taxation is going to really hamper 

our financial freedom, our personal freedom to find work and 

to seek a better life for people.  And until the government calls 

upon experts with alternative views for achieving financial 

freedom, many Saskatchewan people believe that financial 

security and increased job opportunities are simply going to 

remain elusive dreams. 

The white paper on economic development, I read with some 

interest.  And the government said it intended to bring forward 

an agriculture strategy.  Well March has arrived and the 

government has put out a paper.  The paper is not a strategy, 

Mr. Speaker.  It is merely one which is encouraging people to 

start discussing one.  And if that's how one keeps a time line 

where we have to be commending the government for putting 

some time lines in, it reminds me to avoid asking the members 

opposite what the time is. 

 

The real tragedy with the economic strategy for agriculture, 

with the taxation policies of the province, is that by missing 

this time line, by putting added pressure on the people through 

taxation, the government actually extends a situation which has 

become unbearable for people of this province, the consumers 

of this province, and the farm families of this province. 

 

Until the members opposite understand that there is a direct 

correlation to increased taxation, to stymied economic growth, 

to lack of competitive edge, to the lack of opportunity for jobs 

to be created in our province, what we're going to have is a 

continuation of the difficulties we've been facing in our 

province. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I wish to thank again the member from 

Pelly for putting his motion forward, but I cannot share his 

enthusiasm for the government's policies.  Like most of the 

people in our province, I'm watching the government's actions 

with great concern for our children and particularly for the 

future of our young people.  And I can only pray that the 

Premier and his government will use some of the taxpayers' 

monies that they have to run our government, to seek 

alternative ideas, to go against further tax increases, to seek 

ideas from those with expertise. 

 

It is with regret that I cannot support the motion from the 

member of Pelly. 

 

Mr. Renaud: -- Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure today 

to stand here and talk in favour of the motion the hon. member 

from Pelly put forth, and against the amendment. 

 

I could understand, Mr. Speaker, why the members across are 

chirping and mumbling and amending this motion because 

there's certain words in the motion that I'm sure that they can't 

understand -- financial freedom, for instance. 

 

You know I'm sure they understand financial mess.  Financial 

mismanagement probably is part of their vocabulary. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Disaster? 

 

Mr. Renaud: -- Disaster, financial disaster would be one. 

 

They have no comprehension, Mr. Speaker, of the debt -- $15 

billion.  They have no understanding of 



380 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1993 

the interest that we have to pay each and every year -- $760 

million.  No understanding at all.  They don't understand, Mr. 

Speaker, that our credit rating is probably the lowest -- I think 

it is the lowest -- of all the provinces in Canada.  No concern, 

no remorse, no understanding. 

 

The member from Estevan, their former leader, stated 

Saskatchewan has so much going for it that it can afford to 

mismanage and still break even.  And they certainly know how 

to do that. 

 

Puberty economics.  The Liberals and Conservatives, Mr. 

Speaker, that's their economic policy -- puberty economics.  

Give the economy lots of time and the pimples will go away. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Renaud: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, the pimples of Gigatext 

and Joytec and interest on our debt and Trinitel, those pimples 

don't just go away overnight, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Their idea of financial freedom, Mr. Speaker, is to the chosen 

few.  They're not concerned about the people of Saskatchewan, 

just the chosen few. 

 

And I want to quote from the Star-Phoenix, March 10, 1993, 

Mr. Dan Zakreski.  Let's see here: ". . . Winning in a Global 

Market conference." And further on it says: 

 

 . . . featured well-known agricultural analyst Faith Popcorn as 

keynote speaker. 

 

 Then-agriculture minister Bill McKnight organized the 

extravaganza to bring the movers and shakers of international 

food policy together in Canada.  Why? 

 

Further down it goes on to say: 

 

 An Agriculture Canada post-mortem on the conference set 

the gross price tag for the two days at $1.07 million.  Subtract 

registration fees and the net cost to the taxpayers totalled 

$989,000. 

 

Further down, Mr. Speaker, it says: 

 

 The budget update includes $108,000 for Agriculture 

Canada, which included planning and personnel costs.  There 

is a $55,000 bill for "video conferencing" and another 

$37,000 for two brochure mailings. 

 

 The gaping hole in the material is the $238,000 for the DKM 

contract fee, translation, registration, public relations, 

miscellaneous disbursements and the like. 

 

And further down it says: 

 

 DKM Communications, incidentally, is a national 

corporation that registered in 

Saskatchewan on June 11, 1992 -- a scant six months before 

the conference and only a month before the government 

tendered the bids on the event. 

 

 Its directors include (and this is the interesting part, Mr. 

Speaker) its directors include Don Pringle and Dave 

Tkachuk, both one-time assistants to former premier Grant 

Devine; Ken Waschuk of Tanka Research, which did polling 

for Devine; and Mary-Lynn Charlton, a one-time assistant to 

former finance minister Lorne Hepworth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's what I'm saying.  Financial freedom to the 

members across is to the chosen few, not the general public of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

(1545) 

 

In 1944, Mr. Speaker, 1971, 1991, who did the people elect to 

fix the mess that was left?  The government on this side of the 

House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would like to ask the members opposite to join with us and 

the people of Saskatchewan in this journey for renewal.  

Financial freedom will allow us to determine our own destiny. 

 

There's a few other words in there, Mr. Speaker, that I can see 

that they may have trouble understanding, and those words are 

responsibility and courageously.  I think they'll have a problem 

understanding that. 

 

In 1992-93, Mr. Speaker, we presented a budget.  It was a 

tough budget, a responsible budget.  We announced to third 

parties what they would get, not just in that year but in the 

following year as well, so that they could plan for their future. 

 

In 1993-94, Mr. Speaker, we are going to give in a very few 

days another budget.  Some people might say it's tough.  But it 

will be a responsible budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I go back to 1991, Mr. Speaker, and I remember that there 

was no budget when the members opposite were in power.  

Why, Mr. Speaker?  Were they scared?  Was it because they 

were going to call an election?  Was it because of politics?  Did 

they feel any responsibility to the Saskatchewan people, or 

were they more concerned in getting elected? 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, the federal government, the same Tory 

administration is thinking of doing the same thing -- not 

presenting a budget.  Is it in the interests of the people of 

Canada?  Is that in the best interests of the people of Canada, or 

is it for political reasons?  That's a shame, Mr. Speaker, when 

they run this country based on politics only and not on the good 

of the people. 

 

The Prince Albert Daily Herald, March 2, 1993: Just call 

them Canada's debt busters -- Bob Rae, Roy Romanow, and 

Mike Harcourt.  Canada's three NDP premiers present 

themselves Monday as the country's 



March 16, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 381 

debt fighters promising cuts in government services to slow the 

flow of red ink, Mr. Speaker.  That's what I call courageous; 

that's what I call responsible. 

 

There's another part of the motion I think that they probably 

have a bit of problem understanding, Mr. Speaker, and that's 

developing through partnerships.  I think they have a little 

problem there, too.  Nine and a half years, Mr. Speaker, we 

were told that the province of Saskatchewan was open for 

business.  Well you know what that got us -- $15 billion debt, 

$760 million a year interest.  That's over $2 million a day.  

Those were the megaproject years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And still today they tell us to build a CANDU 3 reactor without 

. . . They don't care if we do any study to find a need.  They 

don't care if we do not have the financial resources.  They just 

say, build it.  Build it.  We'll worry about that later.  Just do it.  

Another white elephant, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What really should happen I think, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

opposition should have another chair set there for their mascot, 

and that of course should be a white elephant. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Renaud: -- Fair Share Saskatchewan.  No consideration 

for the finances of the province.  No consideration for the 

people, the workers.  Their attitude of divide and conquer 

because all they're concerned with, Mr. Speaker, is politics.  

They're not interested in what's best for the province.  Mr. 

Hardy, whose place I took . . . And the reason why there's only 

10 people across, Mr. Speaker, is because of white elephant 

deals like Fair Share Saskatchewan and megaprojects. 

 

Nine and a half years, Mr. Speaker, and . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The member's time has elapsed. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Well, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Here's Johnny. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Here's Johnny, right. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's a little hard to find much to say after some of 

the stuff that I've heard.  I looked at the motion and two words 

stuck out right away, and that was responsibility and 

courageously.  Those two words in that caught my eye.  I think 

these people should get their act together, Mr. Speaker. 

 

First of all, we have the member from Melfort telling the 

people in Melfort that Saskatchewan is on the verge of 

bankruptcy.  And then we have these people standing up and 

telling you what great and wonderful things this government is 

doing. 

 

And the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, seem to have some 

kind of a notion that the money that they left owing in the 

province didn't attract interest; that it 

was only the debt that we left that attracts interest.  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I've got news for them folks.  We've been paying 

interest on your debt ever since 1982.  And the members in the 

front benches know that very well, but they forget to tell the 

back-benchers. 

 

Those numbers we put on the Table, Mr. Speaker, are your 

own numbers, the government's own numbers.  Take those 

numbers, ask your front bench if those number are wrong.  Ask 

them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I guess I had a pretty good laugh when I saw the 

whites come out this morning and saw the motion the member 

from Pelly was going to make.  And I would say, what irony, 

Mr. Speaker, what a hoax.  Another hoax -- the same hoax they 

perpetuated on the province when they bloated up the deficit. 

 

And now the Premier is saying the deficit is going to be half of 

the last one.  Of course, because the other one was just wind.  

There was nothing but wind in that other one.  Monkeying 

around with a pencil. 

 

Now the member from Pelly wants us to support this motion -- 

support the biggest tax grab in the history of the province.  

Support that?  I don't think so, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To support the actions of the many ministers of Finance over 

there in their slashing and hacking programs.  They don't seem 

to realize every time they hack jobs they lose income.  That's 

not the way you pay off the debt.  You don't pay off the debt by 

taxing people; you pay off the debt by putting people to work. 

 

And it's interesting, Mr. Speaker, that while the NDP were in 

opposition, they said enough is enough, and the NDP 

government would impose no new taxes.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, 

their own studies on the effects of harmonization says, and I 

want to quote what their own study said: this tax increase will 

lead to increased inflation, reduced consumer spending and 

consumer confidence, and thousands of lost jobs and hundreds 

of millions of dollars in lost economic activity within the 

Saskatchewan economy. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, apparently there's been a change of heart 

over there.  The many ministers of Finance over there have 

finally had a change of heart.  Now the NDP consider it 

courageous and responsible to raise every tax in sight, and 

some taxes that were not in sight; $15 million, Mr. Speaker, 

that don't show anywhere -- 15 million.  I want to show them to 

you.  That's right. 

 

And while they're doing this, Mr. Speaker, they slash programs 

and they cut services all at the same time, which means losses 

of jobs, people going on UIC (Unemployment Insurance 

Commission) or welfare.  And that is supposed to pay off the 

debt we have?  Incidentally, about $8 billion which they're 

responsible for, which we showed here in the House.  

Challenge anybody to challenge the figures, and nobody has . . 

. (inaudible interjection) . . . That's right.   



382 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1993 

That's right.  You won't even bother because you don't want 

your eyes opened.  That's why. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Time has elapsed on this 

debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' MOTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 1 -- Tax Increases 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Speaker, 

once again we have to rise in this Assembly and condemn this 

NDP government for doing exactly what they promised they 

wouldn't do to Saskatchewan people, to Saskatchewan 

taxpayers.  And I think the motion is very appropriate, Mr. 

Speaker, particularly since we saw what happened in question 

period today when we asked a number of questions to the 

Premier of this province in regard to his taxation policies and 

the reasons that he could give to Saskatchewan taxpayers as to 

why that onerous burden was being placed upon Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

And I would just like to read the motion into the record, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

 That this Assembly condemns the government for its betrayal 

of Saskatchewan people in dramatically increasing taxes and 

using the utilities as unaccountable taxation machines after 

the Premier gave his solemn word in the 1991 general 

election that there would be no tax increases under his 

administration. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, no tax increases.  And the Premier 

promised that in venues all across this province while he was 

the leader of the opposition, while he was trying desperately to 

become the premier of this province. 

 

I think Mr. Speaker, it might have been the fact that as one 

approaches a quarter of a century in this particular institution, 

that you begin to see your time passing by and that your desire, 

if you're in that position, to become premier becomes even 

stronger.  And you're prepared, it seems, to throw caution to the 

wind, and as the election approaches, say things that you 

probably don't mean and don't plan on carrying out. 

 

And I'd like to refer, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to some quotes that I 

have here from the Premier of our province when he was in 

opposition.  And he was talking to Saskatchewan people about 

the degree of taxation which they had at that time and the way 

that he would run the province of Saskatchewan in lieu of 

increased taxes, in lieu of raising utility rates, in lieu of 

increasing all of those small fees that are part and parcel of 

government that we all as taxpayers have to live with. 

 

And I quote from CKCK-TV on September 3, 1991, and this is 

the member from Riversdale: 

We believe in living within our means.  We think $4.5 

billion expenditure a year roughly, is what we now expend in 

the province of Saskatchewan . . . (that that's) enough. 

 

That's enough. 

 

From the Prince Albert Herald of February 23, 1991: 

 

 "Tax increases were not needed to pay for the GRIP and 

NISA programs," says NDP leader Roy Romanow. 

 

From the Leader-Post of September 6, 1991.  You've got to 

remember, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we're in that period of 

time just leading up to the 1991 election campaign. 

 

 No new taxes would be imposed; instead, the NDP would cut 

wasteful spending and encourage new economic 

development. 

 

Well I've got many more here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I'll use 

as part of this debate.  But I think from that you get a flavour of 

what Saskatchewan people were being told over and over and 

over again.  On a weekly basis, both when this legislature was 

in session, when this legislature was out of session, we had the 

member from Riversdale going around this province, grabbing 

hold of absolutely every opportunity with the media to expound 

this message of: I can do it better, I can do it smarter, and I can 

do it without tax increases, without utility rate increases; that 

your health and your education and your agricultural programs 

will be safeguarded.  And I will do it all because I will manage 

this province better. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the deficit in this province . . . and 

we haven't seen what the final number is going to be this year.  

It was projected at 517, but we know that the government went 

for special warrants for fully one-sixth of the budget year.  So 

we have no idea exactly where we're going to end up.  But my 

guess is it'll probably be the second highest deficit in the 

history of this province. 

 

(1600) 

 

That this Premier and this government have added to the total 

debt of this province probably in the neighbourhood of $600 

million, $650 million, somewhere in there.  But in fact since 

this government took office a couple of years ago, we're 

probably well over a billion dollars more on the total debt side 

of this province.  And we have had unprecedented tax increases 

and utility rate increases. 

 

It hasn't been on a yearly basis, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  This is 

like every six months, and almost always, I remind the 

members of this legislature, when the House isn't in session.  

This from a political party and a group that always stood in 

their place in this House and said that you should do your 

utility rate increases when the House is in so that we can ask 

the ministers the appropriate questions.  That's what they said.  

All up and down the rows here they said, you should 



March 16, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 383 

bring in those increases. 

 

But you know what we see, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  We see it 

done in the dark of night in between Christmas and New 

Year's.  We see it done every time when this House isn't in 

session, so that the ministers responsible don't have to answer 

questions in this House. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when one goes through the list of 

Crown corporations, the family of the Crowns, as the New 

Democrats so fondly refer to them, the family of Crown 

corporations who were into the pockets of each and every one 

of us for 11 long years during the 1970s and the early 1980s, 

when you look at the retained earnings of the profit of the 

family of Crown corporations, you know, you look at 

SaskPower -- these are 1991 retained earnings, I'm sure that the 

numbers are much more significant now -- $155 million; 

SaskEnergy, 99.4; SaskTel, 89.9; SGI (Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance), 38.2. 

 

Just these four of the family, Mr. Deputy Speaker, $382.5 

million.  Who knows what that number will be when '92 is 

finally revealed?  Who knows?  And we've had rate increases 

in December of 1992 that will add to this. 

 

Now when one talks about 7 and 8 and 9 per cent in one 

calendar year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you've already got 

retained earnings of this size, and then you look at the 

pronouncements of the member from Riversdale time after 

time, time after time. 

 

Here's another one, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from the Star-

Phoenix, September of 1991: 

 

 The party (meaning the NDP party) has also promised to 

abolish the provincial flat tax. 

 

So I mean, we weren't going to raise utilities and we weren't 

going to raise personal income tax; we were even going to take 

away the flat tax. 

 

Well the last time I noticed on my income tax form, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, it's still very much a reality.  In fact a lot of 

people in this province are very concerned that come this 

Thursday that that thing might even go up some more, that that 

promise to do away with the flat tax is going to become one 

more in that long litany of broken promises. 

 

As we said to the Premier today in question period, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, you are setting the all-time record in this province for 

broken promises, the all-time record.  I mean if it was even 

done over a four-year term, people might take some solace in 

it.  But here we are not quite at two years and we've already set 

the record. 

 

We go back to a quote from the member from Riversdale, 

March 24, 1990, Leader-Post: 

 

 I say the people of this province are fed up with (Devine's) 

taxes, and we are going to change that. 

Well I'll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it's no wonder people 

fear change in this province.  Because when it's NDP change, it 

means not less; it means more.  Each and every time it seems to 

mean more. 

 

And as my colleague from Wilkie has pointed out to this House 

on a number of occasions, that this government likes to hide 

behind certain things in order to justify these broken promises.  

They like to hide behind this ongoing charade of gee, I didn't 

know.  Gee, when I promised all these things, I thought it was 

only such-and-such. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member from Riversdale is on record 

-- on record -- talking about a total debt of this province of over 

$14 billion well prior to that election in 1991.  And it doesn't 

take a mathematician to figure out how much the interest is on 

a deficit of a total debt of more than 14 billion.  My goodness, 

he produced three economic analyses and statements based on 

the fact that there was over $14 billion of total debt in this 

province. 

 

We held them up in question period today.  All his analysis was 

based on that number.  And it isn't a whole lot less than what 

the interest is on the fifteen and a half or whatever it is now 

since he's added a billion on in the last couple of years. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when all of these promises were made 

all over this province in every media outlet, in town halls all 

over this province, the member from Riversdale knew that 

there was a significant debt attached to governing this 

province.  But what people were listening to, was he said: I can 

manage with less; I can do it smarter; I can cut certain 

government functions out that will make me a better manager. 

 

Well I would think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that his cleaning up 

of waste and mismanagement, as he called it, probably 

occurred many months ago. That any waste and 

mismanagement that we have in this government now is 

directly a result of the policies and the manipulations of the 

member from Riversdale.  That's what Saskatchewan taxpayers 

are saying today. 

 

When the seniors phone my office and say, my goodness, this 

party that I believed in all of my life are now charging me for 

most of my medical services, are now taxing me on all of my 

utilities, are now saying to me that I'm going to have to give 

more come budget day on my fixed income, they are really 

starting to question the promises made by the member from 

Riversdale and his cohorts in this province. 

 

In those nine years that he spent in opposition, nine years that 

he spent in opposition because in his previous connotation as 

the deputy premier of this province, the family of Crown 

corporations meant more to the NDP government of the day 

than people did, the family of Crown corporations which spent 

billions of dollars borrowed in the United States of America at 

high interest rates to drill oil wells and buy potash mines and 

dig uranium mines and buy packing 



384 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1993 

plants.  Those family of Crown corporations were more 

important to them. 

 

And that's why in 1982 people in this province said no to the 

family of Crown corporations.  Get out of my pocket, get out of 

buying things that already employ people here, and get on with 

protecting me when I'm losing my home, when I'm losing my 

farm, and when you put the very structures of our province in 

jeopardy. 

 

It's interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that someone no less than 

the former premier of the province, the Hon. Allan Blakeney, 

would say to people in Saskatchewan, 1982 in the Moose Jaw 

Times-Herald, when he acknowledged that there was no 

money left in the kitty when the Tories took power in 1982, 

and I quote:  The public believed the government was well to 

do, had lots of money.  There was in fact no lots of money. 

 

And I quote again:  The Heritage Fund was to take money and 

invest it like Saskoil, in potash and uranium mines.  It was not 

the belief that the money would be there in cash to build 

hospitals or nursing homes. 

 

And in fact what people were saying at that time was, you have 

let the hospitals and the nursing homes of this province 

deteriorate to the point where people don't feel comfortable 

being in their own community again.  And I say to you, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that a lot of the money spent in this province 

in the health care sector in the 1980s and the early 1990s was to 

rectify this situation. 

 

And it was done, I suggest to you, it was done without using 

the family of Crown corporations to dip into the pocketbooks 

of each and every person in this province on a biyearly basis.  

It was done without saying to people that we're going to have 8 

and 9 per cent increases in each one of our utilities, that there 

were priorities made. 

 

But you know what we see today?  We see all of these massive 

tax increases.  We see all of these utility rate increases.  And 

what do we see with the hospitals and the schools and the 

nursing homes?  Do we see a commitment to open them up, to 

fix them up?  No, we see a commitment to close them down by 

the tens and the dozens and the hundreds, because the members 

of this New Democratic Party government need to cover up 

their tracks that they laid in this province in 1990 and 1991 

when the member from Riversdale promised up and down this 

province that $4.5 billion was enough, that we could do with 

less, and we could still manage all of those things. 

 

And he is on record as saying that there will always be enough 

money -- always be enough money -- for education; that 

education is something that you can't scrimp with, that you 

have to develop the assets and you have to deliver in order to 

educate our children. 

 

And he would do all of that on $4.5 billion without any new 

taxes, without raising utility rates, without 

unleashing the family of Crown corporations back on 

Saskatchewan people's backs.  And in fact we have seen just 

the opposite. 

 

Now I suspect, Mr. Speaker, that at the end of the day here, 

with the Premier's new-found resolve to balance the budget in 

three years instead of four, that maybe all of this pain has 

something to do with the fact that come the 1995-96 budget 

year, when the member from Riversdale screws up his courage 

to have an election, that he's going to proudly stick out his 

chest and say, I balanced the budget.  I balanced the budget on 

the backs of every person in this province, drove thousands out 

of it, shut businesses down, but at the end of the day he'll say, I 

balanced the budget. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, even people in our universities, 

young people who are going to school, getting an education 

because they want to be part of Saskatchewan society, they 

want to be contributors, university students have got 

themselves together in Saskatoon and said, you know, things 

seem to be out of whack here.  We can sit down and design an 

economic game plan here that balances the budget without 

causing all of this pain to Saskatchewan people.  We don't need 

to unleash the family of Crown corporations onto the backs of 

everyone that lives in this province. 

 

(1615) 

 

We don't have to make every senior in our province feel like 

they are some kind of disadvantaged citizen.  We don't have to 

have the best of our entrepreneurs packing their bags up and 

going off to Alberta or British Columbia or United States or 

some place else where they can practise their God-given skills, 

where they can go and make a dollar and contribute, where 

they can be part of the charities, where they can join in with the 

union hospital in their excellence campaign. 

 

But instead we say to them, no.  The kind of climate we're 

going to provide for you is one of increasing taxation, one of 

doom and gloom, one that means that the member from 

Riversdale can cover up his tracks with the Saskatchewan 

electorate about the things that he said in opposition and that he 

can balance the budget no matter what the cost, no matter what 

the human cost that happens to the people of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to quote again, and this is from October 3, 

1992, from the Harasen line: 

 

 Well, to answer your specific question . . . (and I'm quoting 

the Premier of the province, the member from Riversdale) we 

will not charge premiums or deterrent fees or utilization fees 

as they are called for a number of reasons.  Basically, the 

fundamental is that they are not a fair way to finance the 

health care program. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, unless I missed something, yesterday in this 

House I saw people asking that petitions be tabled on their 

behalf in this Assembly, tabled on their behalf because what 

the member from 



March 16, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 385 

Riversdale said, the Premier said, is diametrically opposed to 

what is actually happening; that even in that sacred area of 

health care, the party that brought medicare to this province, 

they are now breaking their word to the Saskatchewan 

electorate in that area that I thought was the most sacred of all 

to people of the New Democratic Party. 

 

And obviously, Mr. Speaker, in the Premier's bent, his drive to 

cover up those broken election promises, even that area will be 

transgressed upon; that the party of medicare has now become 

the party of I don't care.  I don't care because I've got to cover 

my tracks with the people that I promised so much to. 

 

And I would suspect, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we see the 

Minister of Health implement her plan across the province of 

Saskatchewan with her non-elected board, with her friends, that 

we will see community after community in this province 

realize that the motto of "I don't care" is the motto of this NDP 

government. 

 

Because when you have groups like SARM (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities) and SUMA 

(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) and others 

across saying, Madam Minister, would you please change and 

repeal a particular piece of legislation so that you can't tax us 

through the back door, and she refuses, she refuses, Mr. 

Speaker, in this Assembly to stand up and repeal that particular 

piece of legislation, even though she says it's not used by 

anyone in the province at present, you know that all of these 

organizations have come to fear this government, this 

government that said, I won't tax, but given the opportunity 

would use whatever means are at their disposal -- whatever 

means at their disposal to use that tax. 

 

The members of the opposition on almost each and every 

working day in his House have asked for leave to introduce the 

private member from Rosthern's Bill so that we can stand up 

and debate the issue.  So that we can get the assurances from 

the minister that that particular piece of legislation won't be 

used against property taxpayers in this province.  That anyone 

living outside the districts of a union hospital board will not 

have to fear another broken promise by this government. 

 

But are we given that opportunity?  No.  The party of medicare 

stands on their feet each and every day and says, I don't care.  I 

don't care.   We're not going to debate that particular piece of 

legislation.  We're not going to debate whether the property tax 

base in this province is going to be offloaded on once again by 

this government. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, only further heightens the suspicion of 

people in this province that have been let down on so many 

occasions. 

 

There isn't a person that drives a vehicle in this province, there 

isn't a farmer that drives his swather down the field that hasn't 

realized that there's been a promise broken.  There's farmers all 

over this province who are getting their fuel rebate form and 

they're 

looking at the $600 and then looking at the total amount of 

gasoline that they've burned in order to earn a very meagre 

livelihood and realize that they have had their pockets picked 

by this government. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, they talk about net farm income in 

this province being down to 240-some million dollars -- the 

same level that it was at the end of the 1930s -- when every 

farmer in this province, many of them devastated by the 

changes that the member from Rosetown-Elrose made last year 

in this House, changes perpetuated by the member from Canora 

who isn't out there pinching every penny possible . . . And then 

we have this government come in and pick their pocket a little 

bit more, a pocket that has been picked so many times, Mr. 

Speaker, that most farmers in this province are beginning to 

look like the chicken that was hung up in the barn in order to 

have his feathers plucked off.  Because I'll tell you, they're 

right down to the skin now.  And every last one of them is 

expecting to have a little more skin taken off them this 

Thursday. 

 

When you have farmers in this province all over the place that 

are being subjected to interest rates by ACS (Agricultural 

Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan) that are two and a half 

and 3 per cent over what everyone else is charging, you know 

that you've got a government that has broken every promise 

they made to people in 1991. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there's about $400 million missing in rural 

Saskatchewan today because of the policies of this New 

Democratic Party government.  They wouldn't cooperate with 

the federal government when they were given many 

opportunities. 

 

They wouldn't even negotiate as they broke another promise of 

'91 when the Premier said . . . when the member from 

Riversdale said, I'll gather people about me, we'll get on a 

plane and we'll fly down to Ottawa and we will deliver like no 

government has ever delivered before. 

 

And all we got out of that little exercise, Mr. Speaker, was a 

bill for about $300,000 so that the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose could go to Ottawa and try and show 

everybody that he was smarter than everybody else.  Well he 

isn't smarter than everybody else.  And farmers by the tens of 

thousands around this province showed up and said that. 

 

And now we've got the member from Rosetown-Elrose trying 

to do for the Department of Environment what he did for 

Agriculture.  And everyone in this province is wondering come 

budget day, wondering come budget day, if there are going to 

be a whole new raft of taxes, environmental taxes, that will 

simply go to the agenda of this NDP government. 

 

Are we going to get that on Thursday?  Well time will tell, Mr. 

Speaker.  But given the way that this government has operated, 

given the way that the member from Rosetown-Elrose has 

operated in his previous life as the Agriculture minister, I think 

people have got to worry.  Because if he can do for the  



386 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1993 

Environment what he did for Agriculture, then that tells me that 

there's a whole new raft of pockets going to be picked. 

 

And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, I have to come back to the 

phrases of the member from Riversdale, the promises made in 

this Assembly and on Main Streets of Saskatchewan, in the 

radio and TV stations of this province, where:  $4.5 billion is 

enough, that I can manage on that and there will be no new 

taxes; in fact I'm going to cut out taxes in this province because 

we can do it better. 

 

I have here, Mr. Speaker, three and a half pages of rate 

increases, three and a half pages.  I mean you can't get married 

or divorced or buried or anything else in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, these days without having some kind of an increase 

attached to the fee.  It just goes on and on and . . . I mean 

articles of incorporation, articles of amalgamation, articles of 

continuance, articles of amendment -- they used to be 10, some 

of them are 250 bucks now.  And it just goes on and on and on, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I'm sure that when the member from Riversdale was running 

for premier he didn't even know half of this stuff existed.  I 

mean these were the things that he was out there railing 

against, that he was going to take these things away so that they 

wouldn't be a burden on Saskatchewan people any more; he 

was going to tax fairly.  And instead we've got three and a half 

pages of increases. 

 

And they're not small increases.  When you go from 10 bucks 

to 250, Mr. Speaker, we're talking a major, major increase.  

That is a cost of doing business for someone.  Each and every 

one of these things impacts on Main Street, Saskatchewan.  

Every one of these is a cost of doing business. 

 

You stack that up against some of the other jurisdictions in this 

country, it's no wonder we have senior citizens on the west side 

of this province saying they're moving to Medicine Hat because 

they can live for $10,000 a year less than they can here, and yet 

they can get the same medical coverage, they can get the same 

insurance.  People are seriously considering, Mr. Speaker, 

other alternatives to living in this province. 

 

Now I don't think the intention of anyone in this province is to 

drive our population down.  And I remember in the early 1970s 

when the member from Riversdale was the deputy premier of 

this province, we got down to 890,000 -- 890,000 people.  Mr. 

Speaker, you and I as taxpayers can't afford to live in this 

province if we get down to 890,000 people again.  I guess 

because he's been there once, he doesn't fear. 

 

Well I say to you, Mr. Speaker, as a Saskatchewan taxpayer, 

someone who has some interest in this province, I fear that.  

We need a million people here.  Better than that, Mr. Speaker, 

we probably need a million and a half people here so that we've 

got the tax base, so we have the ability to maintain our 

hospitals and our schools and our social institutions. 

And I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that if the Premier 

had kept his promise, if he had kept his promise about 

managing on 4.5 billion and not increasing the taxes, and 

managing a little bit and not letting his philosophical agenda 

get in the road of good government, then we just might get 

there.  That the 1,600 people who left this province in January 

might not have made that decision.  That the 9,000 fewer jobs 

that we've got from February of '93 to February of '92 wouldn't 

have disappeared and we wouldn't have a couple of thousand 

more people going to hit the bricks tomorrow and on budget 

day.  That would probably be the reality, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I mean there are lots of things that this government could have 

looked at.  Our sistering province in Manitoba is working out 

arrangements with their workers on job sharing.  People that 

are put out of a job because this Premier can't keep his 

promises aren't going to be able to contribute to our economy.  

They aren't going to do any of that base broadening that Isabel 

Anderson talks about.  They aren't going to be part of solving 

the economic solutions, and they certainly aren't going to be 

able to help the people of this province pay down the deficit, 

Mr. Speaker, because they'll be out of a job. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have heard from this government now for 

nearly two years that they have a plan and an agenda.  They 

even have a white paper.  And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, if the 

present agenda of taxes, of dislocation, of digging into the 

bottom of every pocket in this province continues on, that that 

white paper isn't worth the paper it's printed on.  It isn't worth 

the cost of producing it because it's a sham -- an utter, utter 

sham. 

 

Because the things that white paper talks about . . .  And I give 

the government some credit; there's some good ideas in there.  

There's business people out there and organizations that 

actually believe some of this stuff. 

 

But if this government doesn't reverse this agenda of taxation, 

of utility hikes, of rate increases, of fee increases, of their 

single-minded determination to cover up the tracks of the 

member from Riversdale and all the promises he made, then 

there isn't anyone going to subscribe to that white paper 

because it will be as hollow as a three-dollar bill. 

 

And that's the challenge, Mr. Speaker, that's before this 

government, is to start coming clean, table the analysis, table 

the economic plans that they have that show that this tax 

regime and the things that they have done to Saskatchewan 

taxpayers at the end of the day means that we will have over a 

million people in this province, that we will be able to sustain 

our social infrastructure, that we will not see thousands of farm 

families have to leave because of the policies of this 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they had that opportunity today.  They 



March 16, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 387 

will have that opportunity, I say to you, day after day in this 

Assembly, to table that analysis, to table the analysis that will 

show that the promises made by the member from Riversdale 

in 1990 and 1991, when he put together his three papers on the 

economy, weren't simply political rhetoric meant to get the 

member from Riversdale into that chair. 

 

Because the members of the Progressive Conservative Party, 

Her Majesty's Loyal Opposition in this Chamber are going to 

ask day after day after day for them to table that analysis, to 

share with Saskatchewan taxpayers the game plan, to show that 

the rate increases that each and every Crown corporation have 

foisted upon the people of this province is legitimate; that by 

those rate increases we are going to encourage people to move 

into our province; that we are going to encourage people to 

open new businesses; that we are going to encourage people to 

hire our young people as they graduate from school. 

 

And I would think, Mr. Speaker, that any government that 

purported to do all of those things would relish the opportunity 

to table in this Assembly, the Assembly of the people of 

Saskatchewan, the taxpayers of this province, that analysis; that 

the government would take that opportunity to lay on the Table 

here so that each and every taxpayer in this province can say 

that I am part of the picture, and I am doing my part, and I am 

not being unfairly abused by this government. 

 

And we're going to give them that opportunity, Mr. Speaker, 

each and every day as we debate the budget, as we debate Bill 

3, as we debate the other items that this government brings 

forward because beside each one of them should be the 

opportunity for every taxpayer in this province to look at it and 

say: it is fair; it is just; and I can play my role knowing at the 

end of the day there is a better day; and that I am not going to 

see once again the family of Crown corporations more 

important to the Government of Saskatchewan than the real 

families who make up this province. 

 

And that is why, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member from Moosomin: 

 

 That this Assembly condemns the government for its 

portrayal of Saskatchewan people in dramatically increasing 

taxes and using the utilities as unaccountable taxation 

machines, after the Premier gave his solemn word in the 1991 

general election that there would be no tax increases under 

his administration. 

 

I so move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I count it 

an honour to be able to stand in the Assembly today to speak to 

the motion brought forward by my colleague, the member from 

Thunder Creek. 

 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, as we have spent almost three weeks 

now in this Legislative Assembly, I think it is 

quite imperative that we take note of what is taking place on 

the outside of these walls.  And I think on many occasions, Mr. 

Speaker, when members come . . . when we come to this place, 

this historic place where we're gathered to discuss the laws of 

our province and to discuss the rules of how this province is 

going to operate and how the electorate are going to operate 

within this province, we seem to walk in these stone walls and 

sometimes think . . . Mr. Speaker, it's very easy for us to forget 

about the real world out there. 

 

And what my colleague has been talking about today is the fact 

that we now have a Premier and we have a government who 

very methodically set out a plan, or laid out a plan, whereby 

they could aim to form the government of this province, and 

yet at the same time not necessarily be that honest or open with 

the people in Saskatchewan or with Saskatchewan residents or 

with the public. 

 

As the motion reads, this Assembly condemns the government 

for its betrayal of Saskatchewan people and dramatically 

increasing taxes and using utilities as an unacceptable taxation 

machine after the Premier gave his solemn word in the 1991 

general election that there would be no tax increases under his 

administration. 

 

And certainly, Mr. Speaker, my colleague raised the fact that 

the Premier said, oh time and time again -- not just the Premier 

but many of the members on the front benches and many of the 

members re-elected, and I realize that there are a number of 

new members in this Assembly on the government side of the 

House, certainly elected as NDP members. 

 

I believe they were elected because prior to 1991 the 

opposition of the day, the present government, certainly took 

the time to lay out a plan of so-called deficit reduction, but they 

would do it by not putting it on the backs of the ordinary 

taxpayers.  They wouldn't increase taxes.  There was enough 

revenue floating into the province of Saskatchewan, into the 

Consolidated Fund, that if they were elected government, if the 

member from Riversdale was elected premier, he wouldn't have 

to increase taxes.  And just by a snap of the finger on election 

night, all of a sudden the province would find itself in a surplus 

position; there would be a balanced budget. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, little beknown the truth is finally 

coming out.  What are we beginning to see?  First of all, let's 

just review a few things.  In the budget of 1992 and prior to 

that budget, just following the October election of 1991, 

remember what the Premier said shortly after the election:  well 

we can't make a lot of promises now until we review the facts, 

until we review the scenario, the fiscal scenario that this 

province is facing.  And before we do that, we're going to 

appoint a commission.  We're going to appoint a commission of 

four individuals headed by Mr. Donald Gass to review the 

province's fiscal situation, because we're not exactly sure where 

the province is sitting regarding its deficit, regarding its 

spending, and regarding the overall deficit.  We're not 



388 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1993 

exactly sure. 

 

That's what the Premier all of a sudden was saying after he was 

elected by the people to govern this province.  Prior to he said 

there was so much more . . . we'd get control of waste and 

mismanagement and we would balance the books.  He wasn't 

really being honest with the people and indicating really what 

he understood was the deficit of the province, although I think 

they tossed out the fact that there might be . . . maybe the 

province had an overall deficit of some $13 billion.  On one 

hand we were at 13 billion; on another hand we heard 14 

billion; now we hear 15 billion; and the next thing we know 

they're talking of a $16 billion deficit. 

 

And it seems, Mr. Speaker, certainly those figures can be used.  

It depends on the time, location, and the crowd you're dealing 

with or talking to, how you want to utilize the figures.  But if 

the government of the day is now starting to talk 16 billion, 

certainly that wasn't the deficit that was there prior to October 

1991. 

 

We all realize that the province has been living on borrowed 

money.  In fact, I don't know if there's an individual in 

Saskatchewan who today doesn't live on some borrowed 

money.  We all live on borrowed funds. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the individuals who are sitting in a good 

fiscal position are the ones who have not gone out and 

borrowed beyond their means or their ability to repay. 

 

Now I want to get into some discussion on the deficit as we see 

it today and the fact that what this government is doing and 

what we anticipate will take place on budget day on Thursday. 

 

What the government is presently doing and what is creating a 

lot of concern to the general public is creating such . . . is the 

fact that the government has taken a scenario of creating doom 

and gloom and creating a picture in this province which I don't 

blame anyone for not wanting to look at the province and look 

at coming to Saskatchewan and making Saskatchewan their 

home. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, when you look around and you listen to 

the rhetoric coming from the government benches, when you 

listen to the Premier, when you listen to the Minister of Health, 

the same individual who while in opposition continually 

condemned the former government for not putting enough into 

health care, continually condemned the former government for 

not being compassionate and understanding, and yet today, Mr. 

Speaker, where is that minister?  What is that minister hiding 

behind?  Where is the compassion that the minister talked 

about? 

 

You don't have to look too far to see that there's obviously a 

very lack of compassion, or that compassion or understanding 

the minister had of the health concerns in opposition seem to 

have taken second place, or maybe have just been totally lost in 

the 

back rooms.  Or maybe they were lost in the cabinet rooms as 

they were sitting around the table and deciding how they were 

going to create the doom and gloom so that they can indeed 

administer the tax cuts and the tax . . . or not the cuts, the tax 

increases on everything that you and I touch. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the health situation and we 

talk about compassion, we look at the recent . . . recently, Mr. 

Speaker, the fact that the Wascana Rehab Centre was looking 

very seriously at closing down a whole wing of rehabilitation, 

especially a number of rehabilitation beds for young children, a 

service that was available to 800 children across this province. 

 

And now today, a couple days after the opposition raised the 

question, and the minister saying she wasn't aware of any such 

move, what happened, Mr. Speaker?  Mr. Speaker, the 

Wascana Centre decided to then at least maintain five beds.  

But I suggest, is five beds . . . will five beds be enough?  Is that 

really showing compassion and understanding to the children 

of this province?  And specifically a child of one couple, that 

they brought their child down here; it was very severely 

handicapped.  I don't think that's showing compassion. 

 

I think today, Mr. Speaker, what we're seeing is a Premier and 

a cabinet and a government who are just continually hiding 

behind a deficit scenario to try and cover up the mistakes and 

the allegations that they made prior to the 1991 election. 

 

And they continually look at trying to focus people's attention 

on the government of the '80s because they do not want the 

people of Saskatchewan to see exactly what took place through 

the '70s and then what's taking place today. 

 

(1645) 

 

There's no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that many people are 

concerned.  And in fact over the past number of weeks, days 

and weeks, we have had people outside our Legislative 

Assembly walking up and down with placards in support of the 

organizations they work for.  Saskatchewan government 

employees have been walking out here because they're very 

concerned.  They're not only concerned about themselves, 

they're concerned about their families, they're concerned about 

their jobs. 

 

And it would seem to me, Mr. Speaker, and when I talk to 

people there are a lot of people that are willing to work 

together to address the deficit.  There are a lot of people willing 

to pull their weight.  And I would think even the public sector 

would be willing to pull their weight as well.  However, I 

believe one of the main reasons they are out here, walking back 

and forth, protesting this government's action, is the fact that 

they believe this government was indeed not going to increase 

taxes. 

 

They believe that as we had seen over the past number of years, 

SaskTel rates were going to be at the same rates.  SaskTel was 

making pretty good money, good 



March 16, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 389 

dollars were coming in, had good equity.  SaskPower rates 

wouldn't increase because the Power Corporation was making 

substantial sums of money to maintain the rates.  SGI rates 

wouldn't increase. 

 

But lo and behold, what has happened?  Increases in SaskTel 

rates, increases in installation fees and hook-ups, increases in 

power rates, increases in natural gas rates, vehicle registration, 

and insurance, Mr. Speaker, increase in the provincial sales tax. 

 

Remember the slogan, no more provincial sales tax.  As of 

October 21, 1991, the provincial sales tax is gone.  The 

provincial sales tax is gone.  Yes it was gone Mr. Speaker, in 

the last budget.  It disappeared from 7 per cent, but it 

reappeared at 8 per cent -- an increase, not a decrease.  An 

increase in the fuel tax, an increase in personal income tax, 

corporate tax, user fees in chiropractic services and optometric 

services. 

 

So I can see why people are concerned.  I can see why people 

are demonstrating. I can see why people are finding it very 

difficult to go to the bargaining table on one hand saying no, 

we're willing to stay at zero because we're willing to work 

together with the government and the rest of the people of 

Saskatchewan to address the deficit.  But on the other hand, 

Mr. Speaker, the bottom line has disappeared. 

 

It seems every time they've turned around, that dollar that 

they've taken home at the end of the day has shrunk to the point 

that they really can't afford a zero any more.  But, Mr. Speaker, 

many people across this province have indeed taken zero.  And 

I think that you will find that people are more than willing to 

give. 

 

We talk about a government that has misled people, a 

government that hasn't been very . . . totally accurate with 

people.  And when I talk about the concerns out there, I just 

want to read a couple of paragraphs from a recent article in the 

Regina Leader-Post, Tuesday, March 16: "Cutback warnings 

jangling."  Mr. Speaker, this is what it says, and I quote: 

 

 Her nerves sandblasted raw by the stern warnings blowing 

from the Saskatchewan legislature, a provincial civil 

servant choked on her words Monday while describing life 

on the job. 

 

Her questions: 

 

 "How much more can people take?  What's going to happen 

here if people all lose their jobs?  This country can't take 

more people on social assistance," . . . 

 

And she's right.  And this is all coming from an individual 

who's worked for government for over 20 years. 

 

The uncertainty, not just in the labour force and not just for 

people in business and not just for the farming community, not 

just for the health districts and the health boards and the health 

workers of this province, but the uncertainty right here in the 

public sector, of 

what they are going to see on Thursday. 

 

And it certainly wasn't enhanced, Mr. Speaker, when recently 

the Premier, I believe it was at SARM, indicated that I believe 

tomorrow for a lot of employees it's going to be D-Day, as the 

Premier indicated that the cuts would be announced even 

before the budget came into place.  And I believe even we 

heard in this legislature an individual asking the Premier where 

his priorities were.  Did he really care about the people of this 

province? 

 

Mr. Speaker, what about all the people who have been 

working?  And I believe one of the government members -- I'm 

not exactly sure if it was the government member for Pelly or 

Nipawin; no, it wasn't Nipawin but it was Tisdale, I believe -- 

indicated about Fair Share Saskatchewan.  We remember all 

the rhetoric about Fair Share Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and 

the fact that the government of the day, while in opposition, 

talked about Fair Share as being oh, what an awful thing it was 

to ask people to work out of some of the larger centres in rural 

Saskatchewan.  What an awful thing it would be. 

 

And yet, Mr. Speaker, when you get out of this . . . if we would 

just remove ourselves, if a few people would remove 

themselves out of Regina or out of Saskatoon, they would find 

that there's a lot to be offered in our larger rural centres.  And 

in fact it may be even more reasonable and more economical to 

live out there.  They'd have more at the end of the day. 

 

But the fact is, Mr. Speaker, by the end of the day, by the time 

this government gets through, Fair Share Saskatchewan is 

going to look like an awfully good program in light of the fact 

that a lot of the jobs and a lot of the departments presently 

working here today, even in Regina, Fair Share Saskatchewan 

isn't going to be gone.  But Fair Share Saskatchewan . . . In 

light of the departments in this province, there are going to be a 

many, many people who will not be treated fairly, even as 

fairly as Fair Share Saskatchewan would have done. 

 

Departments most likely will be eliminated.  And, Mr. Speaker, 

I believe at the recent SARM convention, and I want to quote 

again from this article: 

 

 The same can't be said for the province's Rural Development 

Department, where the office atmosphere is tainted by word 

of its dissolution under the coming budget, with some of its 

functions and people relocated to other departments. 

 

And it continues, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 Employees learned earlier this month of internal government 

documents suggesting rural development could be 

eliminated.  One worker reports it as fact . . . (An individual 

who) worked for the government since 1977. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it appears to me that there are people 



390 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1993 

right across this province, even in this centre of Regina, who 

had been led to believe by the former . . . by the government, 

by the then opposition that it wouldn't take a lot just to control 

some waste and mismanagement, and there would be so much 

more we could offer you.  And yet, Mr. Speaker, I believe as 

I've indicated and as I've read, and as we're seeing in our papers 

daily, there is a vast betrayal and people are feeling betrayed. 

 

Another paragraph: 

 

 One government employee, who asked not to be identified, 

said the uncertainty about the budget has spawned many 

rumors about how many years of government service are 

needed to be safe from the axe.  "You don't know what to 

believe (any more)," he said. 

 

There is uncertainty in this province and one can hardly 

wonder why would anyone even consider moving to 

Saskatchewan when we hear of the doom and we hear of the 

gloom that is being preached by this government. 

 

Prior to the election of October 1991, $4.5 billion was going to 

be enough to run the province; then after the election their first 

budget all of a sudden condemning the former Finance minister 

for suggesting there's a $257 million deficit.  When in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, if they would have followed the scenario of the 

former government, the government of the day and the scenario 

they had layed out as to how they were going to balance the 

budget, the process they were going to use and the fact that by 

even the harmonization . . . and certainly that's a word that the 

government of the day doesn't want to hear. 

 

Harmonization would have been a very minor tax in light of all 

the tax increases that have taken place to date -- very minimal, 

Mr. Speaker.  And it would have been so much easier to 

administer.  It would have been a benefit to manufacturing.  It 

would have been a benefit to small businesses in this province.  

It would have been a benefit to the agricultural sector, and yet 

everyone would have paid their fair share.  You would have 

paid according to your ability to pay, Mr. Speaker.  But what 

do we have?  Because of the uncertainty, because of the doom 

and gloom, people have come to the point where they just don't 

know where to turn any more.  They're tired of hearing about 

the doom and gloom. 

 

But let me just quote . . . make a few comments taken from the 

Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, March 3, 1993.  Talking about the 

gloomy scenario that is being presented, and the headline is, 

"Give us a break from gloomy scenario".  And I'm quoting: 

 

 Premier Roy Romanow says he needs a break.  He's already 

carrying around what has to be the heaviest budget any 

premier has ever been saddled with, at least to hear him tell 

it. 

 

And then the article goes on to talk about the fact that the 

Premier is referring to the offloading of $106 

million from the federal government or the fact that the federal 

government is looking for the province to pay back $106 

million.  But the article brought out the fact that it's not $106 

million today.  The fact is the repayment schedule wasn't going 

to start until 1994-95 budget year, and then there was six years 

to repay this. 

 

But let me go on: 

 

 In this regard, Romanow's government is no different.  

Romanow's government had no ethical difficulties with 

demanding refunds of overpayments from farmers under 

GRIP.  Despite bitter opposition from welfare rights 

groups, Romanow is still demanding money back from 

welfare recipients who have been inadvertently paid too 

much. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you can't have it both ways.  If there's guilt on 

one side, if you're going to demand that the federal government 

not ask for the repayment of an overpayment that came to the 

province of Saskatchewan, then let's think of the other people.  

Let's think of people in this province.  Let's think of the 

overpayments and give them consideration, Mr. Speaker.  We 

must treat people fairly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, his response . . . The article also says: 

 

 His response speaks more to the NDP's political agenda than 

it does to fairness. 

 

And the article will continue on with the debate about the 

upcoming budget. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there is so much more that I could add and 

more I'd like to get into at another date but as for right now, for 

now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:57 p.m. 

 


