




















































Hansard: May 06, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1475 

 May 6, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize any member, earlier today 

at Government House we paid tribute to 13 Saskatchewan 

recipients of national and provincial honours. These 13 

recipients and their guests are seated in the Speaker's gallery 

today. We want to recognize them in the legislative Chamber 

today. 

 

I want to call first upon the Premier and then the Leader of the 

Opposition to make a few brief remarks, and then MLAs 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) will be given an 

opportunity to introduce their honoured constituent. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Members of the Assembly, it gives me a great deal of pleasure 

to join with you to acknowledge the contributions made by the 

recipients who are seated in your gallery, Speaker's gallery to 

my right. These are recipients of the Order of Canada, the 

Order of Military Merit, the Saskatchewan Order of Merit, and 

the Medal of Bravery. 

 

Now earlier today, myself and other members of the Assembly 

had the opportunity to congratulate the recipients, but I do want 

to take the occasion to repeat and to reiterate our 

congratulations right here in the Assembly for the official 

record, as it were. 

 

Such honours are given to those who exemplify the highest 

ideals of our society — achievement, courage, the pursuit of 

excellence, service to others, devotion to the common good. 

 

The individuals we recognize today, Mr. Speaker, and 

members, have committed their time, some might even say 

devoted their time, but certainly committed their time and 

energy to a wide variety of activities — medicine, the arts, 

government, science. They've served the interests of the 

farming community, national defence, recreational planning, 

and business. And two of today's recipients have, at great 

personal risk, reached out to save lives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they are truly exceptional citizens, dedicated to 

the people of this province and to this country Canada. And 

they are, I'm sure, an inspiration for all of us. On behalf of the 

government of the province of Saskatchewan, I want to 

congratulate each and every one of them, their friends, 

supporters, and spouses, and thank them for their outstanding 

contribution to Saskatchewan and to Canada. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 

join on behalf of Her Majesty's Loyal 

Opposition with the Premier in extending that very warm 

welcome to our honoured and most distinguished guests to the 

legislature today. 

 

As the Premier said, we have individuals visiting with us today 

who have strived and endeavoured and achieved in so many 

different areas in our society. And I would say to all of the 

young people in the gallery who are here visiting with us today 

that this group of distinguished men and women could provide 

you with an excellent opportunity to emulate careers or emulate 

service to the community, indeed to learn how to serve your 

fellow man. 

 

And I just say once again, congratulations to this distinguished 

group who are here to visit and view with us today. And on 

behalf of the opposition, just keep up your good work in 

society, ladies and gentlemen. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 

introduce to the Assembly the Hon. Allan Blakeney, Officer of 

the Order of Canada. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 

is my pleasure to introduce to the Assembly, Dr. Stuart 

Houston, Officer of the Order of Canada, and Member of the 

Saskatchewan Order of Merit. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed my 

privilege to introduce Dr. Dmytro Cipywnyk, Member of the 

Order of Canada. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you and 

through you to the members of the Assembly, Mr. Harvey 

Gjesdal, Member of the Order of Canada. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, it's indeed a privilege to 

introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

Assembly, Mr. Joseph Moran, Member of the Order of Canada. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my privilege to 

introduce to the Assembly Dr. Don Rennie, Member of the 

Order of Canada. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to 

introduce to you and to members of the legislature, Chief 

Warrant Office Alan Stever, Member of the Order of Military 

Merit. 



1476 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1993 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to introduce to 

you Mr. George Bothwell, Member of the Saskatchewan Order 

of Merit. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Scott: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce to the 

Assembly Chief Samuel Bunnie, Member of the Saskatchewan 

Order of Merit. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to introduce 

to the Assembly Mr. John Hicks, Member of the Saskatchewan 

Order of Merit. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my pleasure to 

introduce to you and to the Assembly Ida M. Petterson, 

Member of the Saskatchewan Order of Merit. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to 

introduce to the Assembly Mr. Ricardo Campbell, recipient of 

the Medal of Bravery. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure and 

honour to introduce to you Mr. Ron Hildebrandt, recipient of 

the Medal of Bravery. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to the Assembly I would like to introduce two 

classes today. The Redvers Elementary School class in the east 

gallery, Mr. Speaker, grade 6's, along with their teachers Diane 

Dubé, Heather Kirby, and their bus driver Annette LeNouail. 

I'll be meeting with them after question period, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I would also like to introduce from the Carnduff 

Elementary School the grade 8's, along with their teacher Art 

Keating, Brian Nicholls, and Cindy Wright. And I'll be meeting 

with them also after the question period for pictures and for 

refreshments and questions. I'd like to ask the Assembly to 

welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

SaskTel Advertising Campaign 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question 

today is to the minister responsible for SaskTel. Mr. Minister, 

can you confirm that your government has commissioned the 

Phoenix Group, 

the NDP (New Democratic Party) advertising agency, to 

produce a new promotional campaign for SaskTel? And can 

you confirm that the theme of this massive advertising 

campaign is "Don't Worry, Be Happy"? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, to the best of my 

knowledge, there has been a competition. And there are more 

than one company — I believe three companies involved in the 

advertising that's being procured. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, it seems the government is 

taking their own ad campaigns to heart and they're not 

worrying about SaskTel. Doesn't seem to have a minister. 

 

Would you confirm, Madam Minister, that the theme of the 

campaign is indeed, "Don't Worry, Be Happy"? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the 

minister responsible for SaskTel, I'll take notice of the 

question. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, while 

you're taking notice of this question, will you also take notice 

of the question of on what basis was this contract awarded to 

Phoenix Group and for how much money was that contract. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, we'll be pleased to take 

notice. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, will you 

also take notice of the following question concerning the same 

item: that we received information from the advertising 

industry that this production, filming, and post-production for 

these SaskTel ads were given to a British Columbia company, 

Cactus Productions, without any tendering call in 

Saskatchewan. Will you confirm that, as you take notice, that 

your government has bypassed the Buy Saskatchewan policy 

when you told them to do this "Don't Worry, Be Happy" 

campaign? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I cannot confirm the 

question that the member asks, and I'll take notice. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will you also, 

in this consideration, include: is it not true that the tender calls 

in Saskatchewan were made after the work had already been 

awarded to the firm? Can you confirm when those tender calls 

were made? Was it after the Saskatchewan firms complained 

about it, Madam Minister? And is it also not true that these 

people were worried, and that they were not happy about it? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I cannot confirm this 

situation that the member describes. I will take notice if there 

are details that we can provide; 



May 6, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1477 

however I do wish to point . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, the member has taken notice. 

 

Economic Summit 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question today will be to the Premier. Mr. Premier, we have 

seen some exaggerated performances in this legislature on your 

behalf this session, but I think the performance yesterday really 

topped it off. You stood here in this legislature, Mr. Premier, 

and you lectured the Saskatchewan business community about 

job creation. It's obviously a topic that you know very little or 

nothing about, Mr. Premier. 

 

I mean what can we expect next out of you? You're going to 

lecture Saskatchewan farmers on what to plant this spring? 

 

Mr. Premier, the Canadian Federation of Independent Business, 

the implement manufacturers' association, the chamber of 

commerce, the construction association, and the home builders' 

association all got together and they said, Mr. Premier, your 

government's job creation strategies are failing. And you 

should listen instead of giving us lectures. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, will you hold an economic summit meeting 

that these associations have asked for, and will you do it before 

this Legislative Assembly adjourns for the summer so that 

people in Saskatchewan can hold you accountable, Mr. 

Premier, for what you say. Would you do that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to inform the 

hon. member opposite that in the letter that we received, the 

organization asks, and I quote specifically: we ask you to call 

upon the Provincial Action Committee on the Economy to 

advise and coordinate about the summit. 

 

That is exactly what we are doing. The PACE (Provincial 

Action Committee on the Economy) will review and will make 

a recommendation. But I can tell you clearly that to put 

together a summit in a matter of a few days shows the ability of 

the members opposite to govern. That is, in fact, how open for 

business, the conference we remember from the 1982 era of 

your government, which invited in the multinationals from 

around the world to take billions of dollars out of the province, 

is exactly what we're not going to do. And I can make that very 

clear. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the Premier. Mr. Premier, you have stood in this legislature and 

told us how you like to go out and have meetings with people. 

The problem is, Mr. Premier, they're like the meetings that your 

Health minister went to. You go to meetings but you don't 

listen. 

And what your minister has just said is that he can't do it in a 

couple of days time. No one expects him to. But the business 

community in this province would like to have your 

commitment, Mr. Premier, that in a few weeks time, that you 

would be prepared to go and listen for a change, when they tell 

you things like imposing a $200 million payroll tax through 

Workman's Comp is unreasonable. When they tell you things 

like that, Mr. Premier, they expect you to go and listen. 

 

Now why don't you stand in this legislature today, Mr. Premier, 

and apologize to the business community for the remarks you 

made yesterday and say yes, I will instruct my minister and my 

cabinet to be prepared to meet with you before this session 

ends. Would you do that, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to 

the hon. member that what we are doing is not responding to 

the hard-line rhetoric of the members of the Conservative 

caucus, which is to throw up their hands in despair and preach 

gloom and doom. But what we are doing is picking up the 

request of the organization that asked about a meeting of 

business people. And in their letter they say that they would 

like this issue referred to the Provincial Action Committee on 

the Economy, and that is in fact exactly what we intend to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question once 

again is to the Premier. Obviously, Mr. Premier, you don't 

think that you owe them an apology. You said yesterday that 

their letter has done more to harm the confidence and optimism 

in the province of Saskatchewan than anything done in the last 

18 months, and I quote: this letter does not face up to reality. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, I would say that you and your government 

are the ones destroying the confidence in this province. You are 

not facing reality. It's your government which is 16,000 jobs 

underneath of your budget targets. Now, Mr. Premier, that is 

reality. 

 

So it's time to start listening. It's time to start listening, start 

creating some of the jobs, Mr. Premier, that you have promised 

Saskatchewan people since before the 1991 election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, what I want to 

indicate to the hon. member opposite, that the comments made 

by the organization referred to here, of a growing sense of 

despair, anguish, and revolt by business people in the 

community of Saskatchewan, is absolutely inaccurate, 

absolutely inaccurate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1478 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1993 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — It is. We have met with literally 

thousands of business people around the province. I have not 

heard one business person talk about revolt. I haven't heard that 

from one business person. And for an organization that calls 

itself responsible to talk about business people having despair, 

anguish and revolt, is an exaggeration that doesn't do the 

organization credit. And we're getting many comments from 

many business people today that say this organization, when 

they talk about revolt, is not speaking on behalf of the business 

community in Saskatchewan. That's the point that we're 

making. 

 

When it comes to jobs and job statistics, I want to be clear that 

if you want to look, for example, at the Liberal record — the 

provincial record — of job creation in this country, you will 

find that the record is as follows. 

 

In New Brunswick the record is 14.6 per cent unemployment 

— Liberal. Quebec, 14.8; Prince Edward Island, 22 per cent; 

Newfoundland, 23 per cent. Anyone one who believes that 

electing a Liberal government is going to solve the 

unemployment problems of this province absolutely doesn't 

understand what is happening in provinces where they have 

already gone that route. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Premier and his ministers, the Premier and his ministers, Mr. 

Speaker, say that the business community is not facing reality, 

and I would say to you, Mr. Premier, they're the people that 

have to face it every day. They're the people that have to 

actually lay off the workers; close down their operations; move 

to other provinces because of your destructive tax regimes in 

this province, Mr. Premier, a dismal business climate that you 

and your government have created. 

 

Mr. Premier, it wasn't the business community that didn't tell 

the truth about taxes, about hospital closures, about helping 

farmers. The business community weren't the people that didn't 

tell the truth, Mr. Premier. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, it's time you started to face reality. What 

they are simply asking for is a meeting with yourself and your 

key ministers, Mr. Premier, to work with you to solve the 

problems. Will you commit to it today, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to try to lower 

the level of rhetoric that the members opposite continually 

throw out about the despair and gloom and doom. And it's 

almost as if they wish for that for the citizens of Saskatchewan. 

Because when we meet with many legitimate organizations, for 

example, when we meet with the business people from Schulte 

or from Flexi-Coil in Saskatoon or Brandt Industries here in 

Regina, they tell us clearly they have never had a better year 

than they had in '92, and it's even better 

in 1993. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Now that's not to say that things 

couldn't be better. The unemployment rate in Regina, which is 

the third lowest in Canada only behind Ottawa and Vancouver, 

could be the lowest in Canada, that's true, and we're working 

towards that. But to preach gloom and doom about the job 

situation in our major cities is absolute nonsense. And I wish 

members would become more realistic, and maybe in 

becoming more realistic that rump of the Conservative Party 

would gain some credibility in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 

hear the Premier and his ministers talk about turning the corner 

all the time. Well I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, in my 

constituency they're coming down the No. 1 Highway and 

they're turning right. They're turning the corner and they're 

going to Alberta and B.C. (British Columbia). That's the corner 

they're turning, Mr. Premier. That's why you're 16,000 jobs 

underneath what your Finance minister forecast just a short 

month and a half ago. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, don't stand up in this legislature and say: 

don't worry, be happy, any more. The folks aren't happy. It's 

pessimism, frustration, and angry. And it's growing, Mr. 

Premier. 

 

Would you do what the people who employ the folks and pay 

the taxes in this province are requesting of you, sir, and that is 

in the next few weeks would you be prepared to sit down and 

meet with the business community in an economic summit and 

live up to some of the promises you made to them last year? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what we are 

hearing from members of the business community as well as 

the population at large and many people who watch the 

economic changes that are occurring in Saskatchewan, is very, 

very positive remarks. 

 

I want to indicate to the members opposite that Nesbitt 

Thomson, for example, in talking about Saskatchewan and our 

budget moves, and I want to quote: 

 

 Our confidence that these targets will be met is based on the 

Government's strong political will and the apparent 

constituent support for the measures to be implemented . . . 

we believe that Saskatchewan may well be the first Canadian 

province to be upgraded in the present economic cycle as 

provincial governments begin to come to terms with 

managing their finances in a post-inflationary era. 

 

 . . . The Province's operating budget is now 



May 6, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1479 

among the most positive in the country. 

 

Now when people in the know are saying this about the 

economic situation in Saskatchewan, for members of the 

Conservative and third party to continually get up and preach 

gloom and doom, can only be done for one reason and that's 

cheap politics. And I say the public will reject that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the Premier. Mr. Premier, the people in the know are the people 

on Main Street, Saskatchewan. They're the people, sir, that are 

paying the higher property taxes, are paying the higher sales 

taxes, are paying the higher utility fees, the telephone, the 

power, the gas, and we're facing increased mill rates because of 

your offloading. They're the people in the know, not the people 

in Toronto or New York who you go to and tell a different 

story than you tell here at home. They're the people in the 

know, Mr. Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — What they're saying to you, sir, is simple. 

They said your document, Partnership for Renewal, we would 

like to sit down and review the goals and objectives of this 

document and see if they're being fulfilled; your own 

document, Mr. Premier. They don't want to design a new one 

— your document. They're saying, let's take the Partnership 

for Renewal, sit down together and talk about it and see if it's 

meeting its goals. 

 

Mr. Premier, stand in your place and tell them that you're 

willing to talk about your own document. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to 

the member opposite that reviewing the Partnership for 

Renewal plan is a very important and integral part of the 

document. We've indicated in a list of 31 strategies that we 

have set dates and deadlines too at the request of the business 

community, that the business community is very satisfied with 

the first review that we have done. And, Mr. Speaker, after 

question period today I will table the second review that has 

been done in consultation with business people so that 

members of the opposition might have a chance to update 

themselves on where we are at in terms of the economy in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have here a magazine, Worldbusiness, another 

organization, another magazine that has made comment on the 

economy of Saskatchewan and the economic blueprint. And I 

want to quote from that: 

 

 Industrial/Economic Development Organization 

 

And they're giving out awards to various provinces and 

organizations for economic development. And I quote: 

Our 1992 Award in this category goes to the Government of 

Saskatchewan under Premier Roy Romanow and Economic 

Development Minister . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — So I want to say to you that . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if the 

Premier and his ministers would only listen. Mr. Speaker, the 

economic review on the document is already in, and I'll quote 

from it — the manufacturing sector, where there are 4,000 less 

jobs than a year ago; the construction sector, where there are 

2,000 less jobs than a year ago; the trades sector, which is 

4,000 jobs down from a year ago, and the agricultural sector, 

which the Premier tells the folks in New York is going to drive 

our revival, has a net income per farmer of $5,000. 

 

The document, Mr. Premier, that your minister talks about has 

just been reviewed by Saskatchewan business people and they 

say it is a dismal, miserable failure. They're asking you to sit 

down and re-evaluate the goals. 

 

In light of this information, Mr. Premier, stand in your place 

and give the commitment to the business community that 

you're willing to work and reverse these figures. Do that, sir. 

Do that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to 

indicate to the hon. member that the work that has been done 

by this government in meeting with business people will 

continue. 

 

We've met with hundreds of organizations around the province 

dealing with business. We have spoken recently at the chamber 

of commerce in Tisdale. We'll be speaking tonight at the 

chamber of commerce in Lloydminster. And a big part of the 

job is in fact meeting with business people to work out an 

economy that is based on realistic facts and figures, which 

certainly isn't coming out today from members of the 

opposition. 

 

But true, the unemployment rate in Saskatchewan is not as low 

as we would like it to be. But it is the lowest in Canada. And so 

we are working hard and we are working diligently with 

working people and business community to lower the 

unemployment rate. 

 

But for members opposite who have representation in other 

provinces to say that they would do a better job flies in the face 

of true statistics which I could stand here all day and quote 

about the unemployment rate in other provinces where we have 

Conservative and Liberal governments. 



1480 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1993 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question to the 

Premier: Mr. Premier, the first step to solving a problem is to 

admit that you have one. Mr. Premier, you obviously are going 

to have to put a . . . Mr. Premier, you're going to have to put a 

leash on that minister. Because your government is like an 

alcoholic; it is so drunk with political power that you don't 

realize that you've got a problem, Mr. Premier. 

 

Mr. Premier, there are 16,000 jobs less than what your Minister 

of Finance is projecting. The Saskatchewan business coalition 

is saying, recognize your problem. Sit down and we will 

cooperatively work with you to achieve the goals that you set 

out in your own document. 

 

Mr. Premier, once again. All they want to do is review your 

document, sir. Will you sit down with them while this House is 

in session and review that document so that Saskatchewan 

people can have the jobs and the promises that you made to 

them such a short time ago. Would you do that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 

Opposition admonishes me to face the reality and admit to 

problems. I think we've done that in economic matters. But if 

that admonition is applicable to me, I want to tell the Leader of 

the Opposition it is doubly applicable to him and the 

Conservative official opposition and the Liberal Party. 

 

In your case, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, you have to admit 

the huge problem that you left behind for the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan, a province virtually on the edge of 

bankruptcy. And we, after 18 months, have turned the corner. 

And there are statements after statements by business people, 

not represented by these five or six people who got together to 

issue a statement without warning to the government, without 

any kind of foreconsultation whatsoever . . . that's right. 

Because they say to us, they don't want any surprises from us, 

and we met with them. But that rule does not apply to them. 

They issued the statement that they did. 

 

I say to the former premier and I say to the Leader of the 

Opposition, we admit that we got to do a lot more economic 

development. I'm telling you that we've turned the corner, but 

you've got to admit that you have put this province in such a 

big sink-hole that we're going to take all the efforts required to 

get this province moving again. And it is beginning to move, 

and the business people know it, notwithstanding the 

statements considered by a coalition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — The problem is very evident, Mr. Speaker, in 

questions to the Premier that he still hasn't learned, that he's 

still drunk with that political power that he achieved 18 months 

ago. 

Mr. Premier, what they're saying to you is that you have broken 

all of your promises that you made before the last election. And 

given that, we're willing even yet to stand and sit down and 

work with you to achieve some reasonable goals in this 

province even though you broke all your promises, sir. 

 

Instead you stand in this House and you lecture them. You say 

that they don't keep their word, Mr. Premier. You're the one 

that campaigned to have the job. You're the one that's supposed 

to have the vision and the leadership. The business community 

are saying to you: Main Street, Saskatchewan is hurting, Mr. 

Premier; sit down with us before that legislative session is out 

and deal with the problems, not blame somebody else. 

 

Mr. Premier, once more, give them that commitment, and give 

it to it today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, note what the Leader of 

the Opposition has said in perverting the words of the letter. 

The letter doesn't say that we broke our promises; that's what 

you say. You try to politicize the situation for narrow, partisan 

political purposes. You take a look at the letter, and it does not 

say that. You say that. Why do you say that? Why do you 

misrepresent the position? 

 

There can only be one conclusion as to why you do that. You 

do that for partisan political reasons. 

 

You don't care about the Saskatchewan situation. You don't 

care about the Saskatchewan people. Mind you, we've known 

that because if you'd cared for them, you wouldn't have 

bankrupted this province after nine years of being in power. 

You wouldn't have bankrupted them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — You bankrupted them; you 

bankrupted them; you bankrupted them, and they didn't say 

that. We're prepared to work with every business group going, 

and we have worked with every business group going. 

 

But I want to tell you, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, that what 

was said in that letter does not portray what the ordinary 

business person in this province feels. They know that we've 

got the fiscal picture under control, that we've turned the 

corner, no thanks to you. 

 

We're rebuilding Saskatchewan; that's what we're doing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

congratulate the Leader of the Opposition for flushing out the 

Premier finally so that he is going to be responsible. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 6, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1481 

Print Procurement Process 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Speaker, I sat here in abhorrence 

listening the Minister of Economic Diversification declare war 

on small business in this province. But, Mr. Speaker, I was 

even more shocked and abhorred to find the Premier goes, 

stands up and reiterates the position and says that we're being 

misquoted and that the people in the business in this province 

don't know what they're talking about. They are cited as saying, 

despair, anguish, and revolt is what they are concerned about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, my question is . . . and I further 

preface this by saying I believe that they feel that they can 

declare war on small business because they have a political, 

manipulative mind where they think that they'll be able to 

worm their way out of this. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Minister for SPMC 

(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) because, 

Mr. Minister, we have received information that indicates that 

your government has transferred print procurement process 

away from your Crown-owned corporation of SPMC and given 

responsibility by awarding print tenders to the minister 

responsible for NDP political strategy, as we know, the 

Provincial Secretary. 

 

Here's my question, Mr. Minister. We have seen how you 

managed to obstruct and avoid open tendering in the past. 

Perhaps you could explain now to this Assembly that I have 

brought up repeated examples of that in this last session, Mr. 

Speaker. Perhaps you could explain to this Assembly how 

giving the print tendering process to the most 

politically-motivated arm in your government allows for open 

and non-partisan tendering. Can you explain that, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, if there was any ever 

good reason or example of why that political party is in third 

place in the polls of Saskatchewan, the member from Rosthern 

just exemplified it in his question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — How he can stand up in this House 

and with a straight face talk about open tendering is beyond me 

and the public of Saskatchewan. 

 

The reason the transfer has been made, Mr. Speaker, is to 

enhance the whole concept of open tendering and 

competitiveness in the bidding. And even the graphic arts 

industry, which represents the people who do the printing and 

who are doing more work across the piece for the Government 

of Saskatchewan than they ever did under that administration 

because of the favouritism they showed, has supported that 

move because of the coordination that is there; because it's 

necessary in order to make the system work openly and fairly 

as it is working now, which it did not do 

between 1982 and 1991. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 63 — An Act to amend The Fuel Tax Act, 1987 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to move second reading of Bill No. 63, An Act to amend 

The Fuel Tax Act, 1987. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill increases the tax on gasoline, 

ethanol-blended gasoline, and diesel fuel from 13 cents to 15 

cents per litre as announced in the March 18 budget address. 

Also the tax on propane is increased from 7 to 9 cents per litre. 

These changes, Mr. Speaker, are effective March 19, 1993, and 

are expected to yield additional revenues of $43.4 million in 

1993-94. 

 

The tax on locomotive diesel fuel and aviation fuel, Mr. 

Speaker, will remain unchanged at 15 cents and 7 cents per 

litre, respectively. As a result, diesel fuel used by the trucking 

industry and by the railways is subject to tax at the same rate of 

15 cents per litre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we recognize that an increase in the fuel tax rates 

will place border fuel dealers at a competitive disadvantage 

with fuel dealers in Alberta and Manitoba. Therefore, I'm 

pleased to say that effective April 1, 1993, the gasoline 

competition assistance program, which provides assistance to 

fuel dealers in Lloydminster and Onion Lake, was extended to 

include fuel dealers located up to 56 kilometres from the 

nearest fuel dealer in Alberta. Also fuel dealers in Flin Flon 

and Creighton are now eligible for assistance under the 

program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill also contains a housekeeping amendment 

that clarifies the tax-free marked diesel fuel may be used by 

farmers in their farm-plated vehicles and in their unlicensed 

farm machinery when those vehicles are used in their farming 

operations. If their vehicles are used for other business 

activities such as commercial trucking, then they must use 

taxable, clear diesel fuel. 

 

Mr. Speaker, farmers will continue to be eligible to use tax-free 

marked diesel fuel in their farming operations and obtain an 

annual rebate of the tax paid on their farm gasoline. It is 

estimated that farmers will receive over $109 million in 

gasoline and diesel fuel tax benefits for 1993-94. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Fuel Tax Act, 1987. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 



1482 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1993 

realize that most people across Saskatchewan do not favour tax 

increases. What we see in this piece of legislation is a request 

for further increases in fuel tax across this province, something 

that motorists are finding that with the amount of miles we 

have to drive that it is becoming an unbearable burden. 

 

Now there are a number of areas that I believe need to be 

addressed further. And to allow further discussion to take place 

and observation to take place regarding some of the questions, I 

would move to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 64 — An Act to amend The Education and Health 

Tax Act 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I will momentarily be 

moving second reading of Bill No. 64, An Act to amend The 

Education and Health Tax Act. 

 

But first I would like to say a few words about the amendments 

being enacted by this Bill. Bill No. 64 amends The Education 

and Health Tax Act to increase the provincial sales tax rate 

from 8 per cent to 9 per cent. It also reinstates yard goods and 

adult clothing and footwear into the education and health tax 

base. 

 

Raising taxes is the least pleasant part of being a Finance 

minister. But as I detailed in the budget address, these difficult 

measures are absolutely necessary if we are to balance our 

budget in four years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, education and health tax is our second largest 

source of revenue after personal income taxes. For the 1993-94 

fiscal year we expect to receive about $643.7 million in 

education and health tax revenue. 

 

Although this seems like a substantial sum, it is nearly $204 

million less than the $847.5 million that will be required to 

service the public debt in 1993-94; $643.7 million is 

approximately 43 per cent of the amount forecasted to be spent 

on health care in 1993-94 and it is significantly less than the 

$871 million expected to be spent on education during this 

fiscal year. 

 

(1445) 

 

As you can see, Mr. Speaker, it is imperative that we take steps 

to narrow the gap between our revenues and our expenses if we 

are to balance the budget. We have implemented measures to 

cut our costs, but we must also increase our revenue if we are 

to close the gap once and for all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is anticipated that the 1 per cent tax rate 

increase and the removal of the exemptions from yard goods 

and adults' clothing and footwear will increase our sales tax 

revenue by about $118 million in 1993-94. This will bring us 

significantly closer to closing the gap between our revenues 

and our expenses. 

No one would deny that the amendments made by this Bill 

place an additional burden on the people of Saskatchewan. 

There is no question that the next few years will be challenging 

for all of us, but we must all contribute if the balanced budget 

plan is to succeed. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, we also realize that the sales tax 

increase is a greater burden for some than it is for others. 

Therefore for Saskatchewan businesses we are continuing to 

phase out the sales tax on direct agents used in manufacturing 

and processing. As members may recall, during the budget 

speech I announced an 8 per cent manufacturing and 

processing tax credit on eligible equipment acquired by 

Saskatchewan small businesses. In order to allow our 

businesses to compete in an expanding market-place, this Bill 

exempts 1-800 telephone services from the sales tax. Finally, 

we are lowering the small business corporation income tax rate. 

 

For those Saskatchewan families who can least afford to pay 

additional sales tax, we have undertaken several measures. 

First, we have retained the sales tax exemptions for children's 

clothing and footwear, as well as for other necessities such as 

food, drugs, and residential electricity. 

 

We are also increasing assistance to working poor families 

under the Family Income Plan. There will also be an increase 

in the monthly social assistance payments to families with 

children. Next year we will introduce the child benefit plan to 

further support children in low income families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have made some tough decisions. But we are 

trying to implement them with compassion, and I would 

encourage all members to support this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move that An Act to amend The Education and 

Health Tax Act be read a second time. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After listening to the 

Minister of Finance, I believe that further scrutiny should be 

taken of this Bill. And to allow a little more time, I move that 

we now adjourn . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I move 

adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 65 — An Act to amend The Corporation Capital 

Tax Act 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of Bill No. 65, An 

Act to amend The Corporation Capital Tax Act. 

 

This Bill, Mr. Speaker, increases the corporation capital tax 

resource surcharge from 3 per cent to 3.6 per cent of a resource 

company corporation's value of resource sales, effective April 

1, 1993. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the corporation capital tax is essentially 



May 6, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1483 

an annual tax on the wealth of a corporation. It's an important 

source of revenue to the province. In the 1993-94 fiscal year 

the tax will raise almost $150 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since July 1, 1988, a corporation capital tax 

resource surcharge has been levied on resource corporations in 

the oil and gas, potash, uranium, and coal resource sectors. The 

surcharge is calculated as the difference between 3 per cent of 

the corporation's value of resource sales and its existing 

corporation capital tax liability. 

 

Effective April 1, 1993, the tax rate is increased to 3.6 per cent 

of the corporation's value of resource sales in the province. The 

changes in the rate of the corporation capital tax resource 

surcharge, Mr. Speaker, will increase revenues in 1993-94 by 

approximately $15 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Corporation Capital Tax Act. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, as well in order to facilitate my 

colleague's desire to look at the Bill and take closer scrutiny, 

give closer scrutiny to the Bill prior to moving it into 

committee, I move that we now adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 66 — An Act to amend The Income Tax Act 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am 

pleased to rise and move second reading of Bill No. 66, An Act 

to amend The Income Tax Act. 

 

This Bill introduces policy changes which improve the 

competitiveness of the corporate tax system for small 

businesses, and also introduces a series of technical 

amendments required by the federal government in its 

administration of the provincial income tax system. 

 

Before I explain the nature of these amendments, I would like 

to update members on the status of our work in reforming the 

personal income tax system. 

 

Saskatchewan, along with other provinces and the federal 

government, are presently examining a new model that would 

allow the provinces to levy personal income tax on taxable 

income rather than basic federal tax. The Government of 

Saskatchewan is hopeful that the provinces and federal 

government will agree to a new model of income tax which 

will provide the provinces with more flexibility within the tax 

collection agreements. 

 

A move to tax on taxable income would increase our ability to 

create a made-in-Saskatchewan income tax system that ensures 

ability to pay is the primary determinant of a person's tax 

responsibility. 

 

A tax-on-income model could also simplify the system. The 

various components of our current system such as the flat tax 

and the surtaxes could be replaced 

by a single provincial marginal tax rate structure. 

 

The income tax system can be used to deliver economic as well 

as social policy. As I announced in the budget, Saskatchewan's 

co-ops and small businesses are the most effective in creating 

jobs. They are responsible for creating two-thirds of all new 

jobs in this province over the past 10 years. 

 

I announced in the budget that in support of co-ops and small 

businesses, the small business corporation income tax rate will 

be reduced from 9 per cent to eight and a half per cent effective 

January 1, 1994 and to 8 per cent effective January 1, 1995. 

When combined with last year's reduction on the tax rate, our 

small businesses and co-ops will benefit from a 20 per cent 

reduction in their tax rate. 

 

I also announced the introduction of a manufacturing and 

processing tax credit equal to 8 per cent of the value of eligible 

equipment acquired by Saskatchewan small business 

corporations. This credit will be in effect April 1, '93 through to 

December 31, '93 and will assist in Saskatchewan's economic 

recovery. 

 

This Bill implements both the small business corporation 

income tax rate reduction and the manufacturing and 

processing credit. These two measures will encourage growth 

and small-business development by improving the general 

climate for business investment and job creation. The 

manufacturing and processing tax credit will help place the 

Saskatchewan manufacturing and processing industry in a 

stronger position to compete interprovincially and 

internationally. 

 

In addition to these policy initiatives, this Bill implements 

technical amendments to The Income Tax Act. Some of these 

amendments allow Revenue Canada to administer the income 

tax system more fairly. These amendments, first, allow refunds 

for taxation years after 1984 without regard to the three-year 

statutory limit; second, allow Revenue Canada to waive or 

cancel interest or penalties where they result from factors 

beyond the taxpayers' control such as when a taxpayer is 

prevented by illness from filing a tax return by the April 30 

deadline; third, give discretionary power to allow a taxpayer to 

apply to make a late or amended election or to revoke an 

original election; and finally, permit a taxpayer to apply to 

extend the time to file notices of objections and appeals. I 

would be pleased to answer questions concerning the 

amendments when discussing the Bill at the Committee of the 

Whole. 

 

Therefore it gives me great pleasure to move, seconded by the 

hon. member from Regina Dewdney, that An Act to Amend the 

Income Tax Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 

make a few comments before I move adjournment of debate on 

Bill No. 66. As we've been sitting here this afternoon, Mr. 

Speaker, the Minister of Finance has brought forward four Bills 

that are dealing 



1484 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1993 

specifically with more taxation in the province of 

Saskatchewan, asking people to dig into their pockets and to 

shell out more. 

 

This afternoon in question period we saw the Minister of 

Economic Development and then the Premier stand up in this 

House and again go to the same old rhetoric of blaming their 

problems on the former government. I'd just like to remind 

them, and I'd like to remind a few people out in . . . who may 

be watching today . . . I'd like to ask a few questions and then 

ask them to give some consideration as to why we need the tax 

increases. 

 

The minister talked about the great deficit that was built up. 

The Premier talked about the deficit that was built up, and yet 

the Premier intentionally forgot to bring forward the fact that 

the government of the '70s, the government that he was a part 

of, went out, went across to New York banks and lending 

agencies, borrowed money, and purchased potash mines — 

purchased potash mines when the interest rates were high; 

purchased potash mines when the value of potash and potash 

mine . . . the mining industry was high. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they went and borrowed money at high interest 

rates to buy farm land across the province of Saskatchewan and 

drove up the price of farm land, spending high interest rates. 

And lo and behold, in the 1980s who was left to pay the bills? 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, which government was it that forgot to fund 

the pension plans? And I think there are people sitting in this 

Assembly today who know very well exactly what would 

happen to their pension plans and what was sitting out there 

because they were not funded; because the government of the 

1970s chose to take that money and put it in the Consolidated 

Fund rather than putting it aside so that at the end of the day 

when the public sector and teachers were retiring, there would 

be sufficient funds to build up and to carry these people into 

their retirement rather than putting an added burden on the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 

 

So there's little wonder that we have a Minister of Finance 

standing in this Assembly today decrying and bemoaning the 

fact that because of this deficit, supposedly laid at the feet of 

the government of the 1980s, but in actuality going back to the 

'70s and the '60s, now is forced to go to the people of 

Saskatchewan and ask for more money, to ask for an increase 

in personal income tax, to ask for an increase in the E&H 

(education and health) tax. At one time, not that long ago, they 

said there would be no more PST (provincial sales tax) in the 

province of Saskatchewan. It would be eliminated. But in fact 

what have we seen? We've seen the E&H tax go from 7 per 

cent to 9 per cent, and I predict by the end of next year it will 

be 10 per cent. 

 

As well, the Premier, when he was campaigning, said don't 

harmonize; it's not the proper thing to do. And yet the minister 

stands up today and tells us that they're going to expand the 

E&H to cover more 

services. And I again would suggest to you, by the time the 

next election rolls around it probably will be a totally 

harmonized tax with the goods and services tax. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think the people of Saskatchewan are 

beginning to realize exactly what took place on October 21, 

1991 when they elected this NDP government, this government 

that promised so much and said they could do so much more by 

eliminating waste and mismanagement. This government today 

has just dug deeper into the people's pockets to the point that 

there is less to go around. 

 

And we just also heard of the fact of the number of individuals 

who are not working in the province. — 16,000 jobs fewer than 

there were two years ago or 18 months ago. And we look at the 

teachers who are losing their jobs. We look at the nurses who 

will be losing jobs. And one has to ask themselves, who will be 

left to pay the bills when all these jobs disappear? In fact the 

targets that the minister has set that they hope to attain through 

this year's budget, what is going to be left? Who's going to be 

paying those bills? I would be surprised that the government 

even comes close to meeting half of the target of the proposed 

income when you look at the few jobs and fewer individuals 

and especially individuals in higher income brackets who don't 

have jobs any more and don't have the ability and will not be 

paying the taxes. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think there is a number of areas and a 

number of questions that can arise out of the Bills that we've 

seen before us and even Bill No. 66. And to allow for further 

scrutiny of this Bill, I move to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1500) 

 

Bill No. 67 — An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue 

Sharing Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to move second reading of Bill No. 67, The 

Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 1993. As many 

members will know, The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act 

establishes a level of provincial assistance to be allocated to 

both urban and rural municipalities. Accordingly, the 

amendment gives legal effect to the decisions reflected in a 

1993-94 budget. 

 

The amendment provides for an overall adjustment in funding 

through the revenue-sharing program to urban and rural 

municipalities. This funding adjustment implements a second 

year of the two-year funding strategy for municipal revenue 

sharing which was announced last year. 

 

More specifically the Bill provides for an overall 5 per cent 

reduction for urban municipalities and 3.6 per cent reduction 

for rural municipalities. SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association) and the provincial government 

consulted extensively 



May 6, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1485 

on how best to fairly and equitably distribute the 

revenue-sharing funds to individual communities. 

 

It was decided to use the program's distribution formula and to 

provide a measure of protection and stability for over 200 

communities by continuing with a safety net provision for 

1993. The safety net is set so that no community will face a 

funding reduction greater than 10 per cent from last year. 

 

The reduction in rural revenue-sharing funds has been 

accommodated by eliminating the basic grant, which is 

reflected in this Bill, and reducing the equalization component. 

These changes were made in consultation with SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) and 

restore the historical balance between conditional and 

unconditional grants. 

 

Road construction and maintenance grants are maintained at 

the 1992-93 level. This level of support will continue to 

provide important jobs in the road construction industry as well 

as indirect support to other rural businesses. These changes, 

when taken together, are reflected in The Municipal Revenue 

Sharing Amendment Act, 1993. The total revenue-sharing 

funding of $86.7 million represents a significant level of 

financial support to Saskatchewan municipalities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 67, The 

Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 1993. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I listened with interest to the 

Minister of Community Services — I believe is the new 

portfolio that . . . Municipal Government, pardon me — 

presenting this Bill to the Assembly. And again as I indicated 

before, I find it interesting that this minister, who was former 

mayor of the city of Melfort, would be standing here and 

suggesting that everyone is very happy with the decisions made 

by the present government to offload the cost and the debt of 

provincial spending on local governments. And local 

governments over the years have proven that they have an 

ability to live within their means. 

 

Now the minister had mentioned that there was extensive 

consultation and that everyone was basically happy. And yet, 

Mr. Speaker, I might add, in attending a meeting at Yorkton 

sponsored by the RM (rural municipality) of Saltcoats over the 

reduction in futures grants, there didn't seem to be a lot of 

happy people at that meeting. In fact they sent a resolution 

asking the government to give reconsideration to the future 

grants and they've offered a number of suggestions. And I trust 

the minister will take the time to review their briefing and 

review the motion that they put forward, and at least take the 

time to indeed consult with these groups. 

 

And the question was asked at the meeting why the Minister of 

Municipal Government didn't take the time to come out to 

Yorkton to meet with the number of RMs that were available 

and that were addressing the question today. 

Mr. Speaker, one has to also ask themselves whether SARM 

and SUMA are indeed very happy with the present legislation 

that we have before this Assembly on workers' comp and 

occupational health and safety, and whether or not they will be 

happy with the offloading that is going to take place indirectly 

through the Bills that are before us. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think here again we must take time to 

review the Bill before us, review the expenditures that have 

been . . . and the offloading that has taken place, and therefore I 

move adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 68 — An Act respecting Financial Arrangements 

for Urban Parks 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of Bill 68, The Urban Parks Financial 

Arrangements Act, 1993. This Bill implements a number of 

budget decisions for the 1993-94 fiscal year representing 

funding for Meewasin Valley Authority, Wakamow Valley 

Authority, and Wascana Centre Authority. 

 

Provincial statutory funding for Meewasin and Wascana is to 

be reduced by 6.2 per cent for the 1993-94 from the level 

provided last fiscal year. Consultations have occurred with the 

other participating parties for these Authorities to determine 

whether they prefer to reduce their own contributions by the 

same percentages or, alternatively, follow some other course. 

These included the cities of Saskatoon and Regina and the 

universities of Saskatchewan and Regina. 

 

In all cases except the University of Saskatchewan, the other 

parties indicated they wished to retain the present cost-sharing 

arrangement and thus reduce their statutory payments by the 

same percentages as for the provincial government. The 

University of Saskatchewan advised it was prepared to provide 

the same level of funding as had been budgeted for this 

purpose, in effect the same amount as last year. 

 

The amendments being made reflect the wishes of those 

various participating parties. 

 

The Wakamow Valley Authority, the provincial budget 

maintains funding at the same level as provided last year. The 

amendment in this Bill implements that decision without any 

increase or decrease. The measure of restraint being applied to 

Wascana and Meewasin are necessary in the context of the 

provincial government's own fiscal situation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I believe there are a number of 

areas that should be at least addressed a little further. But I 

don't believe we will have a lot of major questions regarding 

Bill No. 68, therefore I move adjournment of debate. 



1486 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1993 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 69 — An Act to amend The Assessment 

Management Agency Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move second 

reading of Bill No. 69, The Assessment Management Agency 

Amendment Act, 1993. 

 

This Bill implements a 1993-94 provincial budget decision to 

hold provincial funding for the Saskatchewan Assessment 

Management Agency to $7.5 million, the same level as we 

provided last year. 

 

SAMA's (Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency) 

board of directors was advised of the proposed funding level 

for this year in advance consultations in early December of 

1992. The provincial budget confirmed this earlier notice 

which was provided to give SAMA an opportunity to 

accommodate the provincial proposal. I have also indicated that 

for 1994 the government is considering either substantially 

reducing or eliminating provincial funding for this agency. 

 

The valuation services which SAMA provides to determine 

property and business assessment are, in the opinion of some, 

essentially services to local governments to enable them to use 

their property and business tax base. The suggestion had been 

made that if this is a government's intent, there ought to be 

broader consultations to consider SAMA's roles, 

responsibilities, organization, and financing. 

 

I agree with this suggestion and plan on pursuing it. For the 

time being, however, the Bill simply holds provincial funding 

at last year's level for 1993. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, in order to allow my colleague a 

little more time to review the Bill before us, I move to adjourn 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I'm 

wondering what role you as Transportation minister played in 

the recent attempts by the city of Moose Jaw and various 

business groups there to bring the CPR (Canadian Pacific 

Railway) communications centre to that community. I wonder 

if you could briefly outline to the Assembly what role you and 

your officials played in that particular negotiation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — . . . department in respect to that was the 

Department of Economic Development. We 

had discussions with them but in bringing . . . discussions with 

CP (Canadian Pacific) was primarily done . . . not primarily, 

was done through Economic Development and to some extent 

in respect to Finance. They had some discussions vis-a-vis tax 

rate on diesel fuel and the like, and also the relocation of jobs 

was handled under the Department of Economic Development. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — So what you're saying, Mr. Minister, is that 

you personally did not meet with anyone from the city of 

Moose Jaw, anyone from Canadian Pacific corporation, or any 

of the various business groups that were interested in this 

relocation. You personally didn't have anything to do with that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — No, I did not. I had some discussions 

with officials of the CP, but in a general outline of their general 

business concerns as it relates to the CP. But specifically in 

respect to the discussions, it was handled by Economic 

Development. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, I find it a little strange that the 

minister responsible for Transportation, transportation policy, 

and obviously the companies involved in the transportation 

sector in our province which is a very large one — and 

certainly our railroad network is one of the most extensive in 

the country — that the minister responsible for that network 

wouldn't be interested in 200-plus jobs and a payroll that was in 

excess of $7 million a year with the obvious spin-off 

components that would affect Saskatchewan's economy and 

society. 

 

Certainly I would think that your department does economic 

studies all the time — that they wouldn't have been the key 

component as far as advising other departments — on the 

number of miles run by the railways, number of litres of fuel 

used, all those sorts of components that would have entered 

into this decision. You could have played a very valuable role 

in this particular negotiation which failed and now has gone to 

the city of Winnipeg. I'd like you to comment on that. 

 

(1515) 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — Well as I indicated to you, it's not a 

question of disinterest. We are interested in location of any jobs 

that we can get, but I indicated to you that our department had 

done studies in respect to taxation, in respect to rail. We have 

had discussions with them in respect to that. Any concessions 

in respect to taxation would be dealt with directly in respect 

with the Department of Finance. 

 

In so far as the relocation, the lead department as I indicated to 

you was Economic Development. Certainly every effort was 

made by the department. And our department here, in any of 

the studies that they had in respect to taxation of railways was 

made available, and we took a keen interest to that extent. 

 

But the direct contacts vis-a-vis any tax concessions, vis-a-vis 

relocation, vis-a-vis the terms under which 



May 6, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1487 

they were offering to locate, was done, as I indicated, by 

Economic Development. And I make no apologies for that 

because they were the lead department in respect to it. And our 

officials were monitoring it or giving any information that they 

had done in respect to any studies and played an important role 

to that extent. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Minister, a lot of the people in the 

community of Moose Jaw and surrounding area, the civic 

administration, the business community, have asked me a lot of 

questions. And maybe you can be helpful here. 

 

The studies that you did that you then shared with other 

departments, would you be prepared to share those with this 

Legislative Assembly so that I can impart them also to the civic 

administration in Moose Jaw, the downtown business district, 

and others that worked so hard to try and bring this particular 

facility to Saskatchewan and to our community. I wonder 

would you be prepared to share those with us? 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — Yes, there's a number of studies. The 

essential study, as I indicated to you, was in respect to the 

concern that was raised by CP vis-a-vis taxation across Canada 

as it affected the CP. We did a study on that and there was also 

one study commissioned by the federal government which we 

have access to. 

 

We have been making that available to any of those that were 

inquiring in respect to the information that had been done from 

the studies. Those studies are available and we can certainly 

make those available to you or to the community of Moose Jaw 

if indeed we haven't already. I can't say for sure. 

 

I'm advised that our studies have been made available to the 

city of Moose Jaw and we're willing to share those. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well I'd appreciate that, Mr. Minister, 

because there's an awful lot of people in Moose Jaw that feel 

that this was an ideal opportunity not only to draw a major 

transportation component, a high-tech component to our 

province and particularly to our cities so that we could build on 

that. And the future, that payroll of over $7 million would have 

been a tremendous economic booster to that particular part of 

the province. 

 

And people are very curious as to why there was no further 

movement on this thing, that it seemed like it was going to 

Winnipeg all along. So I'll look forward to you sending those 

across to me and then I can share them with local people. And 

perhaps then when the Minister of Economic Development 

comes forward, we can get into the details that he obviously 

handled rather than yourself. 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — As I indicated to you, we will make 

those studies available. They're public knowledge. We have 

discussed those also with the officials of CP. And while there's 

not full concurrence with the content of it, nevertheless we 

have done it not 

only within the department, but we have an additional one 

which is a consulting firm, I believe initiated by the federal 

government, in respect to taxation. 

 

I think that those are the two reports, is it not correct? Yes. I'll 

make those available to you. 

 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 

have a few questions I would like to talk to you about. 

 

In my constituency, we're talking about Highway 14 going 

west from Unity; Highway 31 from Kerrobert to Macklin or 

vice versa; Highway 317 which connects Highway 31 down to 

Highway 51. 

 

Mr. Minister, I notice in your construction projects, all that I 

see in that area is the 16 kilometres you're talking about west of 

Unity, in the Senlac area. Mr. Minister, all we're doing there is 

repairing excessive damage, and I would like to maybe bring 

you up to date on the history of Highway 14. 

 

Highway 14 was . . . the subgrade was built in the early . . . the 

late '60s. And in about 1971 the government changed and your 

government came in and didn't do anything with that highway 

until later on when my government became government. And 

by the time that that had happened, we had lost the subgrade 

and that had to be rebuilt. That all had to be rebuilt again. 

 

Mr. Minister, I'm asking you, are you not in danger of letting 

that same thing happen again? And I hope, sir, it is not purely 

political. I think common sense and the economic impact does 

require you, sir, to finish the surface of that road. Would you 

give me an indication of what your plans are for Highway 14? 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — I want, first of all, to indicate to the hon. 

member that I think if you look through the schedule here that 

it has been fairly well distributed throughout Saskatchewan, 

and there is no politics in the schedule. 

 

I want to clearly indicate to you that we are under stress, 

though. I can indicate to you that the previous budget, capital 

budget, back two or three or four years ago was something like 

up at the maximum 116 million, if I'm not mistaken. That's 

capital and rehabilitation. 

 

That dropped, in 1991-92, to about into the 84 million, 

somewhere in . . . that's the approximation, 84 million. And 

then subsequently in '92-93, it dropped down to $65 million . . . 

is what we have to deal with 25,000 kilometres of highway. So 

it's not a very big budget, but those are the circumstances under 

which we work. 

 

This year, as you will indicate in the budget, we have $75 

million, but part of that is represented by the federal 

contribution also. So we're really working with that $75 

million, and all I can say to you is that I have had the 

department . . . I came into the department on September 30, 

and they are trying to 



1488 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1993 

develop a strategy to maintain what is something like $6 billion 

infrastructure. 

 

Couple of things I need to point out. One is that within the 

restricted budget, we have to somehow pick out the priorities. 

That's what the department has been trying to do. 

 

Secondly, the second thing that influenced the schedule 

somewhat is that the federal government required that we in 

fact do it on those main highways, as I mentioned the other day 

— like 16, No. 1, and you know them, 7, 11, and so on. And so 

that transferred more of our capital construction budget into in 

fact those highways. 

 

So all I can say to you in respect to it, we've gone as far as we 

can. We think that we have addressed the best we could the 

pressing needs in the schedule that we have put forward. I 

appreciate you bringing forward the information to me. I will 

have the staff of course take notice of this, and when we're 

making up future budgets that we take a look at it, depending 

on finances again. 

 

But I know that particular highway from Saskatoon through 

Asquith and Biggar and through Wilkie and out to the Alberta 

border. So we'll take a look at that in the future. 

 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I appreciate your 

position and I would . . . I think in my remarks I pointed out to 

you that this has happened before where we lost the subgrade 

on that highway and we had to rebuild it all. Now I hope that 

don't happen again. 

 

I want to point out another thing to you, sir. You're talking 

about the federal government more or less indicating where 

they want you to put your share of the money, and I appreciate 

that. However, Highway 14 is an east-west avenue for the 

people in that area. I think we connect on Highway 40, if I'm 

not mistaken, in Alberta — a very good highway. And in the 

area . . . Or maybe Highway 40 is up a little north. 

 

What's happening in there, sir, is we have a heavy oil traffic. 

And I'm sure from what I heard the minister say the other day, 

that your government is not trying to discourage oil production. 

Now if you look at the economics of that highway, you may 

find that by not finishing the surface it's bad economics 

because you'll lose the highway again and we'll have to redo it 

again. That's the point I want to make to you, sir. 

 

And I want you to look at another little thing about that area. In 

that west and south corner of my constituency, over the years 

has had very little road work done in it. And if you look at the 

three highways I pointed out to you, sir, you'll find that 

Highway 14, Highway 31, and Highway 317, going down to 

Highway 51, opens up that whole area to decent roads. And if 

you drive through there some day, you'll see what I mean. 

 

And the five-year project that I had developed with my 

government was that those roads would be finished. There's a 

short portion on 31, from I believe Salvador to Macklin, I 

would like to see you finish. It doesn't make a whole lot of 

sense to me to leave that portion not finished. Highway 317 

goes down to just south of Cactus Lake. 

 

And I'm not suggesting, sir, that you can do the whole thing on 

317 in one year. I understand that. But I would certainly 

appreciate if you would consider doing some each year. 

Because if you look at the area within itself, you'll find that it 

does open up that whole area, and it is not a lot of road work if 

you consider the size of the area. And it does give us on 

Highway 14 an east-west route coming up 31, comes up to 

Biggar which gives us a route into Saskatoon, if you will. 

Highway 51 gives us another east-west access. And I think, sir, 

if you look at it, it makes a lot of sense. 

 

And I would ask you I suppose this year — unless you have 

some leeway you may not be able to do a whole lot in there — 

but I would pressure you, if I can, to don't make the same 

mistake on Highway 14 that we did a few years ago. It does not 

make economic sense. 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — Well I appreciate the comments of the 

member. I want to indicate that in respect to some of the 

highways that he mentions, Highway 31 and Highway 317, I 

think he will appreciate that the volume of traffic is relatively 

light on those two highways. The traffic counts are relatively 

low. That's not to say that they shouldn't be developed. 

 

I just want to say one thing, that we're taking a close look at 

and responding to some extent even within the limited finances 

that we have, and that is looking at a highway construction 

relative to economic development and tourism. I'm not sure 

that . . . I know that we have addressed it to some extent 

throughout the years, but I'm having the department take a look 

at a study to better focus on either putting in roads for 

economic development more readily or servicing at a higher 

quality those roads with economic needs. And certainly we're 

doing that. 

 

(1530) 

 

And I just indicate to you, south of Kindersley on Highway 21 

I believe it is, that was a heavy use for oil traffic also. And we 

have done work on that and that's part of the reason for doing 

it. 

 

So I appreciate your comments. All of the considerations will 

be given. I think within the . . . I'll not be able to meet all of the 

expectations, but certainly we're open to review them and to 

consider your input into it. And I'll certainly take a look in 

respect to Highway No. 14. 

 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. If you're talking 

about the highway count, when the road is a bad road naturally 

the count goes down. I happened to in my previous life depend 

on heavy trucks for supply. And the truckers at that time told 

me they would rather use 14 than 16 because of the hills and so 

on that was on the other highways. That's a very flat 



May 6, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1489 

route; they like it. However when they get to Saskatchewan the 

road was not as good, so we didn't use it. 

 

The other thing is the same in the area of 31 and 317. Those 

folks there would use that road more if it was in better 

condition. Highway 21 is also a concern of mine. It's under 

heavy stress right now; I agree with you there, and it's going to 

have to have your attention for two reasons. In my area the oil 

patch is coming into our area. We have very good play going 

on in the Senlac area, Macklin — Senlac, over as far as 

Rutland. And we also, in the foreseeable future, have two high 

throughput elevators being contemplated in the Unity area, 

which will again put stress on Highway 21. 

 

So those things I think have to be considered. And I would 

appreciate you, sir, if at another year or another time if you 

would give us the privilege of submitting to you a plan that we 

would like you to consider before you have come out with the 

final decision. 

 

I guess what I'm saying to you, sir, when we were government 

our Highway minister — and this is not meant as criticism — 

our Highway minister came to us and said, give me your 

five-year plan. And we did that, and not necessarily believing 

we were going to get it, but that give him and it would give 

you, sir, a chance I think to plan. And under that five-year plan, 

31 was to be finished, 14 was to be paved, and 317 was to be in 

piecemeal style finished up to 51. So when I get your . . . what 

you decided, without any chance of talking to you about it, I 

felt a little like I was left out. 

 

And I understand the constraints you're under, but I think if you 

would look at that for another year, it maybe would help us. 

 

I have one more concern I would like to bring to your attention, 

and it's not to do with the highway itself. But could you tell me 

how your highway people purchase their filters for their 

equipment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — I'm advised that the filters are purchased 

through tender, through SPMC. 

 

On what you're saying — and that's a reality that there's a lot of 

high-input elevators springing up — the thrust, I think, of the 

federal government looks as though there will be a direction 

towards more rail line abandonment and more hauling longer 

distances. This is already impacting on the highway system. 

 

And I've had people raise concerns in the Outlook area in 

respect to the quality of the highway. I have problems over in 

Kamsack area because of a possibility of a high-input elevator. 

Melville is another one. So we've got a compounded problem 

in that if the method of payment, as the federal government is 

designed to change, and also to have a massive rail line 

abandonment, the problem that we have is that nowhere in their 

discussions have they ever indicated that they will compensate 

or at least make funding available to the provinces and the 

municipalities for the infrastructure that replaces . . . that will 

be used 

instead of the rail. And that is a real concern to us. 

 

And as I said, SARM had met with the federal officials with a 

proposal in respect to if a line is abandoned, compensation. We 

have worked out a proposal with a federal consultant — or it 

was a federal consultant that did the work, I believe — in 

respect to the impact of rail line abandonment. 

 

So we have a growing problem confronting us. And what we're 

trying to do within the department is to put a plan together for 

the overall transportation here in Saskatchewan. And the 

department is working rapidly, trying to accommodate that. 

 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, if it's 

any comfort and I'm sure your department knows, your 

predecessor in our government lobbied the feds very heavy for 

exactly what you're talking about, is some compensation to our 

Highway department because of the abandoning of railroads. 

So you may even find it in your department. And I hope you 

continue on with that because I believe it's a valid request from 

us to the feds to give us some help on the highways. 

 

Mr. Minister, I would like to develop a little further the 

question of the purchase of the filters. Now I understand you to 

say that SPMC, the purchasing agent . . . am I to understand 

then in order to get the information that I have to go to SPMC? 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — Yes. All of the large volumes that go to 

tender of that nature would be with SPMC — Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation. And that's, I'm advised, 

where the information would be obtained. 

 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. This will probably 

be the final question, depending on your answer. Then am I to 

assume you don't know whether we do any recycling of those 

filters? 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — What I'm advised is that there has been 

some limited attempt at recycling, but it's just at the infancy 

stage. Certainly if you have any company that is in that type of 

business, we'd be pleased to be advised of it and consideration 

could be given. But it's not well advanced for recycling of the 

filters, not far advanced apparently. 

 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I do have . . . There 

are several people that do this. I'll send a copy of this over to 

you, sir. And the reason I brought this subject up is that I'm 

under the . . . I've been told that we do very little recycling. I've 

also been told that we buy out of province and that's why . . . 

but I'll visit with you on a personal basis on this matter. 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — Thank you very much for providing this 

information and I'll appreciate the opportunity to discuss it with 

you privately. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 

Minister, the issue about the filters, I think it's very important 

that we take a serious look at recycling and 



1490 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1993 

reusing these because of the environmental impact this can 

have. If we simply use the filters and then dispose of them, it's 

just more addition to our landfill sites that isn't necessarily 

needed. 

 

At some point in time they will be no longer useable. But I 

believe it's important that we take every opportunity that we 

can to recycle this material. And most of these filters are made 

of paper, so it's fairly easy to wash them and to reuse them. 

You have to be careful that there's no holes that allow the dust 

to collect through that, but it is possible to do it and it happens 

all the time in the agriculture industry. People recycle their 

filters 2, 3, 4, and 5 times. 

 

So it is possible to do so and I think it would be very important 

that the Department of Highways with their large number of 

vehicles takes an opportunity to do this, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — I totally agree with what you're saying. 

The information has been provided; the department will take it 

seriously; we'll take a look at it. In respect to recycling, one of 

the innovations that they have come up with is in respect to 

resurfacing a road, clawing up the present asphalt and then 

reusing it. That has been a tremendous innovation as well. But 

that's not with respect to filters. 

 

But also in respect to tires, we tried using rubber, or 

melted-down rubber as a part of the mix back a few years. I 

don't think it worked. They are still carrying it on — research 

— in Ontario, in respect to it. And I don't know whether or not 

it will work or not, but I don't think it was very successful here. 

 

So some efforts are being made within the department to 

recycle and I certainly appreciate what you say, that it's 

important. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. It seems that 

the only people who do a successful job of putting rubber on 

the road is teenagers. I'd like to ask you a question dealing with 

the employment practices of the Highways department. How 

does the Highways department go about hiring new employees, 

and how do they go about hiring temporary employees? 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — For the employment of new personnel 

for the Department of Highways, it follows the same practice 

through the Public Service Commission. Applications are made 

for positions that are posted, and within that of course any 

position that is posted, any existing individual within the 

department would have the right also to apply for an 

advancement as a position came open, or a lateral transfer. So 

that's basically how it works. 

 

Out-of-scope positions, senior positions, normally what is done 

there I believe is that there's an advertisement for the position. 

If you're looking for a deputy minister or assistant deputy 

minister there's normally a competition in respect to it. That's 

generally how it operates. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — This procedure would also be in 

place for temporary employees that would be hired on a 

short-term basis. No, I'm not thinking summer students here, 

but somebody who might be hired for a one-month project or 

two months or some short term. 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — The casual employees they indicate to 

me they can pull in without competition, up to 20 days . . . over 

two months. Those they can pull in with applications outside of 

having to go through the Public Service. So up to that for 

casual. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — And how would this work, Mr. 

Minister? Would somebody within the department have a 

project, say, that's going to last a month, and they would just 

simply go out and hire somebody, or is there a procedure, some 

criteria that you go through? 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — Normally what they do if they need 

casual is to try to attempt to get them at a local level, in the 

area that the work is being done with the department. That's 

what I'm advised. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Is there any criteria though on how that 

hiring takes place? Is it just pertinent to where that actual job 

. . . If the job is in community A, then you would hire 

somebody from community A rather than from community B. 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — We have the six districts, of course. And 

within the districts we have the different maintenance depots in 

the various towns. You take Swift Current; there's several of 

them in there. And similarly in the other districts. 

 

So I am advised that what happens is that . . . for instance, I 

know my area, Watson for instance, if they needed somebody 

on a casual basis, then the person that's the head of 

maintenance there would see if there's anybody around locally 

that they can pull in. And similarly at Lanigan or whatever 

other area. 

 

So it's left up to the individual maintenance area to do it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Would these positions be advertised in 

any way or would it simply be that the local supervisor could 

go out and pick two people to have the job? 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — Well they aren't advertised because 

they're short duration that they need them for. And they just 

simply go out and find an individual that can work for that 

length of time. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Well I'm surprised that there isn't at 

least some criteria in place for this hiring, that it's simply left 

up to the supervisor or whomever it might be. 

 

At what level would that decision be made? Would it be the 

person who is actually driving the truck and the other . . . the 

casual labour is going to be helping him with a shovel? Or who 

makes the decision on the hiring? 



May 6, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1491 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — I'm advised it would be the supervisor of 

operations. There's nothing sinister about it. They just . . . 

These are short-time employees. Many of them repeat. They 

may be in an area and have worked for the department before 

and may be available at call. Apparently that's all . . . It's done 

by the supervisor of maintenance. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Well the reason I had these questions, 

Mr. Minister, because I received a phone call from an 

individual in a community with a maintenance depot who is on 

welfare and who applied for the job with Highways department 

on a casual basis — he knew it was a casual job. 

 

The supervisor did not make the decision as to who was going 

to be hired. The supervisor turned that decision over to another 

employee who in turn hired two of his friends to fill those 

positions with him, because they were going to be working 

with this individual that made the choice as to who got hired. 

 

The person who was on welfare felt that he should have at least 

had the opportunity to have an interview and be considered for 

that position, and he felt that he was not given that opportunity. 

 

Mr. Minister, would you respond to that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — Give me the specifics and give me the 

name and I'll look into it, because that's not the way it's 

supposed to happen. The supervisor transferred it down and 

delegated it. And if it's improper and if your facts are right, that 

is incorrect. Give us the information and we'll look into it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, I will pass it 

over to you. 

 

I'd like to go on to another subject then, and that is oil surfacing 

or resurfacing of highways. And I wrote you a letter on this last 

fall about this issue. 

 

Last year through Kenosee park, the highway through there, 

No. 9, was resurfaced. And it was a very shiny surface at night. 

When you were driving down this road, if there was oncoming 

traffic, you had a great deal of difficulty seeing the road. At 

that time you were going to look into some manner in which to 

take that shine off of the road. Has anything happened with 

that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — I remember the problem; I don't 

remember the answer, nor do my staff that are here. Can I 

check that out for you and get back to you? I know that . . . I 

believe I recall you having raised that, but I can honestly say I 

didn't keep the answer in my head. And somehow my staff 

haven't done it either. But we'll get back to you on it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Another 

question for you. When you're oil-surfacing a highway, would 

it be possible to only do a certain section of the road to allow 

traffic to bypass that section, do one lane? And I realize that on 

all 

highways you don't have the capability to divert traffic around 

it. But would it be possible to do one lane, allow that to dry 

while you're proceeding on with other construction some place 

else along the highway, and then come back and do it again? 

 

I've had people complain that they come driving along the road 

and the surface on their side of the lane is completely fresh oil, 

and they can't avoid it. Would it be possible to make some 

changes along that area? 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — They're telling me that it's not conducive 

to the construction industry because you tend to get a drop-off, 

and they indicate that that has a safety factor that they want to 

eliminate. So that's the reason why they don't do it. 

 

In respect to the shininess of your highway there, I'm advised 

that the contractor is to provide a reflective tape on the 

highway. And usually weathering generally takes care of any 

existing shine. But if you have a particular problem, I will look 

it up for you. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, in that situation, it 

was . . . you could easily see the road as you were driving 

yourself, with your own headlights at night. But it was when 

you were meeting oncoming traffic and the lights from the 

oncoming traffic would reflect off the highway and back into 

your eyes, and it was very, very difficult to see the road. You 

were never exactly sure where you were heading as you met 

that oncoming vehicle. And so if some sort of a surface could 

be put on that . . . perhaps the surface could be roughed up after 

it's put on or some sort of a coating that could be put on to there 

that would not be quite so reflective. 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — I'll have the department officials take a 

look at that. You might indicate — I think you did — but make 

sure that I know what highway and in what particular area, just 

so we're sure. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Well this was while No. 9 was being 

resurfaced through Kenosee, through Moose Mountain 

Provincial Park is where it occurred. But I would have to 

assume that if a similar mix is being used that it could occur at 

any place. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, just 

to follow up on my colleague's comment there, there certainly 

are ways that you can off-colour the tops of the pavement, 

throwing in a little bit of cement and all that kind of stuff. And 

I'm sure your officials will find a way to take care of this 

problem. 

 

I just want to go into a bit of a summary of what we've done 

here, Minister. We've talked about several things in the 

Department of Highways. And I guess by now you realize that 

you don't handle the portfolio with the largest numbers of 

dollars. Health gets a billion and a half dollars, and Education 

gets way more than Highways. But by the interest that you see 

from my colleagues and the people that you obviously deal 

with, you must realize that even though you don't have the 

most dollars to spend, you have one of the 



1492 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1993 

more important portfolios in the province of Saskatchewan. 

That being of course because of our geography and the large 

distances that we have to travel and the importance that our 

road system naturally is to everyone in our province because 

we don't have the economy to be able to have airplanes or 

helicopters for everyone. 

 

So reality is that even though you have some restricted dollars, 

you have an extremely important job to do in the province to 

try to provide the road network that all of the people certainly 

expect and need. We know that that is tough for you and the 

decisions are hard, and we appreciate the candour with which 

you have discussed the highway system with us. And we look 

forward to discussing other problems like the ones that we have 

done in days to come and the future. 

 

With that, we would like to point out, Minister, that in view of 

the fact that there are such changing roles in many of our 

factors — for example of course, the rail-line abandonment, 

which you yourself have mentioned earlier today, and things 

like the Crow's Nest freight rate agreement possibly being 

cancelled. With those kinds of considerations in the offing and 

in the process, we would suggest to you that you work hard on 

some five-year, ten-year developmental plans. I'm sure that 

you're doing that, but it hasn't been mentioned. 

 

But certainly I think we need to do that and we need to all 

cooperate in the input to that, even those areas where you may 

not have friends and colleagues. And the rest of us certainly 

would pledge our support to helping you in those areas to try to 

provide the best network of roads in the province as we emerge 

into the 21st century. 

 

The Crow's Nest freight rate agreement, we didn't discuss at 

length and we won't because we could obviously stay here for 

another two days and do that. The reality being that it's been 

going on for 30-some years and the debate will continue for 

some time yet, I expect. 

 

Now the reality there of course being that we thought a month 

or so back that we were headed smack, bang into the 

cancellation of the Crow and that we were going to have to 

face it right away. I see some softening on the horizon of the 

federal picture now so most likely we won't deal with the 

immediate impact right away, only a gradual projection. 

 

So we won't go into it for a long time because I don't think 

there's going to be a real big impact on your budget for this 

year, as might have happened if things had unfolded as they 

were being talked about just a short time back. 

 

So I think possibly by next year though you will have for us 

some kind of a plan of how we're going to handle this 

restructuring of our road system as the infrastructure of our 

province changes as a result of those changes to the Crow. 

Because it's obvious to me, and I think to most of the world, 

that something's going to happen there and we want you to look 

ahead 

a bit and plan for the future in that area. 

 

The fuel tax as it affects our rail system certainly has to be a 

sad situation for the people of Moose Jaw, and I'm certain that 

nothing hurt you as a minister more than to see the loss of those 

job potentials in that great city in our province. I think perhaps 

though that we should have tried harder. I don't want to lecture 

you severely; I just want to let you know my feelings that I 

think maybe we let the people of Moose Jaw down. We could 

have tried harder and I hope next time, if there is an 

opportunity, that you will bend a little harder and try to get 

those kinds of activities into our province. 

 

We've talked about some individual roads that need attention, 

and I want to personally thank you for a letter that I received 

recently from your office and yourself wherein you indicate 

that passing lanes on No. 1 Highway in some of the key areas 

where we have congestion and a lot of mortality rates and a lot 

of accidents would in fact be looked into and perhaps gone 

with. We appreciate that. 

 

In that light, having suggested a couple of locations in the west 

part of the province — at Piapot and past Maple Creek where 

I'm more familiar with the road — it has now come to my 

attention that there are people in the eastern side of the 

province who also feel that a couple of more spots there should 

have some attention, and I will ask my colleagues to bring that 

to your attention behind the bar later. But for those people we 

want them to know that we haven't forgotten them and there 

may be a possibility there. 

 

I just want to add in that light, Minister, that this seems to be a 

good idea because a passing lane is relatively inexpensive as 

compared to twinning an entire road. A two- or three-mile 

stretch often is enough to allow a lot of traffic to pass one 

another and to get out of congestion, especially in the summer 

when we have trailers being pulled by too small a cars. And 

those kinds of things happen where the traffic lines up, 

especially on those tourist routes like No. 1 Highway always is, 

where people are coming through our province in great 

numbers. 

 

And yet it's not wasted, because when you do double-lane the 

highway, you've got that sub-base pretty well there and you can 

integrate it into the double-laning if it's properly planned. And I 

would suggest your engineers can do that and will certainly 

probably go along with making every effort to save costs in the 

future so that we can double up the use of these things as we go 

through time. 

 

I think that the driving public needs to have safety and wants 

these little things even though the budgets are tight and I think 

it would be incumbent upon all of us to try our best to try to 

make our roads as safe as we can. 

 

The other thing I wanted to mention, Minister, before we get on 

with this is the rural municipal road structure that you are now 

taking over. Obviously this is a new thing for the Department 

of Highways. I'm happy that you have brought some of the 

official 



May 6, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1493 

people from Rural Development along into your department so 

that they can pass their expertise and knowledge about rural 

affairs and rural road needs on to you and the rest of your 

officials. 

 

It is a big responsibility for you because there are many, many 

thousands of miles of municipal roads in this province. It is a 

network of roads that this province, I believe, can be proud of 

beyond measure. The planning that has gone into the road 

structure of this province over the last 30 years has evolved and 

developed into one of the finest road systems in the world and 

probably the most miles of road for any place with such a small 

population, for sure. 

 

(1600) 

 

So while we've done well, we need to continue to work to 

maintain that structure and to keep it in proper condition. That 

brings me to a concern and a worry about the transfer of the 

government's bookkeeping system into an accrual system from 

the cash basis and what it has done to the futures for our road 

construction in rural municipal circles. 

 

The reality, Minister, as you're probably well aware, is that the 

cash basis allowed for the futures to be claimed in the year that 

it happened. The accrual means that now in two years of 

accrued grants ahead, you are restricted from any more 

building. There's going to be at least a thousand kilometres, 

we're told by municipal officials, that won't be built this year as 

a result of this ruling. 

 

That's a severe blow to the construction industry. It's a severe 

blow to the municipal culvert sales people. It's a severe blow to 

the workforces and to of course the people who depend on 

having the roads upgraded for their driving pleasure and safety. 

 

So I want you to ask your officials if there's some way that we 

can work our way through this accrual system to allow these 

people to continue to build their roads. There must be a way. 

There's got to be a way to get around this bookkeeping thing. 

Because the reality is that the cost doesn't come to you from 

1995 in this year's budget. The reality is that it'll be a cost to 

the 1995 budget when you actually pay the money to the 

municipalities, if that's the year that it's due. 

 

So there must be an accounting way that we can get around this 

problem so that people can continue to build their roads and 

expand the system as it is needed. If we let it deteriorate, we're 

all going to be in serious trouble. 

 

So, Minister, I haven't really, I guess, specifically asked a 

question in this round but I've made a lot of suggestions to you. 

And if you'd like to reply to them, then I'd like to wrap up this 

and allow this thing to proceed to some other area. 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — I want to address some of the areas that 

you discussed. One is asking for a plan, and certainly I think 

it's incumbent on the government and the department to put 

together a sort of . . . not a sort of, 

but put together a plan which will address the transportation 

needs into the future. This is being worked on as rapidly as 

possible in the department. 

 

I want to indicate to you that we have asked SUMA and SARM 

to also participate in structuring sort of the plan. And that has 

started already. And I think it's very useful to have their 

participation. So we're well on the way to structuring an overall 

plan. And what we hope to do is to have the full consultation in 

respect to it. 

 

In respect to passing lanes, I know you raised that issue with 

me. I think they are not inexpensive. As I am advised, they're 

quite expensive. I'm also advised that there's not much salvage 

in the future. 

 

I think more work probably needs to be done in this, because I 

understand in the States they have a fair number of these, and 

maybe in some of the other provinces. We have some 

experience on No. 1 Highway, I guess, east towards Indian 

Head. And so the department will continue to study that, take a 

look at it. I've asked them to consider what you have mentioned 

in respect to the western part which isn't four-laned. And we'll 

continue to take a look at that. 

 

I don't want to heat up the debate on the Crow benefit, only to 

say that I'm a little disappointed with the actions of the federal 

government in that in the minibudget, the Minister of Finance, 

Mr. Mazankowski, in December cut the Crow benefit by 10 per 

cent. And 10 per cent of 730 million was 73 million — 55 per 

cent of that goes to the producers here in Saskatchewan. 

 

So basically we lost $40 million in one whack this coming 

year. So it's not too great a comfort that after having taken 40 

million unilaterally from the producers, that we end up getting 

back 35 million. I don't think it was a great exchange, although 

it's obviously better than nothing. 

 

I appreciate what you indicated in respect to taking over roads, 

bridges, and ferries, from Rural Affairs. That we have to work 

. . . we have some excellent staff, as you indicated, who have 

transferred over from the Department of Rural Affairs. And I'm 

sure that we can set up a very effective method of dealing with 

the RMs, as has been the case under Rural Affairs. 

 

You have mentioned the problem in respect to the accrual 

accounting impacts on rural road construction, and I am aware 

of that. The actual funding, the budget itself, is within 

Municipal Government. The funding, the actual budget is there. 

Then what we do is administer it, the funds that are made 

available. 

 

There's no doubt that there's a couple problems that happened, 

is that Finance looked at it and they were requested to transfer 

over to the accrual system, as you may well be aware. They 

were looking at $19.6 million outstanding in futures. And what 

they endeavoured to do, because under that it represented a part 

of the debt of the province, and what they . . . in the budgetary 

decision it was to reduce this debt to a 



1494 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1993 

more manageable level of $15 million. And so that was a fair 

amount being addressed during that current year, some $4.6 

million. 

 

Our information here is twofold. One is that in the past two 

years rural road construction activity had been at about 650 to 

700 kilometres. That's about where it was at over the past two 

years. We feel that while this will have some impact, it will not 

have have a . . . well it will have a reduction of somewhere 

between perhaps 150 to 170, 75 kilometres of construction. So 

this undoubtedly will have some impact. 

 

But I want to indicate to you that the RMs that are in pretty 

good shape, there's nothing stopping them from proceeding on 

their own and constructing. 

 

But I can only advise you that we did take a look at other 

options, and I think it was reviewed again by Finance. Some of 

my colleagues met with members of the RM, representatives of 

the RM over in a meeting at Yorkton, and certainly we tried to 

address it. 

 

But as I say, we are on the accrual system. It was an effort to 

cut back on the amount of the 19.6 million to 15 million. I 

think the impact subsequent years will not be as severe, I'm 

advised. While I don't think any total decision has been made, 

the suggestion was to perhaps phase it over less — rather than 

the 4.6, to go with the smaller amount. 

 

But that wouldn't achieve the level of reducing the futures as 

was required by Finance. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. Just to clarify the 

kilometres, you may want to check that again because I was of 

the impression from a meeting that was held in the Yorkton 

area of just a few municipalities in that area that they 

themselves in those few municipalities that attended that 

meeting had between 150 and 200 kilometres that were turned 

down as a result of the change in the accrual system and the 

method of the futures grant process. 

 

So if that in fact is true, then it would have to follow through 

that their estimate of 1,000 kilometres affected in the province 

would necessarily be more accurate. And so the impact would 

be quite a bit more severe on the entire provincial scene than 

what you may be aware of. So I suggest that you recheck that 

to see how deep the hurt really does go. 

 

I suggested to you the other day, Minister, that we should be 

looking at reducing some of the costs in Highways, simply 

because your government campaigned on the issue of saying 

that they could do a lot of things a lot cheaper and a lot better. 

And to prove that point and to allow you the option to prove 

that point, I suggested I would move a motion to reduce. 

 

I'm not going to move a motion because obviously your 

government will defeat my efforts, but I'm going to suggest to 

you where I think you can reduce and where I think it would be 

realistic for you to do that without hurting a whole lot of 

people. I'm going to suggest to you that if we wanted to take 

the time, the 

area that I would have you vote on to reduce would have been 

under item no. 1, in the Estimates, Saskatchewan Estimates 

1993-94, item no. 1 under Highways and Transportation, on 

page 70 under vote 16. And I would suggest that the $4,494 

there could be reduced by 30 per cent without seriously hurting 

anybody in the province. I also suggest that under item no. 6 on 

page 71, that the figure of $3,028 could also be reduced by 30 

per cent. And I'll leave you with that challenge of trying to do 

that without putting it to the test of the vote today. 

 

The only other thing I want to mention is when you said the 

feds had downloaded by cutting 10 per cent from the Crow, I 

agree with your figures; they are accurate as far as I know. 

 

And I want you to also know that I don't agree with them 

cutting that money for the province of Saskatchewan; I think 

that was wrong. I agree with you that it's a hardship for our 

province and for our producers, and I want you to know that we 

stand squarely together on that issue. We deserve to have that 

money as the system presently is, but we're not going to get, so 

we'll have to learn how to live without it. But we certainly don't 

oppose your efforts to get those dollars for the Saskatchewan 

economy. However it is decided to divvy it up now or later, 

those monies should come to Saskatchewan producers under 

the old agreements as we understand them. 

 

So I stand fully with you on that issue, and I hope that 

somehow we can convince the federal government to stop this 

kind of downloading on Saskatchewan producers in whatever 

way it works out, whether we get the grants for municipal 

roads or your highway system later on. You know, there have 

been those suggestions. In fact the Crow goes so deep and is so 

broad that some people have actually suggested that rural 

municipalities should get the entire Crow benefit so that they 

could use the money to exclusively build roads. 

 

But as I said, we could talk for three days about that. But I 

wanted you to know that we do support you in a lot of areas but 

we do think that there is some room to do some cutting. 

 

And with that I want to conclude by thanking your officials for 

coming in. I want to thank you, Minister, for your candour and 

your honesty. And as far as I'm concerned that is as far as we 

need to go with our questions for this year's estimates. 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — Well thank you, hon. member. I know 

that you had indicated the other day some concern in respect to 

cost saving. And I don't think it could go without indicating to 

you that a tremendous effort has been made by the Department 

of Highways. And I want to indicate to you that it has been 

very, very substantial. 

 

We took a look at it. Advertising savings alone: for '92-93, the 

department reduced advertising expenses some $230,000. And 

this was accomplished by some very significant innovation. It 

was accomplished 



May 6, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1495 

mainly through tender advertising which was reduced by 

$145,000 through consultation with road builders, by inserting 

tender ads only once versus twice. And we saved a total of 

$145,000 by working with the department. 

 

The balance of the reduction, by reducing the other department 

advertising: road bans only once rather than twice, 30,000; 

orange zone, 40,000; and the traffic accident information 

statistics, $15,000. So there was $230,000 that was cut there. 

And out-of-province travel: in '92-93, the department reduced 

out-of-province travel by 35,252, which was a 32 per cent 

reduction. 

 

Ministerial staff, hon. member, was cut by 50 per cent. The 

previous minister had 12 members to his staff; we have a 

maximum of six, including secretaries. There's a saving there 

of some $200,000. 

 

When we had the amalgamation of Rural Affairs with the 

department, there's some savings of something like $1.9 

million. And Saskatchewan highway map, as I indicated to 

you, rather than doing and producing it each year, we did it for 

two years and we saved $90,000. Recycling of asphalt surfaces, 

it's estimated that we make savings there annually of $1.5 

million. Truck change-over units — some trucks have been 

modified to accept an oil distributor tank and a truck box, and 

this eliminated the need to purchase two trucks. And the 

savings were on average of $200,000. 

 

(1615) 

 

Additional savings that they have innovated in the past couple 

of years: dual use of fuel labs, estimated at $90,000 saving 

annually; Highway Traffic Board, we reduced the number of 

board members from 12 to 5 with $32,000 savings; 

teleconferencing, by using teleconferencing instead of travel, 

saving almost $4,000; subscriptions to magazines were 

reduced. 

 

So I just want to say to you that a fantastic, really, effort has 

been made not only in the reorganization of the department but 

some real deep savings for the taxpayers of the province. And I 

don't want to be political, but may I say we don't have any 

ex-MLAs, ministerial advisers, as was the case in the previous 

administration. We have a basic saving there. The former 

member from Rosthern, who had a pretty fair job with the 

Department of Highways, and he is no longer employed by the 

Department of Highways. And do you realize what we're 

saving, member from Arm River? Do you realize that we're 

saving $285,000? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Do you want to be here for another 

week? 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — No. But I just want to say in the 

reorganization and amalgamation, there was 1.9. I don't say this 

. . . I raise this only for information purposes and to 

congratulate the effort of the department; that's really what I 

did it for. 

 

So I want to thank my staff. As the auditor said, it's one 

of the better operating departments of government. And that's 

why he did the audit on the value for money, and I want to 

congratulate them for their effort during the course of the year. 

I guess we can roll. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 16 agreed to. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 55 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that Bill No. 55 — An Act 

to amend The Workers' Compensation Act, 1979 be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — The tone of the voice indicates that there 

may have been a problem deciding what we're doing but . . . 

Okay. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy today to have the 

opportunity to discuss two Bills. First of all we're dealing with 

Bill No. 55, The Workers' Compensation Amendment Act. 

Later we will be dealing with another Act that is very close to 

this same area. 

 

The reality, Mr. Speaker, is that an awful lot of people would 

think that these are just ordinary kinds of procedures, that along 

with 70 Bills in total would sort of just get lost in the shuffle, 

and everybody'd learn to live with it. But that's not the way it's 

going to be with these Bills. These Bills are going to change 

the direction of our province in a very significant way. 

 

In fact the most dire predictions would indicate that this could 

be the Achilles' heel of Saskatchewan as a province, and could 

in fact end up destroying and breaking the province financially 

in two ways. First of all, it could cost us our businesses, and as 

a result of costing us our businesses, it would cost us our tax 

base, it would cost us our jobs, and it would cost us our people. 

 

The other scenario, of course, is that the immediate costs 

involved would seriously impede business activity even if 

those other, more serious spin-offs didn't happen. I have some 

briefing notes from some people that I want to refer to today in 

order to get the message across to the government of why we 

want this Bill to be considered at some length. 

 

Up until today, I will explain, Mr. Speaker, that we were of the 

opinion that perhaps the business community wasn't too 

concerned about these particular Bills. Nothing seemed to be 

have been said very much until, of course, question period 

today. In question period the Premier was flushed out, and he 

did in fact basically declare war on business in Saskatchewan. 

And the business community around 



1496 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1993 

the province apparently must have been keeping their ear tuned 

to what was happening in the question period because within 

minutes after the question period our phones began to ring. 

 

And I've had reports brought in to me into the House today 

from a couple of our members, that they continue to ring. 

People are phoning in — all kinds of them. They finally, I 

guess, have woken up to the fact that there's this very serious 

threat to the business community and to the workers in our 

province with these Bills and the way they are presently 

drafted. 

 

The Canadian Federation of Independent Business though had 

of course speculated that there was some problems, and they 

had presented us with some briefing notes earlier today. And I 

want to go through them because apparently the calls we're 

getting do reflect an awful lot of what's being said in this 

document. And so if I go through it very quickly, an awful lot 

of the conditions that raise problems will be seen and brought 

to light. 

 

It says here that: 

 

 Recent (leaked) correspondence I got from the Workers' 

Compensation Act Review Committee, chaired by Judge 

Muir. Note that a committee of this group is still active and 

meeting. They recently sent this correspondence to Labour 

Minister (and his name is here; I won't use it) . . . You will 

note that even Judge Muir now says the W.C. (workers' 

compensation) Act amendments are flawed in many areas, 

and do not reflect his previous report recommendations. This 

is in sharp contrast to the NDP government's claim that this 

Bill simply reflects "years of consultation". 

 

So immediately the claims by the government, Mr. Speaker, 

that a lot of consultation . . . and as was stated in question 

period today, that . . . by the deputy, that several thousands of 

people have been consulted with, simply is all negated by the 

fact that what was consulted with those thousands of people 

has now been changed to something totally different than what 

they were talked to about. And if that in fact is true, then 

consultation really never happened. It is null and void. 

 

And of course some of the members will disagree with that. 

Obviously they have to defend their Premier and the Deputy 

Premier. But the reality is that this is the way the judge himself 

has written it. And I guess the argument just has to be followed 

through. 

 

Okay, we have . . . I just want to go through a few of these 

items on this and not to take the whole day up. I want to go 

ahead into the thing quite a ways and drop a half a dozen pages 

and get to some of the background of the brief: 

 

 CHANGES TO THE WORKERS' COMPENSATION ACT 

 

It says here that: 

 

 The Saskatchewan NDP government has just introduced 

legislation which would radically change 63 years of history 

in the Workers' Compensation Board. If enacted, the 

Canadian Federation of Independent Business fears that 

workers' compensation premiums would drastically increase. 

 

Now that has been admitted, Mr. Speaker, by members of the 

government already. They've already indicated a 10.5 per cent 

estimate, according to some studies that they've done. And 

members of this Assembly will of course recall that there's 

been some indication by people that it could be up to 300 per 

cent. Now conventional wisdom tells us that there's a real, 

distinct possibility that it could be 200 per cent, and that is a 

serious and significant change from 10.5. 

 

But even if it's 10.5 . . . We have some figures from the home 

builders' association, for example. And I just pulled this one as 

an example — we have several letters doing some of the 

mathematics — and they . . . I'll just pick one instance out of 

here. 

 

It says the increase per employee — and this would be based 

upon the 10.5 per cent increase with the home builders — and 

it would be from a minimum of $217.30 to a maximum of 

$516.16 per employee. That's the cost per employee that things 

would increase from the present rate to the new rate. And that's 

pretty significant if you start considering workforces of 

hundreds or even thousands throughout the province. 

 

So even with those lower rates, it is a significant impact on 

business which business may not be able to necessarily accept. 

 

I want to just go on with this. It says: 

 

 This estimate is based on research commissioned by the 

previous Board, with the aid of a professional accrual 

accountant (. . . Mercer Ltd.). They feared that massive rate 

increases would be created because of the government's 

intent to prevent future Boards from "deeming" or estimating 

the annual earnings capacity of those injured workers who, 

despite best efforts, were unable to find work in 

Saskatchewan's weak economy. If the Board is unable to 

"deem" injured workers, they were concerned that the WCB 

would change into a social welfare program where more and 

more workers would exercise their new-found rights to stay 

longer on claim, waiting to receive as much training and job 

search as possible so that they could be guaranteed job 

placement despite weak job skills, poor education and a 

shifting economy. The old Board also provided statistics to 

show that the practice of deeming was not widely abused, 

and in fact was used less than one per cent of the time. 



May 6, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1497 

Well, Mr. Speaker, obviously I think the research has been 

done, that their figures are fairly close. And I guess after 

examining the process that would be gone into in the 

legislation, it is recognized that the legislation does provide for 

these things to happen: that there would be a longer job search 

at the expense of the workers' compensation fund; that longer 

job search presently is paid for through other arms of 

government but now would come into workers' compensation 

which is funded exclusively by premiums from business. 

 

(1630) 

 

So it becomes a payroll tax in effect and nothing else but that. 

 

Now in response to the previous board's concerns, the Minister 

of Labour hired several other consultants and recently 

dismissed all of the concerned board members. He replaced 

them with new appointments. Now that doesn't augur well for 

the kind of positive negotiating atmosphere that the 

government says has been going on when you've had to replace 

a bunch of your people. 

 

Well they go on to talk about the 10.5 per cent, and they say it 

is a big untruth; they use a different word than that, but I won't 

read that here. They go on to talk about how the numbers are 

faulty and defective and why they are faulty and defective. And 

I guess that will remain speculation as to which side is right or 

wrong. I suggest though that if one side is high and the other 

one is low, probably some place in the middle is where we're 

going to end up, so there is likely a more serious problem here 

than what the government has admitted to the general public. 

 

Now they also give a little, brief explanation here of why 

business costs will go up. It says that the object of the new Act 

states that it is to provide rehabilitation services for as long as it 

takes to return a cooperating, injured worker to a position of 

independence in suitable productive employment. 

 

Well I'd be the last one, Mr. Minister, to appear to be trying to 

kick the crutches out from underneath sick and injured people. 

And reality is that I think that everyone in this Assembly would 

say we want workers who are injured to have every full 

opportunity to get back to work and to be healed up and to be 

rehabilitated or retrained if that's what's necessary. However it's 

the shift in the costing that costs our society the problems that 

we're going to get into. If we treat sick people under the cost of 

medicare, a whole group of people called the province of 

Saskatchewan, our whole society, is taxed in general with all 

kinds of taxes that helps to pay for that Bill. If we restrict this 

cost to The Workers' Compensation Act, we are saying only the 

business people who hire people are going to pay for medicare 

for this particular group of people. So it is segregation of the 

costs of medicare that is being shifted into the premium range 

of workers' compensation. 

 

Now they go on to talk about things like the 

educational rate of people that are injured and the fact that they 

are for the most part — people who in our labour force that get 

injured — according to statistics, people who haven't got other 

career options openly available to them. They have some 

limited educational skills, and in order to be able to transfer to 

different jobs they'd have to be retrained and re-educated. 

 

Here again, nobody would say that we're against that sort of 

thing because obviously you have to be in favour of it in a 

changing society. But what we're saying is that you have to be 

careful not to make that shift in cost to the business community 

exclusively because it's not really not their fault that the people 

that come to work for them that have accidents turn out 

statistically to be people with a lower educational skill. And in 

order to be able to get them to work in other areas you have to 

re-educate them. This should be a responsibility of society in 

general, not of the business people . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . Now obviously some of the people from the left of the 

governing party will disagree. 

 

But the reality of life is that businesses are not a pool of endless 

wealth that we can continue to tap and expect them to stay in 

our province. The reality is that businesses, if they are taxed in 

premiums to death, will leave the province or go broke. They 

will disappear. And once they are gone, well, reality is you 

don't have the jobs. 

 

Suppose you lose your employers. Where are your people 

going to work then? The government isn't going to take over as 

some of the extreme left-wingers would hope because we don't 

have state ownership and state control exclusively like a 

communist state although we seem to be heading that way in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

There are some other reasons why the cost to the Workers' 

Compensation Board will sky-rocket. Any previous health 

problems or conditions, as long as it merely combines with a 

newly reported work injury, could be fully compensated 

according to the new Act. This would result in a back-door 

approach to funding non-work related health problems through 

a Workers' Compensation Board payroll tax. It may also be 

impossible for the new board or employers to separate these 

medical costs since the new Act denies access to any medical 

file or health conditions prior to the date of the work injury. 

 

You see, Mr. Speaker, that's exactly what we were talking 

about, is this transfer of costs, of who in society should be 

paying for certain kinds of bills that occur. The new Act greatly 

increases the number and variety of health care professionals 

who will soon invoice the Workers' Compensation Board for 

patient care. The Bill will also remove the previous cap on 

those health care costs and the medical fees may be more 

generous than under the current medicare system. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I can use an example of something that's 

happening outside of this whole area that the government's very 

familiar with. SGI (Saskatchewan 



1498 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1993 

Government Insurance) has just said that people who put glass 

in windows, and have insurance, have been selling the glass to 

SGI, if the people are insured, for something like maybe 250 or 

$300 while an independent person who doesn't have any glass 

coverage or insurance might get that same windshield for 60 or 

$70 from the same person selling it. And they have said that 

that's wrong. 

 

Well if that's wrong, then it has to also be wrong to do it here, 

as these people point out under the Workers' Compensation 

Board. The same problem will result. You will have a double 

standard and a double billing. So if it's good for the goose, it's 

good for the gander; that's what I'm telling you. 

 

And the members of course are chirping from their seats that 

there is no comparison. Well I think there is. I think it is a very 

distinct and absolute reality that this government is declaring 

war on business and they intend to try to tax them out of 

existence and out of business. 

 

Now this goes on into several different areas and I'm going to 

just read a couple more of them. "All of these additional 

implications were never costed by the NDP government," is the 

concluding line here. And I think that the reality is, Mr. 

Speaker, that these costs have never been really costed out by 

the NDP. And especially in terms of what happens to our 

society if these businesses are forced to go out of business and 

they are no longer there to provide the jobs for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

 Bill 55 will greatly politicize the Workers' Compensation 

Board by allowing the Minister of Labor to make regulations 

that supersede independent Board operating policies. The 

Labor minister can dismiss future board chairmen without 

having to prove "cause" before the legislature. The 

government is also expanding the administrative overhead of 

the Board to five from three politically-appointed members, 

even though the number of annual claims has declined 

steadily over the last several years. In a blatant payback to the 

big union bosses, the new legislation proposes that all future 

worker representatives must exclusively be nominated from 

organized labour, even though they represent less than 10 per 

cent of the private sector workers in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now that is totally and completely unfair. And it is not only 

unfair, it is an absolute partisan political manoeuvre. And it 

takes over control of an entire area of our economy in such a 

way that democracy no longer is there or is served. 

 

Now I've briefly touched on their ideas and I know that it may 

be somewhat disjointed, Mr. Speaker, because I didn't want to 

read the entire brief. It would take quite a long time to do that. 

And I hope that I have summarized it to some extent so that 

people can understand it. 

But we have recommendations from this other group, and I just 

want to go through their recommendations, not through the 

preamble — the workers' compensation cost impacts and that 

sort of thing. And it says: 

 

 As supported by the review committee report, the Workers' 

Compensation Board must be run without intervention from 

Government or other agencies. 

 

 1. Delete sections 139(3) and 181(2) 

  -Both these deal with intervention and should be removed 

to maintain the financial viability of Workers' 

Compensation Board and leaves the necessary 

consultation process between workers and 

employers in place to effect changes. 

 

 2. (The) increase of 10.5 % can be reduced by efficiencies of 

operations and Workers' Compensation Board must 

be challenged to absorb this increase through 

savings in efficiencies to minimize rate increases. 

  -This accomplishes better benefits, better operation, lower 

negative impact on economic recovery. 

 

 We challenge Members of the Legislative Assembly to 

balance this legislation to the economic reality of our 

economy. 

 

 To other businesses and our members, we challenge all to let 

our law makers know your concerns about the cost impact of 

this legislation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have a lot of material here about these two 

Bills, and this one particularly. I just have one more thought 

that I want to throw into the mix, and then I will draw my 

conclusion as to where we should go. 

 

Some short time ago apparently the Canadian Federation of 

Independent Business, that's the survey they did, July to 

December 1992, and I want to quote from that survey that they 

did. 

 

The question was: 

 

 Should the Saskatchewan government use a form of payroll 

tax to generate revenues for the government? 

 

Now they give the background of the proposal, what the 

government was saying. They give reasons why it should be 

supported and they give reasons why it should be opposed as 

according to the information that they had. And I think it was a 

very fair way of presenting a ballot to people, by giving all 

three sides of the story. 

 

The results are quite significant though, Mr. Speaker. On the 

question: 



May 6, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1499 

Should the Saskatchewan government use a form of payroll 

tax to generate revenues for the government? 

 

The results were in Saskatchewan: yes, 4 per cent; no, 90 per 

cent; undecided, 6 per cent; no interest in the issue, zero. Now 

that's a significant and very important set of figures for the 

government to consider when they are asking themselves the 

question, how does business and the business community feel 

about what they are proposing in the kinds of changes that we 

are seeing in this legislation? 

 

If they want to find out how very intensely business people feel 

about this, that should tell them by itself. And I suggest that 

anybody who stands in the Assembly — as happened in 

question period today — and says that the business community 

is happy and smiling, is not right. They are not listening to the 

business people in Saskatchewan and around the country. And 

I suggest they better go out and talk to them again. 

 

And because we see a very significant interest in this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, and because we see that very significant interest 

generated not only through our phone calls through the 

afternoon and from these letters that have been presented to us 

and these briefs, we are suggesting that perhaps the reality is 

that the government didn't really understand how desperately 

serious this set of Bills is affecting the business community and 

how much they want a chance to talk to the government about 

this before it becomes law. And maybe the government just 

didn't understand that. Maybe they just don't realize what the 

impact really is. 

 

And so giving them the benefit of the doubt, I think we should 

allow this Bill to stand still for a little while longer and give 

some chance for the government to negotiate further. We do 

believe that there are ongoing efforts for meetings to be 

arranged by the business community. 

 

And to allow the government that time and give them the 

benefit of the doubt, I now move that we adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 56 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that Bill No. 56 — An Act 

respecting Occupational Health and Safety be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Very much the 

same arguments that go into The Workers' Compensation 

Amendment Act, No. 55, go into The Occupational Health and 

Safety Act. While the changes are somewhat different of 

course, because they represent different areas of concern in our 

workplace, the net result of the changes would be effectively 

the same. 

Instead of just dealing with the real problem of bringing about 

safer conditions to workers, which is necessary in our society, 

the whole process goes beyond that to the point of shifting 

responsibility in society for the cost of doing business and the 

cost of producing goods and services. There is a shift in the 

responsibility in society of who pays for what. That shift to the 

business community has to be another form of taxation on the 

business community, over and above what the rest of the world 

is paying around us. 

 

That shift in responsibility can only have a negative impact on 

the number of jobs that will be available. We've heard in this 

Assembly earlier today, Mr. Speaker, that this government has 

fallen 16,000 jobs short in their goals to produce jobs. If these 

two pieces of legislation go through, I predict that figure will 

double by next year. This is absolutely chaos if we pass this, 

because the business community cannot tolerate in a recession 

and a depression these kinds of shifts of responsibility in 

payments for the things that the rest of the world need and want 

to have paid for. 

 

(1645) 

 

If we're going to have taxpayers paying for the plight of our 

workers, then we're going to have to spread it over all of 

society and not zero in exclusively on one group that can't 

afford the impact. 

 

I want to run through a few of these recommendations that 

some of the people have made with regards to the Bill, just to 

make our point. First of all, I'll deal with the recommendations 

from the Saskatchewan Home Builders' Association. And they 

recommend that the Act should give power that are normal in 

our society, not powers that exceed the powers of police 

officers. 

 

And of course what they're talking about here is the search and 

seizure aspect of this Bill which allows people that are not 

policemen, I guess best described as bureaucrats working for 

the department, would actually give them more power to search 

and seize than what the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted 

Police) presently have. They could come into a business and 

search, they could seize anything in there, and they can do that 

without warrants or without explanation to the courts. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is not democracy. That is whatever people 

out there think in their minds this kind of government and 

governing would have to be. Where in the world . . . What 

countries in the world would you expect bureaucrats to have 

the power to kick your door in, take all of our records, and 

leave without having a warrant? What countries would you 

expect that to happen in? Certainly not Canada and the United 

States, certainly not in the democratic world, but certainly in 

those places where people are in bondage and in slavery in one 

form or another, politically or otherwise. 

 

They also go on to say that: 

 

 Appeals should reflect adjudication that involves an 

Arbitrator for each party and they 



1500 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1993 

 appoint an agreed to Adjudicator/Arbitrator. The Government 

should not control this appointment. 

 

Now I think that there are several ways that you can make that 

sort of thing fair, and this is their recommendation. I have some 

ideas of my own that would be a little different than that. I'll 

suggest them later. 

 

 Harassment must not take place in the work force but to place 

this in the Occupational Health & Safety Act leading North 

America with this type of legislation is dangerous if you do 

not have legally trained occupational health officers. This 

should be removed from the Act. 

 

Now what are they talking about here, Mr. Speaker? What they 

are talking about here is the fact that you don't have the 

harassment feature of problem in the workplace being handled 

under the proper Act. And by putting it in this Act, as we 

understand it having read through all of this preamble, it is my 

understanding that we are setting a precedent in North America 

in all of the jurisdictions of lawmaking. 

 

Now I don't know if these people have done their homework 

exactly right or not, but I'm going to give them the benefit of 

the doubt and say to you that if they are right, setting a 

dangerous precedent in such an important piece of legislation is 

something that must certainly be taken a second look at. 

 

If you're going to start setting this kind of precedent in all of 

the free world, then we'd better be careful that we have it right. 

And it doesn't look to me like it's in the right area. 

 

So I think the government ought to go back to the drawing 

board and consult with business and labour and renegotiate 

this. 

 

 The Act and Regulations must encourage employers and 

employees to work together to make the workplace safe. 

 

I like that and I appreciate that. I think it shows responsibility 

on the part of the business people. 

 

It also goes on to say: 

 

 We encourage our law makers to make this Act less 

adversarial and more objective towards encouraging safety. 

 

And obviously The Occupational Health and Safety Act is 

intended exactly for that: to provide safety for our workers and 

to provide them with a good, healthy atmosphere to work in. 

And as long as it does that, that's good, but if there's an 

adversarial mood between the worker and the employer, 

obviously things won't work as well. And I've worked with a 

lot of people in my lifetime, Mr. Speaker, and I know that 

happy workers are much more productive. 

 

Well we've got from the Canadian Federation of 

Independent Business also the brief that I read earlier on Bill 

55. They have a long explanation of Bill 56 that goes into the 

same kind of preamble, Mr. Speaker, and makes about the 

same types of argument. And so having made that argument for 

Bill No. 56 that perhaps we've jumped a little too fast to allow 

the business community a chance to negotiate with the 

government, I'm going to take this opportunity to give the 

government the chance to go back to the drawing table, and I'll 

move that we adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 58 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 58 — An Act to 

amend The Northern Municipalities Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 61 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Calvert that Bill No. 61 — An Act to 

amend The Vital Statistics Act be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 62 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Calvert that Bill No. 62 — An Act to 

amend The Medical Profession Act, 1981 be now read a 

second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 38 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 38 — An Act to 

amend The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code be now read 

a second time. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I won't rise and 

say that I am surprised that we are debating this here Bill in the 

House because I knew in 1981 if the NDP won the election, 

that this Bill would come forward to this House. 

 

I have many remarks to make, Mr. Speaker, and the first one to 

make is there was no need for this Bill. There was no need 

whatsoever. And I think many of the members opposite know 

there was no need. This seems to be just mainly the socialist 

provinces and socialist people that want these type of Bills. 

Why have we got such an uproar in Ontario and 



May 6, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1501 

Saskatchewan and B.C.? It's the socialist people that want a 

Bill such as Bill 38. 

 

This year I watched, Mr. Speaker, I watched the inauguration 

of President Clinton, and I watched it for four hours. I was able 

to see it on television; I watched it for four hours. Then I went 

away for two hours and came back and the first thing he was 

signing, Mr. Speaker, was a Bill to progress with restricting . . . 

making it legal for homosexuals in the Armed Forces. Why do 

we get all these in the socialist countries? Why is it happening? 

Socialist states, socialist provinces, why is it they want to 

protect the gays and lesbians and homosexuals? Why, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

He's having trouble. Mr. Clinton's having a lot of trouble. He 

thought he was just going to push that right through, but the 

Armed Forces, some of the leaders and stronger people and the 

strong people that know how to stand up to Mr. Clinton, it kind 

of slowed him down. It's not through yet. 

 

Seems to be, Mr. Speaker, that the vast majority of socialist 

parties throughout the world see a need that homosexuals and 

lesbians teach our children and preach their thoughts from the 

pulpit. That seems to be what they all believe. 

 

They're trying to put a smokescreen across this that, oh, we just 

have to have a Bill 38 just to give them a place to guarantee 

them a place to sleep and something to eat and a job. I mean, 

that's not it at all. We're going to get into that through my 

speech, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Minister of Justice and all other members of the 

government, I'm very disappointed with some of their remarks. 

Especially just the other day, the Minister of Justice made a 

remark pertaining to the plebiscite petition. He's saying don't 

sign the petition. He said, it's legal; if you get enough 

petitioners we'll have to have a vote; it'll cost a lot of money 

and we won't honour it anyway. 

 

Now what kind of discrimination is that? Who's discriminating 

who? If that isn't discrimination, I don't know what is. That if 

thousands of people are against something, and the minister has 

already said we have a plebiscite and over 50 per cent of this 

province say we don't want Bill 38, that we'll do it anyway. I've 

never heard of such arrogance, Mr. Speaker, ever in my 15 

years as that. 

 

I just can't believe that a man like the Minister of Justice would 

say that, especially when the day before he met with 15 

ministers from churches in Regina, representing all you people 

here because there is not one of our seats represented in 

Regina. So it's 15 different pastors in the minister's office, and 

they really threw it at him where he was wrong on this Bill, 

that it wasn't just to give them a place to sleep and give them a 

job, which I agree with that. We have to love our fellow man 

and we have to love the gays and the lesbians, but boy, we 

don't have to love their sin. We can love the people but not the 

sin. 

And here's our Minister of Justice really in trouble with these 

people, and he was quite nervous about it. And he said, perhaps 

maybe we'll have to have some amendments, and he kind of 

settled them down pretty good. But they must have been 

absolutely just insulted the next day when they heard him say, 

if there's a vote and a plebiscite and over a hundred thousand 

people sign it, then we won't pay any attention to you anyway. 

 

I have some notes to put together here, Mr. Speaker, and what 

I've done . . . it's from the second reading of the Minister of 

Justice, so what I've done is put his quotes and then my 

thoughts underneath. 

 

And I'll start off this way, Mr. Speaker. The present Premier 

introduced this important legislation. Why did — and this is 

what the minister said — and why did the now Premier refuse 

to add sexual orientation to the code in the 1970s. Why didn't 

he do it then? The code is pre-eminent among our laws. It takes 

precedence over every other provincial law. Now this is a very 

serious concern, Mr. Speaker. Very important. 

 

Real Women response to NDP questions and answers: 

 

 Question, item 10, how will the changes affect marriages and 

adoptions? The Bill 38 amendment will not change the 

definition of marriage nor family directly, but could easily 

have the effect indirectly. Human rights have been described 

as fundamental law by the Supreme Court of Canada. In the 

case of conflict with other provincial or federal laws, the 

Human Rights Code will prevail. The widely publicized 

efforts of some homosexual couples to be recognized as 

spouses for the purpose of family and health benefits will 

only be enhanced by the sexual orientation amendment. 

 

And this government, Mr. Speaker, hasn't even defined what 

the words sexual orientation even means. Every time you have 

a Bill come in this House, since I've been here all these years, 

they always define the meaning of any words that stick out. 

And no way did they define what the words sexual orientation 

means or what it means in this Bill. 

 

Fundamental law in Saskatchewan will say that it is unlawful 

to discriminate on the basis of sexual orientation. To say that 

only two people of the opposite sex can be married is 

discrimination. Denying homosexual rights that normal 

heterosexual people have, who are you to say that a marriage 

has to be a man and a woman? That is an outdated 

homophobics concept and denies homosexuals dignity and 

worth. The government, a court cannot hold that discrimination 

is unlawful in this province and also hold that marriages can 

only be between a man and woman, discriminating. 

 

So when you put this Bill through and it's whole the way it is, 

even if there's amendments goes in, it's going 



1502 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1993 

to be . . . the judges are going to look at it, Mr. Speaker, is how 

. . . it's discrimination. No matter what you do thereafter, it's 

going to be discrimination and that's what it's very, very clear 

about this Bill. 

 

Likewise, with employee health insurance benefits for 

same-sex partners, the government, a court cannot hold that 

discrimination is unlawful in this province and also hold that 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. It now being 5 o'clock, this 

House stands recessed until 7 p.m. this evening. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 


