




















































Hansard: March 23, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 543 

 March 23, 1993 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that the Assembly resolve 

itself into the Committee of Finance. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. At 5 

o'clock I was just about to conclude my introductory remarks, 

so I will do that at this stage. And I'm very pleased to see that 

so many members of the opposite party are flocking in just in 

case that they will not . . . so that they will not miss any of my 

remarks, as I attempt to continue to show them, Mr. Speaker, 

the error of their ways and to give them some cause for 

reflection. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just prior to the supper break, I was embarking 

upon illustrating to the people of Saskatchewan that indeed this 

is a tough budget and that there were tough choices, but that the 

choices were of their own making, of the government's own 

making and that they were also, Mr. Speaker, not the right 

choices — not the right choices to accomplish the objectives of 

managing the deficit and certainly not the right choices in so 

far as the pain and the suffering inflicted upon the people of 

Saskatchewan as the government tries to get itself out of the 

deficit hold. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we were talking about the kinds of things that 

they're doing. We were talking about their attempt to try to 

establish some kind of revenue increases. I made the point, Mr. 

Speaker, that revenue increases can basically come only from 

one source, and that's hip national. The taxpayers of this 

province are the ones that are going to be doing that. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I also made the point that this does not take 

any particular amount of courage. Taxing does not, Mr. 

Speaker, take any great amount of courage. It is the opposite. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the members of government stand up and 

they make much ado about trying to rewrite history and take 

this, what I consider to be a silly explanation, about the NDP 

(New Democratic Party) building things in the 1970s. Mr. 

Speaker, we hear a lot of the fact that they were busy building 

things in the 1970s. 

 

And I want to remind you, Mr. Speaker, that in the 1970s the 

government was one of the most fortunate ones in the history 

of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the 1970s are referred to as the 

super '70s. It is a period of time, for those of us that are 

somewhat in the middle-age era, that we reflect upon with a 

great deal of fondness. These were the times when inflation 

was running high, when wages were good and we seemed 

to have everything going for us. 

 

And I know a lot of people that I knew in the farming industry 

would buy land and they would buy land that was perhaps 

beyond the productive capacity of that land but nobody seemed 

to worry about it. They did not seem to worry about it because 

well we'll pay for it on next year's inflated dollar and we were 

able to get away with it for quite a few number of years. 

 

I submit to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the people of 

Saskatchewan, that this was a pattern that developed not only 

in the farming sector but in the business sector as well and 

certainly in Saskatchewan in the 1970s by the then Blakeney 

government. This was standard fare at the time. So, Mr. 

Speaker, we have the super '70s, revenues were pouring into 

the coffers of the province and they were just staggering, 

absolutely enormous amounts of income for the government. 

 

We had at that time, Mr. Speaker, huge windfalls in oil 

revenues, grain prices were at an all-time high, the demand was 

great in those days. We had potash, we had uranium, all of 

them commanding huge, simply huge prices. 

 

And I ask, Mr. Speaker, what did the folks across the way do 

when they were in government in the 1970s? What did they 

do? What did they do with all of that wealth? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I ask you, did they, did they in fact build 

anything, or did they in a sense squander the money. And you 

know the clichés that we have developed over a period of time 

about building dry holes in the ground, buying dry holes in the 

ground, buying potash mines and then borrowing the money at 

the same time to pay interest to the New York and Toronto 

bankers. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I have to admit there was a pattern of 

building. Certainly there were a lot of liquor board stores built 

during that time, Mr. Speaker. And I know whereof I speak 

because the town of Rosthern in my constituency received a 

liquor board store and it was built in Rosthern. 

 

And it's kind of ironic, Mr. Speaker, that now, 11 or 12 years 

later, what do they do to the folks in Rosthern? Well we have 

again established our priorities, says the members across the 

way, because now what happened is the rural service centre in 

Rosthern was summarily closed. 

 

It took exactly one minute to close the rural service centre in 

Rosthern. And the feedback that I am getting, Mr. Speaker, is 

that first of all that is not going to make this government very 

popular in my area. And if they had their druthers, Mr. 

Speaker, I wonder what they would want to have closed — the 

liquor board store or the rural service centre which this 

government has decided upon as their strategy. 

 

This is one of the choices. This is one of the choices that this 

government is making. They built liquor 



544 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1993 

board stores and close rural service centres. So we have a real 

heritage of 10 generations squandered, Mr. Speaker. It has 

utterly and totally destroyed the hope for financial freedom 

through the crisis that we would and now have to continue to 

face. 

 

So I say to those members across the way, you cannot and don't 

you dare be sanctimonious about the 1970s. They were the 

richest period of time for government, and yet the people 

suffered. So is it any wonder, Mr. Speaker, that after all of that 

money was squandered there would be problems when that 

windfall stopped, when the crisis finally hit as we knew, as 

everybody knew, that it ultimately would. 

 

And then these members across the way, Mr. Speaker, have the 

audacity, the gall to try to lay all of the blame on the feet of 

others. And we hear that from time to time all the time in 

question period when the ministers light up their blame 

throwers and blame everybody except themselves. 

 

So I challenge the members opposite to look at what did 

transpire through the decade of crisis in the 1980s. Let's take a 

look at the '80s for a moment now. 

 

We know, Mr. Speaker, there was a period of drought; it was a 

period of flood; it was a period of collapsing market for grain, 

for potash, for uranium, for oil. All of the commodities, the 

natural resources that Saskatchewan has been blessed with, we 

have found that the bottom dropped out and we had the most 

disastrous years since the Great Depression, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In addition to that, in the late '70s, in the early '80s, what were 

the people of this province facing? Horrendous interest rates, 

Mr. Speaker — on top of it all, horrendous interest rates. And 

yet no relief for the people of Saskatchewan by the former 

government. Now before I am accused of becoming too 

sanctimonious here, let me first of all lay it on the table very 

clearly, Mr. Speaker, that I am also a believer of the fact that 

the former government was not perfect. I think that it would be 

naïve for anyone to even suggest something like that. So there 

were mistakes made, Mr. Speaker, major mistakes. But it did 

understand, the former government, our government, did 

understand what Isabel Anderson talks about and it did build in 

this province. 

 

In nine short years, for example, Mr. Speaker, the 

manufacturing base of this province was increased sevenfold. 

The manufacturing base of this province was increased by 700 

per cent. We had more diversification in those nine years than 

in all of the history of Saskatchewan before them. This 

province, Mr. Speaker, grew and the economic base was being 

diversified as quickly as possible. 

 

It was recognized that we could no longer be hewers of wood 

and drawers of water. It was recognized that you have to have 

the value added industries that can only come if you start to do 

something with your raw products before you just simply sell 

them on the market to someone else and then buy the 

refurbished 

or the manufactured products back again. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there were mistakes. And I'll tell you 

something that you might find rather strange, something that I 

find very strange and I think also that the people of 

Saskatchewan and the media might find strange, and that is 

this: that we on this side of the House now did learn from our 

mistakes, Mr. Speaker. We did learn from our mistakes. And I 

suggest to you that the NDP has not. The NDP has not. If this 

government were genuinely in possession of just some modest 

wisdom, it would in fact learn not only from its own mistakes, 

but it should learn from the mistakes of the previous 

government. Yet it has proven that it is completely incapable of 

doing so, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In my opinion, one of the great mistakes that we, the previous 

government, made was to allow the rallies and the threats and 

the protests to have too much impact. And in that impact, Mr. 

Speaker, the previous government did not cut deeply enough or 

cleanly enough in those areas where cuts were and are 

warranted. 

 

That's my personal view, Mr. Speaker. But has this government 

learned anything from that lesson? I say to you, sir, that it is 

absolutely unacceptable that $6 million in this budget is 

allocated to artists when the financial situation of this province 

is being characterized as a crisis. Six million dollars being 

contributed to artists. 

 

Well that I am receiving letters of utter terror frankly, Mr. 

Speaker, from senior citizens, for example, who cannot qualify 

for this government's so-called safety net that is supposed to be 

in place and yet they cannot afford their medication. The 

choice is simply a cruel one, to say that at the same time while 

we cannot afford medication for our seniors, we do have $6 

million for artists, or that we do have millions of dollars to 

keep the Deputy Premier, the former minister of Finance, in his 

office so that he can continue to pad his pension allowance for 

the ultimate time when he will retire. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's what I've been talking about over the last 

little while, and that is choices. That is choices that this 

government is making. 

 

And the NDP have no right, Mr. Speaker, no right at all to say 

that while I'm talking this way that I'm being divisive, that I'm 

attacking artists when I put that choice on the table. I don't 

believe that I am. I bear no ill toward the artist community, 

toward the arts and the different kinds of arts in the 

community, Mr. Speaker, because I love art just as anyone else. 

I go to auctions and I buy art pieces and so on. 

 

But I think, Mr. Speaker, when the choices are laid on the 

table, we have to make the proper choices. And I don't consider 

this to have been one of the proper choices. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I share, I share the view of Paul Martin, for 

example, about the funding of certain 



March 23, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 545 

economic development programs. But I would even go one 

step further than Mr. Martin does in his because I think maybe 

I'm a little bit more aggressive. I have learned the lesson that 

this government refuses to learn. 

 

And I say, Mr. Speaker, I say that the $50 million a year that 

goes to the Department of Economic Development — all of it 

— we could hack it out of the budget. We could do that. We 

could simply hack it out of the budget and replace it with a 

dramatically reduced funding for a private sector economic 

development authority. 

 

We could give them let's say a third of that. We could develop 

funding for $50 million, Mr. Speaker, and have an automatic 

sunset clause involved where that sum of $50 million is 

automatically reduced by a million dollars every year until it is 

indeed a full private agency on full self-funding. 

 

(1915) 

 

Why is the government spending $150 million on economic 

development, I ask the members opposite, in a time of crisis? 

And I guess what is most discouraging is the bang for the buck 

that we as taxpayers in this province are getting lately. 

 

And all the lost opportunities — when it comes to economic 

development, Mr. Speaker, businessmen tell me . . . and they 

tell you too; I'm sure they do. All businessmen tell you, get out 

of my life. Get out of my life; let me control my own business. 

Don't stand in my way. Government, get out of the way. You're 

slowing me down . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You see, Mr. 

Speaker, I'm getting a rise out of the members opposite when I 

say that, because in their heart of hearts they are still socialists 

to the core. Their fundamental belief is that government is 

bigger . . . the bigger the better — socialists to the core. 

 

We could talk of the Soviet Union, and we could talk about 

central Europe. We could talk about all these countries that are 

tripping over themselves trying to get away from socialism. 

And we have Cuba and Saskatchewan. The people in Ontario 

you can't include in that any more because they've had a year 

more of you guys. You see? That's what I say. Get out of life, 

and at the same time we would be saving the taxpayer of 

Saskatchewan $150 million. Mr. Speaker, I have learned that 

lesson; the members opposite have not. 

 

I'm going to give more alternatives because I don't think 

anybody has the right to get up and just condemn. So I've given 

you a couple of alternatives already. Here's another alternative 

I think that we should be following and that is that we cut out 

all funding for non-essential third parties. Cut out all funding 

for non-essential third parties: Health, Education — obviously 

— Social Services. Planned Parenthood, in my opinion, would 

not get a dime of taxpayers' money while there is a debt in this 

province. 

And, Mr. Speaker, at the same time, while I'm saying that, I 

apologize to all advocacy organizations for saying that. But my 

constituents are telling me loud and clear that this is what they 

want to hear. And I'm passing this message on. I'm passing this 

suggestion on. This is one of the choices that could be made in 

order to save money for the government. 

 

They're telling me that they want these types of expenditures 

stopped and they want them stopped now. And I'm willing and 

I'm ready to stand in this Assembly and give voice to those 

demands as I'm doing right now. No more money, Mr. Speaker 

— another alternative — no more money from taxpayers for 

abortions. No more money from taxpayers for abortions. 

 

The people have spoken — 63 per cent said unequivocally, 

don't do that. Don't do that. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Is that a saving? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — He says, is that a saving. You can't find 

money for drugs. You kiboshed that plan. You can't find 

money for insulin. You've kiboshed that plan. You can't find 

money for oxygen, the people that need 6, 7, $800 worth of 

oxygen a month. You can't find money for that plan. 

 

And you ask me, does it save money if we stop abortions. 

Priorities, Mr. Member. Priorities. Choices. Choices. Those are 

the choices that you are making. I'm telling you the choices that 

I would make. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I say again, this government is not learning its 

lesson very well. It's not learning the lessons that we were 

taught. And we learned belatedly, I grant you that. 

 

There would be no more money, Mr. Speaker, for 

organizations about the status of women. Gone. Mr. Speaker, I 

held and voiced these same positions when I was on the other 

side; I still hold them now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we never seem to be able to cut through the 

campaign of the member for Riversdale that the money was 

there. I remember being elected in the fall of 1986, as a good 

many of the members of this House were. When I was elected 

in 1986, we went to Cypress Hills, in the park there, for a 

so-called caucus retreat. We made some very significant 

decisions at that time. 

 

And one of the decisions that we made was that we can't afford 

to be where we are and afford the funding of all the programs 

that we wanted to fund or that the people had grown 

accustomed to being funded. And so we started to cut back; we 

said we can't afford it. So we made cutbacks of various dental 

plans; the most famous one was the children's dental plan. The 

drug plan, we instituted a user fee for the drug plan. 

 

What did the member, the Minister of Health, the opposition 

member of Health in those days say? Ranted and raved and 

screamed and said that the people were now going to have to 

choose between 



546 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1993 

drugs and groceries. She even accused us of being the cause of 

death of individuals. 

 

That's the kind of pressure you guys were putting on when we 

were in government and you were in opposition. You had 

absolutely no knowledge of the economics of the province or at 

least you pretended that you didn't. You pretended that there 

was no reason to cut back on anything. The constant . . . and 

then somebody brings up the old socialist . . . Cargill, Saferco. 

 

That, my dear Mr. Member, is the only thing that you've got 

positive to say in this budget speech is Saferco and the money 

that it's making. The money-losing effects of the PAPCO 

(Prince Albert Pulp Company) in Prince Albert — losing 

$91,000 a day and we turned it around. It's making lots of 

money now. And you're holding these up as shining examples 

of what the NDP government has done. You see you're making 

choices, members across the way, you're making choices based 

upon the wrong information that you have always been 

supplying to people of this province prior to you being elected, 

and that is, that money is no object. 

 

We can live through 4.5 billion budget, we can spend more on 

health, we can spend more on education, and we can do away 

with harmonization at the same time. That's what you said. And 

that's why I get aggravated every time I think about the 

deception under which you guys were elected, and gals. Those 

are the conditions under which you got elected. That's the only 

reason you are there. 

 

We gave the people of Saskatchewan a plan in 1991 and they 

looked at it and they said, oh that means harmonization, oh 

that's great, $180 million coming in from taxes. You never 

talked about the fact that all the farmers out there would get the 

benefit of their input costs being returned in taxes, the 

businessmen would get that, the mechanic in the garages were 

looking forward to getting the refund on their tools as an 

expense. But you said, no we'll take away the hamburger tax, 

we'll take that away. 

 

The people looked at your plan, which was no taxes and more 

spending and then they looked at ours, and we said more taxes 

because it had to be paid for. We lost. The people looked at 

your plan and said, no we like their plan better so they voted 

for you in overwhelming numbers. And we felt chastised and 

crawled into our little corner in the legislature here and this is 

where we're operating from because you were elected on that 

assumption. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, something just came to mind that I've 

never expressed before and I'm not quite sure whether I should 

and the adage in politics is, well if you're not sure, then don't. 

But I'm going to break that, because what we're seeing in our 

system in Canada, what we're seeing under the parliamentary 

system and the party system and the system that has party 

unity, party solidarity, and if you lose a confidence vote you 

lose government, this kind of thing, so we have to have that 

kind of party solidarity. 

And when it comes to election time, over the last number of 

years — and I'm not blaming the NDP or the Liberals or the 

Conservatives when I make this assessment — but I feel very 

strongly that within our system is built some of the biggest 

dangers in itself. Because what we're doing as parliamentarians 

is saying, this is a plan, and we go to the public and say, can we 

use your own money to buy your vote. We've done that. The 

Conservatives have done that. And then the NDP come up and 

say, oh yes, but we're going to take your money and we're 

going to give you more, vote for us. And that's the system that 

we've developed over the years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I don't know if I should say that we bribed the people with their 

own money, but it seems to me that that is exactly what's 

happened. I remember 1986. We came up with a plan for the 

home-owners. We came up with a plan where you could get 

your $10,000 and you could get your $3,000 and you paid 7 per 

cent interest. And we were chastised for implementing that and 

keeping our promise after the last election. 

 

But what did you guys come up with? Oh we've got to beat 

them. You came up with your seven times seven times seven 

— $70,000, 7 per cent, for 7 years. And I think at that point the 

people were beginning to say, oh that's ridiculous, because I 

think they began to see how politics in Saskatchewan works, in 

Canada works, under our parliamentary system works. And the 

people allowed it to happen. 

 

So what am I saying? I guess what I'm saying is that the 

Conservatives are to blame, the NDP are to blame, the Liberals 

are to blame, because that's how the system works. And I 

would even put some blame on the taxpayers because they 

allowed themselves to be bought by the highest bidder in 

reverse. 

 

I think that's inherent within our system. And I think what 

happened in 1991, Mr. Speaker, in that election, is that we 

came forth with our plan, and it was a little bit different. It 

wasn't the plan that we'll do away with harmonization, that 

there will be no taxes for two years and that there will be more 

spending on health and more spending on education. That was 

the plan that these people came up with. 

 

We, I think, were beginning to envisage this because this is a 

concept that I've held for a long time, and I've expressed it in 

caucus. I'm not saying I had any influence in the final decision; 

I'm not naïve here. But I do think that our plan was more 

realistic. But why should the people vote for higher taxes 

through harmonization as we were planning to do if . . . And 

they put their trust in the Premier and his words, and they voted 

you in. 

 

But let me tell you this: there are fallacies in my reasoning, no 

doubt, that you can poke holes into, but let's just say in general 

I'm correct. I think now that gone are the days — gone are the 

days, Mr. Speaker — where people can bribe the folks out 

there with their own money. I think people are sceptical. 

They're cynical. They're going to see through that. And from 



March 23, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 547 

now on it's going to be the party that comes up with the most 

comprehensive, effective financial plan for this province that 

the people are going to put their trust in. I'm convinced of that. 

 

I got sidetracked, Mr. Speaker, but basically that, I think, is one 

of the messages that I want to leave with this government, that 

you're making choices. You're making the wrong choices. If 

you're not going to learn from your own mistakes, at least learn 

from ours. Why reinvent the wheel? And that's something that I 

would sincerely like to leave with you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on, but I think I have the attention of 

the members. And I think with this softening-up barrage, Mr. 

Speaker, I'm going to turn the podium over to my colleague 

from Morse so that he will be able to deal a little bit more in 

depth with an amendment, Mr. Speaker, to the motion. An 

amendment that I'm sure will give cause for some serious 

reflection on members of the opposite way. And my colleagues 

on this side of the House can flesh this out a little bit more. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move then, seconded by the hon. member from 

Morse constituency: 

 

 That all the words after the word "Assembly" be deleted and 

the following substituted therefor: 

 

 regrets that the provincial budget demonstrates the 

government's betrayal of the people of Saskatchewan by 

failing to adhere to the promise of: implementing no new 

taxes; holding government expenditures at $4.5 billion; 

providing economic opportunities and jobs; supporting rural 

Saskatchewan; protecting the working poor not on welfare; 

ensuring all residents have adequate access to health care and 

education; conducting an open and honest government; 

keeping cabinet to 10 ministers until the province can afford 

more; and a complete failure to bring patronage excessives of 

government under control. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so move. Thank you for your indulgence. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1930) 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I first 

of all want to congratulate the Minister of Finance, the hon. 

member from Saskatoon Westmount, on the budget that she 

has presented here today . . . or this week. I realize it's a tough 

budget but, Mr. Speaker, I think it's a budget that will keep 

Saskatchewan on a course of recovery. I also want to thank the 

former minister of Finance, the hon. member from Regina 

Dewdney, for all the hard work and dedication that he put into 

the budget process in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

This may be a tough budget, and I feel at this time that that is 

really what is needed. And I'm only going to 

take a few minutes to explain, Mr. Speaker, just how we got 

into the type of mess that Saskatchewan is in today. And this 

has been said over and over again, but I think it's worth saying 

again because we've got so many serious problems created by 

the Conservative government opposite. 

 

In 1982, as you know, we left the Conservative government 

with $139 million in the bank as surplus. There was a 

long-term debt that we had in this province that was less than 

$3 billion. At that time . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, 

that's right, it was less than $3 billion. The interest rates . . . the 

interest that was paid on the long-term debt in the province in 

1982 was $43.3 million. That was the interest that was paid. So 

you can just figure that out. And I might add that the interest 

rates in 1982 are a lot higher than they are right now. 

 

And what has taken place since 1982 is quite a change, and as I 

indicated, that's why we're in this problem here today. 

 

It only took the Tories 10 short years to turn that surplus of 

$139 million into a $15 billion debt, a $15 billion debt that we 

face in this province today. And we're not paying $43.3 million 

on that debt. What we are paying today - 

_ for the member from Wilkie — we're paying $847 million a 

year on interest rates, and the interest rates are quite low right 

now compared to 1982, Mr. Member. 

 

The Tories can sit there and they can holler, and they try to put 

the blame on us. But let me tell you, I've been around this 

province, and I've been around this province since the budget 

came in, and everybody in this province are blaming the 

Tories. They're putting the blame where the blame should be. 

That's why we're in this mess. And we're going to get out of it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thompson: — When I talk about 1982 and having a 

surplus and a low total debt, we also had the assets in this 

province to be able to maintain that. The assets belonged to the 

citizens of Saskatchewan. In 1982 we had a low debt rate, we 

had less than 4 per cent unemployment — everybody was 

working — and we had the assets to back that up. And what 

has happened? What has really changed? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'll tell you what has changed. When the Tories 

came in, the first thing they did, they started selling off the 

assets. And they didn't really sell them off, they gave them 

away. That's the sad part of it. They gave them away to their 

friends — the coalmines given to their friends Manalta Coal up 

in Calgary. That's when they started. 

 

Then they took the highway equipment. They sold off $40 

million worth of highway equipment for less than $5 million. 

That was the start. 

 

Well the hon. member from Wilkie calls it a bunch of junk, but 

let me tell you there was a lot of buyers that were coming in 

here from the United States and other 



548 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1993 

parts of Canada. They sure took it up. They didn't think it was 

junk. 

 

And I can also tell you that the 250 Highways workers that you 

fired in one day didn't think they were junk. They were the 

individuals who operated them, and they maintained that 

equipment. No, it wasn't junk; it was good equipment. 

 

Then you proceeded and you sold off the oil. Then you sold off 

the potash. You sold away our forest industry. You sold off the 

uranium industry. You gave it away. You just gave it away. 

 

We no longer have these assets. And really when it comes right 

down to it, Mr. Speaker, the citizens of Saskatchewan no 

longer control the province because you have sold off all the 

assets that we had. 

 

Those are the problems that we face. That is what's created this 

large debt that we have right now. And all the citizens in this 

province are going to have to work hard to pay off that debt. 

And they've committed themselves. They realize what has 

happened and they realize that it has to be paid back because if 

it's not paid back, who is going to suffer is going to be our 

children, our grandchildren, and our great grandchildren for 

generations to come. And they are the ones that are going to 

suffer in this province. 

 

It's going to be tough. But I'm sure, Mr. Speaker, that the 

citizens of this province will come through and we will get rid 

of this debt and we'll make Saskatchewan a very proud place to 

live and to raise our children. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Speaker, we now have to start charting 

a new course for Saskatchewan, a new course for the future. 

And I want to indicate what I feel will solve the problems that 

we have in the constituency of Athabasca that I represent, and 

solving the solutions to the mess that was left behind by 10 

years of Tory rule. 

 

Projects that I am working on and will continue to work on 

with all our departments and the ministers in charge of those 

departments, projects that will get this province back on its feet 

and will get the citizens working in this province and especially 

in the constituency of Athabasca — these are projects that are 

going to help to solve these problems. 

 

Some of the projects are — and I'm going to go through some 

of the projects tonight that I've been working on with the 

ministers in the departments — in the highways and roads. And 

that is important to any area and any region of our province. 

The last region to be de-isolated, to have access to roads, is that 

far north country. And we're going to be working on that. A 

road to the far North where the Minister of Highways and 

Transportation is continuing to work with the federal 

government in Department of Indian Affairs to try and put 

funding in place so that we can start to build that road. 

And I just want to indicate to you what it means to the citizens 

that live in that far north country. When we talk about being 

tough and what people are paying, paying for their goods and 

services because they have to fly it in to that far north country, 

I just want to give you a few examples, not to take too much 

time of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But these are prices that I received from that far northern 

country and Stony Rapids, Black Lake, Fond-du-Lac area, just 

in the last week. A loaf of bread at one store costs $1.99. Both 

stores — I'm using two stores up in that area — that loaf of 

bread is $1.99. A dozen eggs at one store is $3; at the second 

store, it was $2.75 for a dozen eggs. Two litres of milk, $4.50. 

A can of Alpha milk, one store was $1.79; the other one was 

$1.98; $1.37 for an apple and over a dollar for oranges . . . or 

$4 for four oranges. 

 

So that just goes to show you what they're paying up in that far 

north country and what the highway or a road system up there 

is going to mean. They're paying 97 cents a litre for their gas 

up there. So you can just see what it's costing them — 97 cents 

a litre for gas. 

 

Roads — that's the roads to the far North. An important piece 

of road that was left unattended is the road between Big River 

and Green Lake. That is now in the process of being 

completed, and they've got the right of way cleaned right 

through to Green Lake. So that's going to open up another 

important area for north-west Saskatchewan. 

 

The road to Fort McMurray is in the planning stages right now, 

and the province of Saskatchewan is working closely with the 

communities up in the north-west side of the province at La 

Loche and the Alberta government to put that connection 

through. It's not a large connection, approximately 60 to 70 

miles, and we'd have a new link between northern Alberta and 

northern Saskatchewan. And that is going to be an important 

feature for Saskatchewan. And most certainly it's going to 

create a lot of jobs. 

 

We want to rebuild other roads in my constituency, and I will 

continue to work for that: roads such as the road into Canoe 

Narrows and the rebuilding of many of the other ones. 

 

I now want to turn to another item that I think will solve a lot 

of our problems in Saskatchewan, especially in northern 

Saskatchewan, and that's the forest industry. The forest 

industry right now is probably at its highest peak that it's ever 

been in many, many years. 

 

Ontario is now cranking up all their small saw mills to take 

advantage of the lumber markets south of the border in the 

United States. The United States was talking about eliminating 

all the duty on Canadian lumber so they can get as much as 

they can get over there because there is a tremendous demand 

for lumber, and we most certainly have the timber in this 

province. 

 

And what I have been working on in my constituency 



March 23, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 549 

is a small-scale forestry operation to take advantage of the 

millions and millions of feet of mature timber that we have up 

in that area. And granted there are forest management lease 

agreements that will have to be negotiated, but I just say this, 

and I say this quite clearly, that that forest belongs to the 

citizens of Saskatchewan and it's standing there and it's not 

being utilized. The demand is there and we have to negotiate 

that agreement with a firm from out of province. But so be it. 

We'll do that and we'll create these jobs. 

 

Small-scale operations will create hundreds and hundreds of 

jobs. We have the timber, the availability of mature spruce, 

tamarack, and jack pine, both in abundance, that can be used 

for fence posts for the farms and for railroad ties. And we have 

lots of that and we have to start taking advantage of it. And I 

intend to keep working on that. Every one of these items here 

creates jobs, and jobs that we so dearly need. 

 

I now want to turn to another item in my constituency which is 

important, and that is the commercial fishing industry. We have 

in my constituency, literally thousands of freshwater lakes that 

have not been fished and are full of fish. And they should be. 

The consumers are demanding a low-price fish and there's no 

reason why we shouldn't be taking advantage of the products 

that we have up in northern Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Yes, that's right. 

 

And once we get a connection up into the Fond-du-Lac country 

and Black Lake and Stony Rapids country, that road will open 

up hundreds and hundreds of freshwater lakes that can be used 

for commercial fishing and can be used for tourism. So there's 

no reason why they both can't work hand in hand. 

 

The problem is, what we're doing now is we take the fish that 

the commercial fishermen are producing, they keep it in their 

fish camps for maybe 48 hours, and then they have to haul it in 

100 miles, 150 miles to a fish plant. Then it's re-iced and then 

it's trucked a thousand or more miles to Winnipeg to be 

processed. And that is wrong. We're exporting all the jobs out 

of this province. 

 

It is time that we started to change that. We could still have 

central selling. We can sell our fish to the Freshwater Fish 

Marketing Corporation. But we should be processing the fish, 

Mr. Speaker, right in Saskatchewan, right up in northern 

Saskatchewan where the lakes are. 

 

(1945) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thompson: — What happens when you take a freshwater 

fish and you keep it in boxes and ice for 48 hours and then you 

. . . All the handling into the boats and out of the boats and to 

the agents and into the truck, and then you truck it over a 

thousand miles to 

Winnipeg, and you get 100 degree temperatures; and then the 

fish is processed down there and then you get it back at the 

supermarkets in the stores in Saskatchewan or it's distributed 

around the world. But most certainly you never get a fresh 

product. 

 

You could go into . . . And I was given some prices that I got in 

Saskatoon here the other day — I went in and looked at it — 

$5.50 a pound for a jackfish. The fishermen are getting a little 

over 50 cents a pound for that fish. A whitefish, $6.76 for two 

small fillets. The fishermen are getting less than a dollar for 

that. 

 

And pickerel, pickerel — I seen a pickerel there and it wasn't 

fresh, it was by no means fresh, it probably had gone all the 

way to Winnipeg, back to Saskatoon. And anybody that knows 

anything about fish, you just have to take a look at the eyes and 

you can tell that the fish is not fresh. And what are they 

charging? They're charging the consumer $8-and-some-cents 

for that small pickerel. There's no reason for that because the 

fishermen are only getting a little over a dollar. 

 

Now this is something that we have to put a stop to. We've got 

the fish. We've got to get up there. We've got to start 

processing our fish in this province. We've got to get tough 

with the Freshwater Fish Marketing Corporation in Winnipeg 

and say, look if you want to sell the fish, that's fine, but you 

process it in the province of Saskatchewan so that the jobs stay 

here and the profit stays in Saskatchewan and you don't have 

all that waste. I think it's time that we have to do that. We have 

to take a look at it, and a serious look, so that the producer gets 

their fair share. 

 

And I tell you when you're up in northern Saskatchewan . . . 

And gasoline in my constituency in the southern part is in the 

60 to 63 cents a litre; as I indicated 97 cents up in the far North, 

a litre. You have to have a good price for your product. And I 

want to continue working with the departments to see that we 

will carry that out. 

 

I now want to turn to an important industry in our province. 

And only one, one industry that I'm going to use here in the 

mining. There's many other mines that we have. There's the 

gold mines, there's potash, there's coal, there's many other 

mines in this province. 

 

But I want to talk about the uranium deposits and what it 

means to northern Saskatchewan and to the rest of our 

province. When we set up the uranium mines before 1982 we 

had surface lease agreements on all the mines — the big mine 

at Key Lake, the one at Uranium City — and those surface 

leases indicated quite clearly that 50 per cent of the jobs had to 

go to Northerners. 

 

And that's fair because the resources, the mines are right up in 

northern Saskatchewan. Northerners don't ask for 50 per cent 

of the potash jobs in the potash industry or 50 per cent of the 

jobs in the coalmines. I think that it's fair that they get 50 per 

cent of the jobs in the uranium industry that is up there. And 

we signed those surface leases. And what they have done, 



550 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1993 

they've created high-paying jobs. 

 

But there are a lot of other deposits up in northern 

Saskatchewan that they're on the verge of getting developed, 

and I just want to bring out just what this one industry would 

mean to the province of Saskatchewan. We have the three 

mines that are actively operating right now at Cluff Lake and at 

Rabbit Lake and at Key Lake, and these are three mines that 

are all in the process of expansions. And at Cluff Lake up in 

my constituency, the Cluff Lake mine have always maintained 

the 50 per cent to 53 per cent northern content. And these are 

good, high-paying jobs. 

 

But I want to indicate what we still have up there to be 

developed. And most certainly as exploration continues there 

will be a lot more ore bodies that will be found and the demand 

is continually growing for uranium in our province. Some of 

the deposits that we have up there, and I'll just give you what 

the poundage are in some of these mines: the Key Lake mine, 

95,700,000 pounds of uranium. 

 

Then they have some smaller deposits at Rabbit Lake. There's 

Collins B with 14 million; Eagle Point, 122 million; Collins A, 

16, 17 million; Cluff Lake has 41,600,000 pounds of uranium; 

McArthur River — that's where the exploration is taking place 

right now — there is 260 million pounds estimated in that 

reserve; Cigar Lake — the test mines are in operation right now 

— there's 385 million pounds of uranium in those mines; 

McLean Lake has 45 million pounds; Midwest Lake, 36 

million. 

 

And most of these have not been developed yet. I say to you, 

Mr. Speaker, and to the citizens of this province, that that 

amount of ore . . . and it's high grade ore. A lot of that can be 

taken out of the ground. 

 

I'll just give you one example. At the McArthur River it's 

estimated that the uranium is at 5 per cent, which means that 

for every tonne of ore that you take out of the ground, you get 

five pounds of uranium out of that five tonnes of ore . . . of that 

one tonne of ore. 

 

Some of them are a lot higher. Cigar Lake, for every tonne you 

take out of there, you get 9.25 pounds of uranium, and that's 

where the test mine is taking place. But the total for the known 

reserves right now is 1,052,100,000 pounds of uranium. Now 

just imagine what that is going to mean in terms of revenue to 

this province and jobs to northern Saskatchewan and to the rest 

of the province. It is just fantastic. And that's one industry. 

 

And I want to take it a little bit further, Mr. Speaker. Just 

imagine if we still retained 50 per cent ownership in those 

mines. Not only would we be getting all the jobs in the 

spin-off, we would be getting 50 per cent of that profit. And 

that's where the Tories went wrong. They sold off all our 

assets. But we still take advantage of the jobs and we 

appreciate that, and there'll be many, many jobs that are going 

to come out of this industry. 

I think it's facts that we have to look at, and look at seriously. If 

we're going to continue to develop that industry, we have to 

make sure that as a government, that it's developed in the safest 

way possible, not only for the environment but for the health 

and safety for the workers that are up there. We were the first 

ones to set those regulations. They are the toughest in the 

world. And we will continue to set those regulations and make 

sure that they are honoured. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are other areas that I want to touch on, 

projects that will provide much needed services and provide 

good jobs to the citizens of my constituency. 

 

We were sadly lacking in hospital services. The hospital at La 

Loche that you, Mr. Speaker, officially opened many years ago 

when you were the minister of Health, that hospital is badly in 

need of some repairs now and we have to take a serious look at 

that. The far North most certainly is a serious problem and we 

have to solve that regarding health. 

 

And nursing homes, I've been working with the department to 

try and get a nursing home in my constituency because the 

constituency of Athabasca is the only constituency in this 

province that does not have a nursing home. The citizens in my 

constituency have to go to Meadow Lake and North Battleford 

and Prince Albert and all over the place to get into nursing 

homes. And that is something that's needed and I will continue 

to work on that. 

 

I think that one just has to go into the North and realize and see 

just how far it is to get to health services, and then you will 

realize that we have to get more then into northern 

Saskatchewan. Individuals who are travelling by bus 3, 400 

miles to get services or fly in from Fond-du-Lac and Black 

Lake and Stony Rapids and Uranium City and Camsell 

Portage, they have to fly out in the middle of the night, or 

whenever it is, to get to the services that they need. And 

sometimes, Mr. Speaker, it's not successful and we have 

disasters. 

 

There are sewer and water projects that the government is 

working on right now, and I've been working very closely with 

them. We still have communities in northern Saskatchewan that 

do not have the basic sewer and water systems.  Poplar Point 

and La Loche is one good example. Stony Rapids is another 

example. St. George's Hill and Michel village, these are all 

projects that I've been working on and will continue to work 

on. 

 

As I indicated, in the constituency that I represent, the 

constituency of Athabasca, we are facing some serious 

problems. We have high unemployment, high numbers of 

individuals who are on social assistance. And I want to just 

give you a few examples of just how bad it is in the 

constituency of Athabasca. 

 

And the main reason for this is, Mr. Speaker, between 1982 

and 1991 the Conservative government of the day, in their 

wisdom, decided that they were going to move all the services 

out of the Athabasca constituency into Meadow Lake and into 

La Ronge. 



March 23, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 551 

They've pretty well taken all the services out of there. And the 

result of that is what we have up there right now — high 

unemployment and a high rate of social assistance. 

 

And I want to give you two examples of the two regions in 

northern Saskatchewan, and this is of December 2, 1992. 

Children on SAP (Saskatchewan Assistance Plan) in the 

constituency — and this does not include the figures on the 

Indian reserves, and I have seven reserves in my constituency 

— in the constituency of Athabasca, we have 800 cases, family 

cases on welfare, and there are 2,000 children who are 

receiving welfare in the constituency of Athabasca. You move 

over to Cumberland on the east side of the province and that 

figure where we have 800 in Athabasca, in Cumberland it's 

only 169. Where we have 2,000 children on assistance, there's 

only 438. And that just goes to show you the difference in the 

two regions of the province because of the mentality of the 

Conservative government who decided that they wanted to 

move everything out of Athabasca. 

 

The hon. member who used to be the minister of Health, the 

member from Meadow Lake, one of his first tasks when he got 

in was to get rid of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. 

And he went in with vengeance, and you can see the results of 

what we have right now. 

 

And I say that we have the most . . . I have the most hardest-hit 

region in this province. The situation is serious and we have to 

most certainly solve that problem, and I intend to continue to 

work with the ministers of all the departments involved to see 

that that happens. 

 

These are the projects that I have been working on. I intend to 

keep doing it. It's not going to be easy because we have a 

tremendous shortage of finances in the province, as I explained 

before. But the citizens of this province, they're hardy people, 

and we will work hard to make sure that we get out of this 

mess and to create a future. 

 

My constituents in Athabasca are no different, Mr. Speaker. All 

they want is a job and a chance to raise their families with 

dignity. What they want and what they need is fairness. And I 

say, Mr. Speaker, as we chart our course for the future, fairness 

is first and foremost, and that is what's going to solve the 

problems up in the constituency of Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the budget and I will be 

opposing the amendment. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a number of 

things that I want to say here this evening that deal with the 

budget. I have however some things that I want to talk about 

that have to be said prior to the budget. And I want to make a 

point on an issue that I think is of significance. And a letter . . . 

I guess it has somewhat to do with the budget too, Mr. Speaker, 

in 

that it has a line in the application form that the government 

sent out to hire students. It's Partnerships '93: employers and 

students working together. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there was . . . I was hoping the Minister of 

Labour would listen. There's one line in there that has caused a 

very serious concern in my constituency, and I have received 

letters from it. In fact one of the constituents of mine wrote a 

letter in the local paper that outlined this, and this is the 

observation it makes, Mr. Speaker. It's the application form, 

and the provision that irritated one of my constituents in this 

application form says this — it's under the criteria for 

employment, eligible employment — priority will be given to 

employer applications that provide employment for a student of 

aboriginal ancestry or a student with a disability, Mr. Speaker. 

That appeared in the '93 Partnerships, employers and students 

application form. 

 

(2000) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just want to read the letter that was written in 

the paper regarding this form. And it says: 

 

 Dear sir: (It's a letter written to The Southwest Booster.) I am 

enclosing a copy of an application form I received from the 

Government of Sask., for a student employment program. I 

personally find it very racist! 

 

 What is racism? 

 

 I received a copy of the Partnerships '93 today and on the 

very front page was a statement that I could not believe I was 

reading. For those of you that have not read it, let me quote it 

for you. This quote is under the 'Eligible Employment' 

section. "Priority will be given to employer applications that: 

provide employment for a student of aboriginal ancestry." It 

also gives priority to the disabled and in that I do not have a 

problem. 

 

 If I (being an employer) placed an ad in the paper and stated 

that a person that was of "white" ancestry would have priority 

I would not even be allowed to place the ad, and rightly so 

(Mr. Speaker). How can the Government (of Sask), using tax 

dollars, single out the aboriginals and give them priority? 

What about the equal opportunity to the other visual 

minorities, or all of the students that happen not to be 

aboriginal? Do these students not need jobs as well, or are we 

as employers to flip the whole bill for labor on non-aboriginal 

students! The color of a persons skin, or the nation that they 

were born in, should not be a condition of "priority" for the 

government. They are all students and all need the money 

from summer employment equally. Canada — "Land of 

Equal Opportunity" ????? 

 

And this, Mr. Speaker, is not the only place that this appears. I 

want to point out to the minister responsible 



552 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1993 

for Indian and Metis Affairs in an ad that appeared in the 

Regina Leader-Post on May 17 . . . or March 17. It's: 

"Assistant Deputy Minister - Metis Affairs." And in it it says: 

"This position is limited to women of Aboriginal Ancestry." 

 

Mr. Speaker, in plain words I think those kinds of things should 

not be done in a Canada that is a free and democratic society 

where it is a fundamental right for individuals regardless of 

race, colour, or creed to have an opportunity for employment in 

the province of Saskatchewan. And this, with a government 

that is bringing in a human rights Bill that deals with those 

kinds of things, I think is absolutely, totally wrong. 

 

I have no problem with hiring aboriginals. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 

I have a niece and a nephew who I am proud of who have 

aboriginal ancestry. And that, Mr. Speaker, is a fact. However, 

they do not have the rights above what I have. They do not 

have the opportunity above anyone else. And that is the 

problem that I have in dealing with those two things. 

 

And I wanted to point that out so that members of the 

government side of the House would know what their ministers 

are doing in relation to at least two programs that set apart the 

opportunities over and above all others the rights of those kinds 

of individuals. That is wrong, Mr. Speaker. And I want to point 

that out as I begin my remarks here this evening. 

 

This budget speech, Mr. Speaker, has what I call . . . it has 

gotten to the lowest common denominator, and that is we all 

share misery equally. We all share misery equally. It's the 

lowest common denominator in a socialist program as we've 

seen it outlined here today and in this budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the concerns that I have and I've always had 

regarding the kinds of economy that a socialist government will 

provide, and that is that they believe and fundamentally believe 

that the more they tax the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, the more the economy can grow. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it's evident in the last budget, it's evident in this 

budget, and it's likely going to be evident in the next budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in order to have an effective economy pay for the 

goods and services that are required by the society we live in, 

that economy has to be absolutely going full bore all the time. 

And it cannot be taxed to death. What we have in the province 

of Saskatchewan is a horrendous tax load carried by people 

who have an opportunity to move. Mr. Speaker, as I live on the 

western side of the province I have seen this over and over 

again. 

 

I visited with a gentleman from the Rosthern constituency 

earlier on this month and he told me he had just been to Banff 

and was on his way home and he passed truck load after truck 

load, van after van, of people moving out of the province of 

Saskatchewan. And that, Mr. Speaker, is a fact. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, on top of that, I want to point this out. On 

top of that, I'm going to raise another issue 

that is just as relevant. In the city of Medicine Hat, which is a 

hundred miles away from Swift Current, they're setting up a 

new Superstore. The Superstore in Regina has dominated a lot 

of the grocery business and other businesses for a long ways 

around it, Mr. Speaker, and so will the grocery store in 

Medicine Hat. Superstore is putting that up. 

 

What are they going to do, Mr. Speaker? They're going to go to 

that store where it's easier, it's easier, Mr. Speaker, and less 

costly to have product brought into Medicine Hat, 

Saskatchewan, than it is into Swift Current. 

 

In fact last week as I was driving into Regina the mayor of 

Maple Creek said that he was going to . . . he and the council 

were going to initiate some positive relationships within the 

community to see whether they could bolster their economy in 

that town. 

 

And he said — and he said this on the radio, the public could 

hear it — he said, we don't know what the impact of the budget 

is going to be nor do we not know what the impact of this 

facility being built in Medicine Hat is going to do. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people have an opportunity to travel and 

buy that service that they could buy in Saskatchewan. They 

have the opportunity to buy it elsewhere. 

 

And that isn't all, Mr. Speaker. That opportunity to purchase 

those goods and services are not just clothing that went up 9 

per cent on adults and 1 per cent on all of the other stuff. But it 

also has to do with those items and goods that are there that 

households need — dryers, washers, mixmasters, all kinds of 

household utensils. All of those things, Mr. Speaker, can be 

purchased in Medicine Hat and then brought back into 

Saskatchewan tax free. And that, Mr. Speaker, is happening on 

a regular basis. People go there for a weekend, come back with 

their vehicle full of goods that should have been purchased in 

this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we have in tax increases in this province is going to 

cause us serious, serious hurt. And the hurt is going to come in 

the very fact that people who have to buy here, who can't afford 

to go there, will decide to buy here and it will cost them more. 

And, Mr. Speaker, those are the ones that they should have the 

opportunity to get that tax break too. But they are the lowest 

income earners in the province. And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

obvious. And what are we doing? We're taxing the low income 

because the others can go cross-border shopping. 

 

As a matter of fact, the member from Regina Rosemont was 

not even in the House the day that the individual budget was 

presented in this House. And that, Mr. Speaker, is the kind of 

thing that I think is going to happen over and over and over 

again. He decided that cross-border shopping in the United 

States was far more important than listening to the budget. And 

he probably was right. That is the concern that we have in the 

province of Saskatchewan as Conservatives, and 



March 23, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 553 

the people have. 

 

There's other things that bother me that need to be addressed. 

Mr. Speaker, the automobile association came to me the other 

day and they said, an individual who has a son or a daughter or 

a relative living in Alberta can ask that individual to give him 

the vehicle that he purchases in Saskatchewan, give it to him, 

and he doesn't have to pay any tax on it. 

 

That's the kind of thing that happens in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And the motor dealers have asked this 

government to change that so that that cannot be done, and yet 

it's continually happening. And they've done nothing about it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the west side of the province we have an 

energy industry that is serviced almost exclusively out of 

Medicine Hat. Who gets the benefit of those oilfield services? 

Not the people of Swift Current, not the people of Gull Lake, 

not the people of Maple Creek, not the people along the border 

all the way north to Pierceland. 

 

It's not the Saskatchewan people that get that, it's the people 

from Alberta because they can get the benefit of lower costing, 

the services they provide to the people of the oil industry. And 

where do they want to go? They'll go where they get it the 

cheapest, Mr. Speaker, and that's a fundamental right that they 

have. 

 

Now I want to point out something else that is just as relevant 

today as it has always been, and that is that people on fixed 

incomes in the province of Saskatchewan who have an 

opportunity to move are going to move to the lowest-cost place 

where they can live. And that, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

I know a farmer from Herbert that has already purchased a 

house in Medicine Hat. Why? Because, Mr. Speaker, he can 

pay the tax in Medicine Hat, he can pay the kinds of things that 

he has to purchase for his personal services, the goods and 

services that he needs to live, he can purchase them cheaper 

than he can in Herbert, Saskatchewan, or in Swift Current or 

any of the other places. That is happening across the board. 

And, Mr. Speaker, it is happening more on the west side and on 

the south side, I would say to you, than anywhere else in the 

province. 

 

What's happening to our economy as it relates to tax dollars? 

The more you push the button in central and eastern side of the 

province, the harder and tougher it will be for you to survive 

and me to survive because those people can't access themselves 

to the low-cost goods and services that are provided in Alberta. 

And that is a fact, Mr. Speaker. And that is a fact in oil or fuel. 

It's a fact in goods and services purchased right across the 

board. And that, Mr. Speaker, is what people are doing over 

and over again. 

 

If you want to have a description of how people work when 

they want to entertain themselves, do they go to the Cypress 

Hills and stay on the Saskatchewan side? No, they go to the 

Alberta side to get the goods and services provided. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that happens 

over and over and over again. And that is a part of the problem 

with putting too many tax dollars on the kinds of things that we 

have today. 

 

I think, I think the solution is clear. And I really have 

appreciated the remarks that Isabel Anderson made. She says 

— and she's absolutely right — you have to have wealth 

creation in order to sustain the debt that is here. That is exactly 

what she said. And that is exactly right. You cannot have a tax 

on a tax on a tax and drive the business out of the province of 

Saskatchewan and not have an opportunity for growth. 

 

And what have we got for growth, Mr. Speaker? In the throne 

speech they talk about AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.). 

And who put the AECL package together? It wasn't those 

people over on the other side of the House, the government. It 

was the opposition when they were government. 

 

Who put all of the commodity things that . . . and I'll have a list 

of it — who put the fertilizer plant together that is going to earn 

tax dollars and revenue on royalties serving the natural gas 

industry into the province of Saskatchewan? Who's going to 

provide the benefit, or who's going to get the benefit of that and 

who provided that? It was the Conservative government that 

did it, and the people over here are going to get the benefit as 

well as every other person in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

A new paper plant up at P.A. (Prince Albert). And, Mr. 

Speaker, there were 300 people working there. Now there's 

1,100 people working there. Who got, who got the benefit of 

that, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And that is the reason why I want to point out to the members 

of this Assembly, you need wealth creation in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And then, Mr. Speaker, the total volume of 

dollars in taxes at a reasonable rate will effectively pay the debt 

down. 

 

That is precisely what Ms. Anderson says, and she is absolutely 

right — totally, unequivocally right. And she says it probably 

better than I have, and she says it this way: There are two 

misconceptions in this administration's view of how to get rid 

of government debts and deficits. One is that the province's 

credit rating is based on the size of the debt. It is not. It is based 

on the ability of the managers of the debt. 

 

(2015) 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the credit rating in the government that we 

have here today went down twice already. And my prediction, 

Mr. Speaker, on the basis of what I see happening in the 

province today, is it will go down again because the 

management capacity of this government, without the 

opportunity for people to create wealth, is not going to deliver 

a bigger tax base. 

 

A bigger tax base must be encouraged by the people of this 

government. What do they do to encourage? What do they do 

to encourage, Mr. Speaker? Jack up taxes. But they had one 

little window, one little window that they took out and put out 

there for 



554 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1993 

everybody to see. One little window, Mr. Speaker, was called 

harmonization of a certain sector for eight months. 

Harmonization. That means they're going to get their money 

back that they pay in taxes. 

 

Now why didn't they do that for everybody? Why not allow 

that service to be provided to the whole province so that we 

could have the people in the province of Saskatchewan start to 

create wealth. That, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why this 

government, in my opinion, is not going to make it. 

 

I just want to point out some graphs that the government 

presented to us in their budget address, and it deals with the 

total volume of debt in the province of Saskatchewan. The total 

debt in the province of Saskatchewan in 1982 was $4 billion. 

And that's their own book saying it.  Mr. Speaker, 1982, $4 

billion debt. 

 

What did we have for interest rates in 1982? Does anybody 

remember? I do. It was very nearly 18 and 19 per cent interest. 

That, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why we have inflation in 

double digit numbers, we have interest rates in double digit 

numbers. 

 

 And what have we got today, at a time of opportunity in the 

province of Saskatchewan when investment should come into 

reality where wealth is created, where wealth is created by 

individuals in the province of Saskatchewan willing to invest, 

when we have an interest rate that is at 5.6 per cent prime and 

an inflation rate that is almost zero. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Except for the government. 

 

Mr. Martens: — And except for the government, as my 

colleague has said. That's the kind of thing that we need to have 

in the province of Saskatchewan. We need to free up that 

money so that individuals will have the right to . . . or the 

freedom to invest in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

But what happens to that money, Mr. Speaker? My best guess 

is that money that isn't tied down in Saskatchewan because of 

the kinds of functions that occur that would restrict the 

investment are going to places where they don't have to pay 

those high taxes. And that, Mr. Speaker, is Alberta. 

 

Why does Alberta's economy seem to move up all the time? 

Because, Mr. Speaker . . . and British Columbia, for that 

matter. And I'll say this as . . . not as a credit to the government 

but to the people of British Columbia. It moves up because it 

takes dollars invested and earned in Saskatchewan and moves 

them west. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why we need to have very, 

very careful fiscal planning in the province of Saskatchewan. 

You cannot tax them above and beyond what they can really 

afford to pay. And that's what we have gotten to. We have 

come to the single common denominator in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, where it's misery — it's misery, misery, misery. And 

that is the reason why the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan have a real significant feeling that they 

need to move out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it has become more evident to me today than at 

any other time; 1993 is a very significant year for me and my 

family. I have three sons, they're all graduating this year, and 

one of them is getting married. And, Mr. Speaker, where are 

they going to find work when they get through their schooling? 

Where are they going to find opportunities for work? Is it in 

Saskatchewan? Is there an opportunity to work in 

Saskatchewan? No, sir. No, sir. They're going to go west. 

Why? Because they don't like to live in Saskatchewan? No. No, 

they want to live here. They want the comforts that have been 

supplied here, but, Mr. Speaker, the job opportunities available 

in the province of Saskatchewan are not to be found. 

 

As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, the volume of opportunities in 

Saskatchewan are diminishing every day. Why? Why, Mr. 

Speaker? Because this government does not understand the 

fundamentals of business nor of the opportunities for 

investment that are in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and members of this Assembly, there are a lot of 

people who have invested dollars very carefully in this 

province. Mr. Speaker, my family has. They've been in 

agriculture since 1904 in this province and have invested 

sweat, money, and all of those things to stay in Saskatchewan. 

And what do we have, the fourth generation after they moved 

to Saskatchewan? Leaving. Why, Mr. Speaker? Because the 

job opportunities are not here, because they cannot invest and 

get the same kind of benefits here that they would elsewhere. 

Those are the reasons why I won't be supporting this budget. 

 

On top of that, I see some things that really are striking. Mr. 

Speaker, I have been . . . prior to the election in 1982, I was a 

reeve and a councillor and a director with SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) for about 

six years. In that period of time, Mr. Speaker, I became very 

comfortable with people in local government. And as matter of 

fact, it was a pleasure for me to serve as a reeve and a 

councillor and a director of SARM. My brother has been 

chairman and vice-chairman and sits on the school board in 

Swift Current and has done so for almost 20 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our family has been involved in local 

government. What do I see as this government's view of 

helping the local government out? Mr. Speaker, over and over 

and over again, as I have seen this government deal with its 

mandate to serve the people of Saskatchewan, it has fiscally 

offloaded on every one of those agencies that assists the people 

in rural and urban Saskatchewan. They have offloaded tax 

dollars on them consistently in the school system, in the health 

care system, in the municipal system, whether it's urban or 

rural. They have offloaded on each and every occasion. 

 

As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, they have not only offloaded, 

but over and above the taxes that are placed on everybody else, 

including them, the raise in 



March 23, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 555 

the percentage of tax from eight to nine, putting on the 

additional $122 million worth of provincial sales tax, add on 

the clothing that they have to buy, add on the goods and 

services that they have to now buy through drugs and health 

care services, add all of that on and then there is a list of things 

that they have to do over and above that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to point some of them out to you as a part of my 

responsibility as Agriculture critic. I want to point out some of 

them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, every person who has a . . . Mr. Speaker, I want 

to point out to the now Minister of Environment some of the 

concerns that the people in rural Saskatchewan have about his 

environmental taxes that we perceive maybe . . . or fees that are 

going to be levied against rural Saskatchewan. Clean up your 

pails, clean up your chemicals, clean up this, and if you don't 

get it done, here's another tax. 

 

As a matter of fact, I could talk to you about the Pioneer Co-op 

in Swift Current who have had significant costs imposed on 

them on environmental clean-up that they had to do, initiated 

by this minister. And also, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to 

this minister that there are a whole lot of underground tanks in 

the province of Saskatchewan that are going to have to be 

cleaned up. He said, okay I'll give you a break for a year. But, 

Mr. Speaker, next year is not going to be any better in rural 

Saskatchewan because they're going to impose some more tax 

increases and decreases in funding. That is the legacy that these 

people leave. 

 

I want to point out every person who has livestock in a 

community pasture, Mr. Speaker, the rates went up. The rates 

went up across the board. Mr. Speaker, the rates went up to 

provide services in those community pastures. The rates went 

up to provide breeding fees for the bulls in those pastures. Mr. 

Speaker, over and over again the prices went up. 

 

And I'll put another one onto that, Mr. Speaker. Sask Power 

Corporation across the board made farmers pay up more. Not 

once in two years. Not twice in two years. In some cases three 

times in two years; increases in SaskPower rates, increases in 

gas rates, increases in telephone rates. 

 

As a matter of fact, there is an interesting scenario that has 

developed, Mr. Speaker, and that is those people who use the 

telephone service for communications. Let's say they want to 

transfer the church service from the church into their home 

now have to pay $27 a month. What did they pay two years 

ago, Mr. Speaker? Two years ago what did they pay? Was it 

$20? No. Was it $15? No. It was 11. 

 

In two years, in two years, Mr. Speaker, SaskTel is going to 

have in excess of $100 million in reserve. And what do they 

do? They take it out of the old; they take it out of the senior 

citizen who can't get out of his house, needs an opportunity to 

sit and view what the world is doing. And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

what these people tax over and over again. 

I want to point out another thing that is of significance to me 

and that's the health care system. And I want to point it out 

because, Mr. Speaker, in the province of Saskatchewan, health 

region no. 1 began in Swift Current. Mr. Speaker, health region 

no. 1 began in Swift Current. It began with an investment by 

municipalities, I believe it was 95 municipalities in the 

south-west part of the province decided that — that was towns 

and villages and RMs (rural municipalities) — decided they 

were going to get together with the doctors and with the 

provincial government and form a unit to deliver health care, a 

unit to deliver health care. And it was studied around the world. 

 

In fact my cousins who were taking a medical school in 

Oklahoma came to Saskatchewan to study the health delivery 

care system in Swift Current, Saskatchewan. That is the kind of 

thing that was done over and over again worldwide, Mr. 

Speaker. And I want to point some things out to you that 

maybe the members opposite don't know. 

 

Mr. Speaker, who was the government that threw that out? 

Who was the government that threw that out? Well it was those 

same people who are now thinking about establishing boards 

all over the province of Saskatchewan, possibly an effective 

way to handle health care, effective from their perspective 

where they can offload over and over again. Mr. Speaker, I 

want to point this out because it was related to me by a 

gentleman who was at the meeting in 1977 when the minister 

of Health, I believe it was Mr. Smishek, came to Swift Current 

to take and say that this is done. 

 

And who did he have to confront, Mr. Speaker? He had to 

confront a very important individual who was Speaker of the 

House at the time, his name was E.I. Wood. And he said to Mr. 

Smishek, no you're not going to take it away. And Mr. Wood 

won the day, but he only won the battle, he didn't win the war. 

And, Mr. Speaker, it was less than a year later and in comes a 

minister of Health that decides, I'm going to wipe this all away. 

 

You know what they did, Mr. Speaker? This whole idea of 

district boards kind of fascinates me because I was involved in 

it from the point of view of being the reeve and the councillor 

for the municipality of Saskatchewan Landing and I was 

involved in it. My administrator was involved with it . . . or the 

administrator from the municipality. 

 

What fascinated me about that, Mr. Speaker, was this: there 

was a surplus in the fund as it related to health region no. 1. 

There was a surplus in that fund. What did they do with the 

surplus, Mr. Speaker? The surplus was there to provide dental 

care to the children in the areas that they serviced. Mr. Speaker, 

some years we paid $7 a year, some years we paid $20 a year. 

But, Mr. Speaker, the service provided to the people in that 

area was sufficient to provide good health care and good dental 

care. Mr. Speaker, that's what happened. 

 

(2030) 



556 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1993 

On top of that, the health region no. 1 had a $900,000 surplus 

fund. That's the reason, Mr. Speaker, that's the reason in the 

'50s and the '60s they could operate that health care board in 

district no. 1. They could operate it efficiently and effectively. 

Who put the money in there? Who put the money in the health 

region no. 1? It was taxed by the municipalities, the towns, the 

cities, and the villages in that health care district. It was taxed 

there and placed there. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, each one of those people from those various 

municipalities, urban and rural, put money into there to have 

that surplus built up, over $900,000. And, Mr. Speaker, I want 

to point out to this Assembly that Mr. Smishek, in his wisdom, 

decided to take it away. He took it all out of Swift Current 

health region no. 1 and put it in the Consolidated Fund, and 

that, Mr. Speaker, is the legacy of these individuals on health 

care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is a very significant opportunity for me to say 

this because the people of Swift Current know that that is a 

fact. They know that that is a fact and that is, Mr. Speaker, the 

reason why these discussions on district health care boards 

interests me a whole lot. 

 

On top of that, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to each one of 

the members of this Assembly that the right that the individuals 

had to tax in 1947, '48, '49, up to 1960 and through 1960 to '75, 

that same opportunity exists today. 

 

And I say across the board in the province of Saskatchewan, 

the offloading that is going to take place in the next two years 

by this government will clearly provide . . . the only 

opportunity for those people to have a health care service is 

through property taxes. That's the only place it's going to come 

from. And that, Mr. Speaker, is . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

No, Mr. Member from Prince Albert, I'm going to tell you this, 

that that has never been my position and that, Mr. Speaker, is 

wrong. It was initiated back then by your government, and that, 

Mr. Speaker, was wrong then. 

 

Health care should be paid for on the basis of a universal tax 

across the province, not on property. And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

the reason why I want to raise these issues in this discussion 

here today. Mr. Speaker, it's important for the people of Swift 

Current. 

 

And I'm going to tell you something else that's going to 

happen. There's a health care facility there that is called the 

Palliser health care centre. And, Mr. Speaker, on Thursday last 

week, their budget was cut one and a half million dollars. One 

and a half million dollars, Mr. Speaker. The health care service 

provided in that centre is a heavy level 4 care facility. And that 

health care facility is for those people who have absolutely no 

opportunity to look after themselves. 

 

And as I understand it from the discussion by the administrator 

and from the people who are the directors on that health care 

board, they could be losing 35 beds. Mr. Speaker, is it any 

wonder people 

wonder at these people and what they're doing. Is it any wonder 

they say what in the world is going on? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to point something else to you, that 

the Premier of this province, the Premier of this province knew 

that as Mr. Hepworth brought his budget into this House, it was 

written in his budget book for everyone in the province of 

Saskatchewan to see, anybody who would have had any sense, 

who was in this House, would have had an opportunity to read 

it, but they ignored it. And it said that there was $14.2 billion 

worth of debt. And the Premier of the province today says, I 

can operate this province on $4.2 billion. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, he can't operate it. He has not operated it on 

the basis of the cash that he's had to operate on. He's not 

operated efficiently. 

 

I want to tell the people in this Assembly that those are the 

kinds of things that are happening over and over and over again 

across this province as a result, Mr. Speaker, of the kinds of 

things that this . . . it's a kind of thing that this government is 

going to continue to do. 

 

And the reason, Mr. Speaker, the reason is absolutely clear. 

These people are going to force creativity and wealth out of the 

province. And who will then stay to pay the tax, Mr. Speaker? 

That's the fundamental question that has to be answered. Who 

will pay the tax? Who will pay the tax when you are down to 

500 or 600 or 700,000 people. Who will pay the tax? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Rosetown-Elrose said that the 

only person that's going to leave is me. Well, Mr. Speaker, I've 

contemplated that a few times, as a matter of fact. One other 

time when the socialists . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . one 

other time when the socialist government . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, there was one other time when 

I thought I should maybe do that. And do you know what I did? 

I talked it over with my family, and I said, I'm going to go back 

and I'm going to fight socialism. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, not only that, I am going to see again 

whether I can kick it out of the province of Saskatchewan 

forever. Because on the basis of what they do for fiscal 

accountability, they have no heart, Mr. Speaker. They have 

absolutely no heart in what they're doing, and that's the reason 

why. They are . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, I'll put it this way: the 

newscaster on CTV (Canadian Television Network) said it 

probably better than anybody else. He said, there are three 

problems that Audrey McLaughlin has — the Premier of 

Ontario; the Premier of Saskatchewan; and the Premier of 

British Columbia. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, that, Mr. Speaker, has driven her in the 

polls. That, Mr. Speaker, has driven her into the polls to be in 

that 6 per cent — 6 per cent. Do you know how many people 

think they've seen Elvis Presley since he died? Twelve per cent. 



March 23, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 557 

That, Mr. Speaker, is exactly where Audrey McLaughlin is. 

That's the kind of role she has to play. And the reason is that 

the Premier of Saskatchewan, the Premier of Ontario, and the 

Premier of British Columbia have driven her to that condition. 

And you go across and ask people across this province whether 

she isn't in that position. And you will find that is exactly right 

no matter where you go. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a whole lot of things that I could add to 

this budget debate. But I will give up my place to allow others 

to do that. 

 

I will be definitely supporting the amendment and I will 

definitely not be supporting the budget as it has been presented 

by the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It's my 

privilege to join this evening to take part in this debate. This is 

a very important debate, Mr. Speaker. It's a very important 

budget. 

 

And I would like to thank the constituents of Saskatoon 

Eastview-Haultain, of course, for the privilege of serving them, 

but also for their ideas and input over the last year. I, of course, 

am referring there specifically to my accountability meeting 

which we on this side of the House do prior to every session 

and after every session to ensure that we're keeping in touch 

with our constituents, but also from the business survey that I 

did, and I'll speak to that in a few minutes. But, Mr. Speaker, 

before I begin my comments specifically on some of the details 

of the speech, I want to raise two or three points in response to 

the member from Morse in his comments. 

 

I have a lot of respect for the member for Morse, and over the 

years I've heard him give some very thoughtful speeches in this 

Assembly. And I've always kind of respected his point of view, 

but tonight the example of his concern about summer 

employment puzzled me. Here is a member who is expressing 

. . . As he rises to his feet, the first thing he expresses concern 

about is the fact that in our student summer employment 

program announced in this budget, called Partnerships '93, 

where we're looking at providing employment, badly needed 

employment, to some 2,000 students, the member from Morse 

expresses a concern that we're giving some preference and 

some priority in our employment targets to aboriginal and 

disabled people, young people. Mr. Speaker, I find it amazing 

that he's concerned about this. I would ask, I suppose, is he 

opposed to affirmative action. 

 

We heard the member from Athabasca say tonight that in 

northern Saskatchewan, where 90 per cent of the people are 

aboriginal, the unemployment is 90 per cent. So I'm sure that 

the member from Athabasca might have been a little bit 

concerned when the member from Morse was raising the 

question as to why there's any preference given to aboriginal 

students in our summer employment program. I 

 personally take a lot of pride in that, Mr. Speaker, and I'm sure 

members on this side of the House do. Those are badly needed 

jobs for aboriginal young people and for all young people. 

 

I guess it's worth reminding the member who was part of 

cabinet when he was in government, that in order to get a 

summer job as a student under their administration, you had to 

have a Tory connection. That is the fact, Mr. Speaker. And last 

year, for the first time in 10 years, the Public Service 

Commission took control of those jobs and were given out on 

the basis of every student in Saskatchewan having an 

opportunity. The fact that he would raise that concern, I guess, 

is an indication of why there was virtually no growth in 

aboriginal or disabled students getting employment in their 10 

years. So I'm greatly concerned about that. 

 

The other point I would like to raise in response to his speech is 

this member from Morse was talking about the misery that his 

family is experiencing and will experience based on this 

budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

He doesn't seem to connect in any way, shape, or form that the 

$15 billion, the legacy of that government over the last 10 

years, has any implications for his family and thousands of 

other families next year and over the course of the next several 

years. There's a relationship between the fact that it cost a lot of 

money for his adult children to go to university and their $15 

billion debt. 

 

The other issue that he raised that I want to just comment on in 

passing, talking about our recent . . . this government's recent 

utility rate increase. Again, Mr. Speaker, they racked up loans 

and bills with regard to the Shand-Rafferty power plant, and 

that's what the last increase in utility rates had to do with. 

 

So again, unlike the member from Rosthern who also spoke 

tonight, where he said that how we got to the $15 billion debt is 

irrelevant, well I think the vast majority of Saskatchewan 

people don't see how we got to that $15 billion debt or that debt 

itself as being irrelevant, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, turning directly to the speech . . . or to the budget, 

I would like to commend the Minister of Finance and my 

colleagues in cabinet and in the back benches and make a 

specific reference as well to the former minister of Finance for 

his tireless efforts in the consultations that went into the budget 

preparation over the last year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I commend the minister and my colleagues 

because there are many ways in which all of us wish we 

wouldn't have had to make some of the decisions that we made 

in this budget. Mr. Speaker, the public of Saskatchewan 

recognizes the financial straits that this province is in. And I 

commend my colleagues because this is an historic debate. We 

are in deep difficulty in this province, which is well 

recognized. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget, building on the budget of 



558 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1993 

last year, this budget, which is a three-year budget, basically 

will fulfil the promise that we have given to the Saskatchewan 

public of achieving financial freedom, Mr. Speaker, which has 

been a hallmark, I might add for members opposite, of CCF 

(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation)-NDP governments 

in running this province for some 32 years. 

 

CCF-NDP governments have always balanced the budgets and 

that's why they've had the flexibility to provide good health 

care, good social programs, and a good educational system 

over the years. 

 

(2045) 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is that flexibility that the members opposite 

have taken away to a large measure in the current situation. We 

are in a mess. If we had that 700 . . . or 800 now — it's going 

up like crazy — if we had that $847 million that we're going to 

have to pay out this next year in interest, Mr. Speaker, we 

could double the budget for education. That's the implication of 

the mess that these people have put us into. For the second year 

in a row, Mr. Speaker, if we did not have the almost a billion 

dollar in interest payments that we're having to pay, based on 

their mess, we would have another surplus budget this year. 

Even last year there would have been a surplus budget of $262 

million. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the government has made the tough choices. 

They were not easy choices. We had arguments and we 

agonized and we debated and we consulted with the public. 

And we agonized over many, many decisions, unlike Manitoba, 

their colleagues in Manitoba, where without warning they just 

last week cancelled 52 NGOs' (non-governmental 

organizations) funding. Well we didn't do that, Mr. Speaker. 

We didn't cancel funding to 52 NGOs that could ill afford to 

have their funding cut and were NGOs that provided services 

to low income people. That wasn't the approach in developing 

this budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I'm not going to dwell any more on bashing the 

opposition. I think it's clearly established in the public mind 

whose debt this is, except I want to say in closing this part of 

my speech, is that they had 10 years to implement their ideas 

— 10 long years. Mr. Speaker, they had 10 long years and the 

situation got worse every single year. That's a matter of public 

record. 

 

Not only that they privatized and gave away our resources, 

whether it's the Potash Corporation or Cameco or the road 

building equipment or Saskoil. They gave all those assets 

away, basically. They were open for business and had 

wheeler-dealers coming in, and the situation got worse every 

year. 

 

So we lost all those assets and the budgets still continue to go 

up by over $1 billion a year, Mr. Speaker. Now all of sudden 

they've got all the answers. All of a sudden they're like the 

armchair quarterback, Mr. Speaker. All their answers are so 

workable today when they weren't workable for 10 

long years. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the reason I commend the minister and my 

colleagues, and I would say the people of Saskatchewan 

because there were extensive consultations that went into 

developing this budget, is because this three-year plan was 

developed under unprecedented difficult circumstances. 

 

This challenge has not been easy. The challenge has not been 

easy but citizens recognize this, Mr. Speaker. And the 

challenges would have been great enough — that is the 

challenges confronting our province, our small province and 

our country, and all countries, Mr. Speaker, had we not had this 

humungous debt. 

 

The challenges are significant for other reasons, and I'd like to 

point to just a few of them, which makes it very difficult to 

develop good economic and social and public policy in today's 

environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, changes are occurring at a rapid level. It's almost 

a cliché but that is true. Things are occurring at such a rapid 

level it's hard to keep pace and to relate and to understand the 

new economic order and opportunities that are emerging. 

 

New realities are confronting us, Mr. Speaker. Issues are 

increasingly complex. There are many circumstances in a small 

province like Saskatchewan, with a million people or so, that 

are basically beyond our control. 

 

We're also trying to grapple with the notion that structures and 

programs and services that were designed for a different era 

and under different circumstances, require reform. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what we've tried to do over the last 16 

months is engage in this reform, whether it's the Partnership 

for Renewal, the economic development paper, or the wellness 

paper, or the study on university education, or SIAST 

(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology), 

or K to 12, is be involved with the public in how those 

structures and services and programs should change. 

 

And that's the key, Mr. Speaker, is involving those who are 

delivering the service at the field level, in response to a 

criticism that the Liberal leader directed at this government last 

night. That criticism is not well founded, Mr. Speaker. There 

has been that kinds of consultation. 

 

These seven or eight realities that I've outlined, Mr. Speaker, 

make positive change and renewal very difficult under the best 

of circumstances. And this province is facing a crippling debt 

which makes the challenge all the more tough, and we're trying 

to face that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the issues are too serious to play politics with as 

we've heard in the last two or three weeks here. So the key in 

Saskatchewan, as we've found out, as we've pioneered many 

other programs, is to do things the Saskatchewan way. And 

that's what we 



March 23, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 559 

intend to do, which is involving partnerships, consulting, and 

working together. 

 

We did this before, Mr. Speaker, in 1944. This province had 

basically been bankrupt at that point in time by previous 

administration. It was bankrupt then. In 1971 we took over a 

mess and continued to build during the 1970s. And what, of 

course the opposition says, is you're always in during the good 

times. That's no accident, Mr. Speaker. We create the good 

times, we're part of developing the good times. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pringle: — Because the opposition has left us in such dire 

straits, it's going to be tough to do this time, Mr. Speaker, but 

we are confident that this budget, this three-year budget, will 

help develop that kind of society that we developed in the '44, 

post-'44 and post-'71 era. So we can do it again. 

 

Whether they like or not, they had 10 years. The Liberals have 

been in the wilderness for 20 years. Whether they like it or not, 

beginning in 1991 and the planning for renewal, journey for 

renewal — which if the members opposite haven't seen this, I'd 

be happy to table it and they could read the journey for 

renewal, the throne speech. And that's a guiding document. 

Securing Our Future — which is the budget speech we're 

talking about — is the other guiding document. They're the 

guiding documents for this administration over the next three 

years. 

 

Back in my riding of Saskatoon Eastview, Mr. Speaker, the . . . 

and I've touched bases with a lot of constituents in the last. 

Well I like to think I do that on a regular basis — but certainly 

in the last two or three weeks I've been in touch with the 

constituents back home. They recognize that we have in this 

budget and prior to the budget, with the Partnership for 

Renewal, embarked on a very generous, economic development 

thrust. And I'll come to some of the economic development 

projects and the jobs that've been created in a few minutes. 

 

They recognize, Mr. Speaker, back in my riding — I can 

guarantee you of this — that this government is taking good 

fiscal planning seriously. And they appreciate that we're 

looking at a three-year plan to do this, and upfront about that, 

that we've got the courage to set targets and make the decisions 

that have to be made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they recognize as well that as possible, we will 

get more money from resources. We have always done that. 

We've used resource money to fund programs and services. We 

will continue to priorize doing that as we can, Mr. Speaker. We 

will continue, as the minister said in her speech, to work 

towards and press the federal government to help us work 

towards a fair taxation system so loopholes can be closed. 

 

We're not happy about the fact that 2,000 high income 

Saskatchewan taxpayers paid no income tax last year. That's a 

federal matter that we're going to have to pursue and we will do 

that. We support 

people paying on the basis of the ability to pay, Mr. Speaker. 

That is a cornerstone and always has been a CCF-New 

Democratic policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people back home recognize that our health care 

plan, the wellness plan . . . because it's working effectively 

back home and we're proud of Cliff Wright and the board and 

the staff who have worked very hard to unfold the health care 

agenda where basically we have rationalized a number of the 

services. And, Mr. Speaker, despite the potential job losses last 

year, there have only been 12 people in the last year in 

Saskatoon who have lost their jobs due to health care reform. 

 

So the message to the members opposite is, if you join in the 

wellness development and work with your communities and 

the districts, you can help convert those hospitals to wellness 

centres and keep the jobs and enhance the services. That's what 

the wellness program is all about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pringle: — And, Mr. Speaker, I would argue that in many 

ways services in Saskatoon have been enhanced, health care 

services. People in Saskatoon Eastview recognize that there's a 

compassion side of this budget. It isn't everything that I would 

like to see. I'm not happy about increasing the deductibles on 

the drug plan. I'm not happy about a raise of 1 per cent in the 

PST (provincial sales tax). I'm not happy about the adding the 9 

per cent PST on adult clothing. And we will deal with that as 

we are able to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But they recognized that this year some $15 million goes 

specifically into a compassionate package for low income 

people. Next year it's 32, the year after it's 112 million. 

Because people know that when we can deal with the 

compassionate aspects, we will do that as quickly as we can. 

But unless we get our financial house in order, there won't be a 

health care system. And that isn't an exaggeration, Mr. Speaker, 

and my constituents know that. 

 

I spent the pleasurable, a very pleasurable day in Tisdale . . . a 

little bit of outreach, curling up at Tisdale last Saturday, 

Saturday evening, my wife and I. And, Mr. Speaker, the people 

in Tisdale are not unhappy with this government but they're 

pretty angry with the last government. It's the last government 

they're angry with, Mr. Speaker, and of course they basically 

view the Liberal leader as irrelevant in this forum. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last Friday, last Friday, I sat here and listened to 

the Leader of the Opposition talk about how mad everybody 

was across the province about this budget. So I had the good 

fortune to tune in to the CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation) phone-in show on the way home. And of course I 

listened to that part way home and then there was another 

phone-in show, CJWW in Saskatoon, CKCK in Regina, sort of 

a hook-up across the province where the Premier was on that 

program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a matter of public record, and I'll 



560 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1993 

just give you a bit of a sampling of what I heard in that 

program and I'm sure that the members opposite tuned in as 

well. But, for example, Dale Botting, Federation of 

Independent Business, well some things he was happy about, 

some things he wasn't. But what he said was that the 

government accepted five of their recommendations. Now 

that's not too bad. They did fairly well, five of their 

recommendations we implemented right now. So that's, that's 

listening, I think to the small-business sector. 

 

A gentleman by the name of Bob, I think he was from . . . I 

don't know where he was from, it wasn't me, Mr. Speaker — 

Mr. Speaker, he said that, quote: in the long run this is a 

positive budget. It's a road-map with clear measurements, 

quote, unquote. A gentleman by the name of Carl, again he was 

angry with the members opposite, said: this budget is a 

responsible approach to the desperate situation we're in, quote, 

unquote. 

 

Another caller said, quote: the opposition can't have it all ways, 

they want no cuts, no tax increases and they want to keep the 

services and pay off the debt, quote, unquote. A caller by the 

name of Cheryl said: privatization by the former government is 

how we got this debt racked up, it's their debt. It's got to be 

dealt with, quote, unquote. 

 

Mr. Hewitt Helmsing, from Regina, executive director of the 

Saskatchewan Health Care Association, on the CBC phone-in 

show talked of the opportunity for meaningful health care 

reform and indicated that people's health needs in 

Saskatchewan are being met and will be met. He goes on 

further, Mr. Speaker — and I'd like the members opposite to 

listen if they didn't hear him — he goes on further to say that 

the health districts will make their own decisions with regards 

to closures or conversions to health centres. And they will 

better utilize, by doing so they will better utilize the available 

money. Hewitt Helmsing — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Helmsing isn't 

doom and gloom. He sees the potential for enhanced health 

care, for local decision making, and for doing it within the 

fiscal constraints of the province in order to save the system. 

 

Another caller, Mr. Speaker, said: I think this government is 

wisely spending our money. And I'm not making that up. That 

was public airways, Mr. Speaker. Well I was driving along 

taking notes, and so I hope my wife isn't watching here, but it's 

a double highway and no traffic was coming this way. But 

those are direct quotes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(2100) 

 

Now also a couple of quotes from the CJWW-CKCK hook-up 

where the Premier was on the line. A woman by the name of 

Joyce commended the Premier and the Minister of Finance for 

a budget going in the right direction. Now she talked a bit 

about, as we could, making sure that we hit those who could 

afford to pay. And of course the Premier assured her that that 

was our objective. 

A gentleman by the name of David approved of the approach 

that the government is taking and talked about having fewer 

MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly). Again the 

Premier indicated that he's considering very seriously a public 

debate about how many fewer MLAs there should be. A 

Regina caller, Mr. Speaker, said that: finally we've got a 

government that's willing to make the tough decisions and get 

the financial house in order. And, Mr. Speaker, the last person I 

will quote because I could go on and on — there were several 

callers — last but not least was a caller from Swift Current who 

said . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Good old Swift Current. 

 

Mr. Pringle: — Good old Swift Current, my colleague says, 

who says: the government's doing a good job; she's very 

pleased with the provincial government. Those are her 

comments, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pringle: — Mr. Speaker, my point here is that the public 

is ready to face the realities facing this small province of 

Saskatchewan. This is not true for the opposition, the official 

opposition who got us in this mess. This is not true for the 

third-party Liberal member from Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and they should get aboard, because look who's 

gotten a aboard here. Crown Life, Crown Life was willing to 

help us get out of about 50 or $60 million of loan guarantees. 

Weyerhaeuser, $150 million and were willing to assist to get us 

out of about 45 to $50 million in loan guarantees. Now they 

can afford to, but the fact is they joined. They joined because 

they're here. They joined the province. Doctors had agreed 

upon a cut in fees over the next, this year and next year. OPEIU 

(Office and Professional Employees International Union), 

labour movement accepted their responsibility by agreeing to 

zero, zero and 2.5, I think. So, Mr. Speaker, the public of 

Saskatchewan is ready to deal with the realities facing the 

province. And the sooner we deal with them, the sooner they 

know that this government will have the financial flexibility to 

rebuild and renew the programs that are important to the people 

of the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pringle: — So the issue is too serious for political 

posturing. And, Mr. Speaker, I know the temptation to do this. 

 

Now I was at home last night. I had some meetings in 

Saskatoon yesterday. I was listening to the third-party Liberal 

leader in her speech. And I have to mention two or three things 

that she referred to, Mr. Speaker, because I think that it's time 

to call her on some of these issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Liberal leader talked about . . . well she 

mentioned some time ago that she would be giving the 

government an idea per week on how to generate economic 

activity in this province and create 



March 23, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 561 

jobs. Now I checked with the Minister of Economic 

Development tonight, and she has not submitted one idea yet. 

So, Mr. Speaker, talk is cheap, but we're looking for her 

constructive ideas, specifically about how to generate 

employment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, she talked about going back to the drawing board. 

The budget's not good enough; go back to the drawing board. 

But what are her ideas on going back to the drawing board? 

The only thing she said was, involve the people at the field 

level. Well we're doing that, Mr. Speaker. We're involving the 

people in the departments on how to create efficiencies and 

how to make services more effective. I mean she's a way 

behind in that. We're doing that already, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the thing that bothered me the most about 

the Liberal leader, the third-party leader's comments last night, 

is her joke that you might remember, Mr. Speaker, where she 

was talking about asking an accountant what is two and two, 

and the lawyer, and then she talked about asking the public 

servant. And the public servant apparently said, what do you 

want them to be? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I had two calls from public servants who 

found that very offensive, that the leader, albeit a third party, 

but the leader of the party who professes a new ethic, who talks 

to the SGEU (Saskatchewan Government Employees' Union) 

people on the steps about what a good supporter she is of 

people in the public service, would so disregard the public 

officials and the public servants that she would say that they 

will tell us anything you want to hear. 

 

Now she was a public servant herself. And I don't think she 

would feel that it would be very respectful if somebody in this 

Assembly would view that that's the kind of public servant she 

was. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I hope she apologizes to the public servants, 

that they just will tell her what she wants to hear. They are 

competent, independent public servants who are professionals 

and we're going to professionalize the public service again, Mr. 

Speaker, after those people politicized them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pringle: — Mr. Speaker, the Liberal leader also said last 

night that the government should begin at home to look for 

efficiencies and she mentioned that the cost of running the 

legislature is up $18,000 in the budget. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I presume that she didn't look at the budget 

as a whole because what she has missed is that $130,000 from 

Property Management Corporation was moved from there over 

to the legislature for security. The security budget was moved 

over to the legislature. 

 

There was an offsetting decrease in the Property Management 

budget, Mr. Speaker, so you can't pick and choose where you 

want to make a political point. 

That is the reason there's an increase on the books. But she has 

to look at the whole budget as a whole. 

 

Now I assume that — I'll give her the benefit here — I'll 

assume that she's trying not to make political points and that 

she just didn't look at Property Management to see that there 

was a corresponding decrease there. 

 

The other point I would raise is she talked about the legislature 

expenditures being up. Again, Mr. Speaker, if you look at 

what's in the budget on that, you will note that there's $110,000 

that's been added to the Ombudsman's office. That's the reason 

for the increase there. 

 

Now we're talking about . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes we 

increased the budget of the Ombudsman which provides a 

greater watchdog function, greater scrutiny to the public 

service. And, Mr. Speaker, what's wrong with that? We're 

proud of that. 

 

We want better scrutiny. That's what the Gass Commission 

report and the adoption of those recommendations and the 

strengthening of the accounting system is all about. If you're an 

accountable government you'll run an efficient government. 

That's what we're trying to accomplish. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would think that the member from 

Greystone, if she looks at why that legislature expenses are up, 

it's the — we'll help her out here — it's the Ombudsman's 

office and we don't apologize for that. 

 

The last thing I would say, Mr. Speaker, is when you come into 

a forum like this, and I detect a certain amount of intolerance 

by the Liberal leader as she looks with some scorn at people 

like me on the back benches and suggests that we're not playing 

a meaningful role; that all we do is sit here and raise our hands 

for votes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that anybody who comes in with the 

view that their ideas are the only ones that are correct and their 

analyses are the only correct analyses, and who basically 

dismisses the experience and the training and the education and 

the expertise and the judgements of colleagues no matter what 

side they're on, anybody who comes in with that attitude, Mr. 

Speaker, will not function very well here on behalf of the 

public. This place has to work together. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pringle: — Mr. Speaker, 95 per cent of the Bills that are 

passed in this Assembly, at least in the last five years that I've 

been here, have been done basically by people working 

together from all sides of the House. 

 

And so it's not that intolerance and that sense of if you're on the 

back benches of the government you're not contributing. I think 

my colleagues and myself find that very offensive. We're out 

there just as much as she is, talking to constituents . In fact I 

get several calls from her riding, partly because I used to 



562 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1993 

represent about 3,000 voters there. But I get a lot of calls from 

her riding, and I try and respond to them as best I can. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with regard to the doom and gloom that we heard 

last night from the Liberal leader and also from the member 

from Morse and Rosthern tonight, I'm aware that on March 19 

there was a forum in Moose Jaw on the economy. I heard this 

on the radio on Friday and I assume this is accurate. 

 

The Bank of Montreal is saying that they are optimistic, 

cautiously optimistic about the economy of the province of 

Saskatchewan. In fact their south-east Saskatchewan 

agricultural minister said agriculture support needs priority 

given to research and development and to value added 

processing. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if you look at the budget, it talks in some 

detail about research and development with new money. 

Several millions of dollars going into research and 

development in the agricultural sector and value added 

processing. Now would they suggest that that's in the wrong 

track? That's sustainable development, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Economic Council of Canada is optimistic 

about the province of Saskatchewan. And they're aware of our 

debt situation. The Conference Board of Canada is, the Royal 

Bank is. We don't apologize on this side of the House that 

Isabel Anderson doesn't like what we're doing. We're not going 

to apologize for that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that on behalf of the business 

people in Saskatoon Eastview-Haultain . . . and I would like to 

thank them tonight, as I have individually, but thank them 

tonight for participating in my fifth annual business survey 

which I do prior to every spring. I forwarded those 

recommendations from the business community to the Minister 

of Economic Development, the Minister of Finance, the 

Premier, in fact to all my colleagues. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, basically I would like to just make a few 

comments from that survey because I think that, as I found out 

last week in Saskatoon and on Monday in Saskatoon, the 

business community — and I can take Market Mall with some 

90 merchants — are not unhappy with this government. I can 

tell the member from Morse to go into Market Mall in 

Saskatoon where 300 people are employed. In fact there are 

more than that, about 400 people employed, including 170 new 

positions this spring, 170 new positions, Mr. Speaker, 170 new 

positions in Market Mall in the last four or five months. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pringle: — Well the member from Morse is shaking his 

head. I challenge him to go into Market Mall and meet with the 

people over breakfast like I did, Mr. Member, which I do on a 

regular basis. 

 

And basically this is what they're saying. On that survey of 

mine I had a rate of return of 19 per cent 

which Dale Botting tells me is very good. The average length 

of the current business in my survey was 12.5 years. We're 

talking about business people who have been around for a 

while, 7.5 employees average. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the questions I had was how do your staff 

numbers compare to one year ago. Well, Mr. Speaker, 10 per 

cent more businesses increased their staff than decreased their 

staff in the last year, but 45 per cent of the business people, 

their staff remained the same. But 35 per cent of them 

increased the number of staff they've hired in the last year. 

Well that doesn't sound to me like a doom-and-gloom situation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with regard to retail sales, in this survey in 

Eastview-Haultain the average retail sale in '92 compared to '91 

was up on the average of $30,000 per business or 6.6 per cent 

on the average business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, basically the obstacles relating to your business 

success, while a weak economy: federal GST — talk to your 

federal people; provincial debt, which is your legacy; taxes in 

general — that amounts to 75 per cent of their concern. Mr. 

Speaker, this government decreased their business taxes for the 

second year in a row have been 1 per cent. And they appreciate 

that. 

 

Not only that, Mr. Speaker . . . and I won't read into the record 

the other, the plans for creating jobs and strengthening our 

economy; other members have, and I could table this card for 

the member from Morse and he could look at it as well. But 

there are five or six points that are very key to business 

generation in the province related to the business corporate tax 

cut by 20 per cent, the manufacturing and processing tax credit 

for co-ops and small business, the 51 million research and 

development of high-tech, tourism and so on, and the 160 in 

the capital projects, not to mention 320 in terms of support for 

agriculture. 

 

And those are things, Mr. Speaker, that the business people in 

Market Mall, which I'm speaking about . . . where some 90 

merchants believe that we are responding to their concerns. 

 

(2115) 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I'll just turn to the last page, and this is a 

study that I'd be very happy to provide to the opposition. But 

when asked, what is the current health or viability of your 

business — and it's a question I ask every year, so I compare 

year to year — 80 per cent of the respondents in my riding say 

that their current business viability is either fair, good, or very 

good — 80 per cent — with 40 per cent being either good or 

very good. 

 

Then I asked them, what is your projection of the future 

viability of your business? And this is where the optimism and 

not the doom and gloom pervades in the real world, out there 

where business people are operating. In my constituency, their 

view of their future business viability, 50 per cent say it's good 

to very good. Mr. Speaker, in Eastview-Haultain, 50 per cent of 

the respondents, the business respondents, say 



March 23, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 563 

that their future business viability is either good or very good. 

That's incredible. Thirty-five per cent say fair. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is supporting small business and 

listening to small business. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pringle: — New Careers will develop 1,500 jobs, student 

summer — Partnership '93, 2,000, over and above the 

Partnership for Renewal. And, Mr. Speaker, I would just add 

— and I won't go over these, but in terms of economic 

development projects that I'm sure the Minister of Economic 

Development has tabled, but again responding specifically to 

the Liberal Leader last night who's saying that there are no jobs 

in this province, and also to the doom and gloom we heard 

tonight — I will send this over to the member from Morse. 

 

But there's a list of 18 projects here over the last year that have 

come on stream over the last year. And, Mr. Speaker . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . No, they're not all your projects, I 

can assure you of that. I'll send it over to you. 

 

But let me say to you and the Liberal leader, there are 17 

projects here. These represent 1,600 new jobs. They represent 

an investment of $270 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not doom and gloom. Small-business 

people are continuing to be creative and innovative and find 

niches for themselves and they're looking for government 

support to do that, and that's what we're trying to respond to. 

 

An Hon. Member: — How many loan guarantees there? 

 

Mr. Pringle: — Well in this one there are really no loan 

guarantees because we're not doing that any more. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pringle: — The days of putting up . . . the days of giving 

away our assets, putting up . . . taking all the risk for big 

megaprojects, guaranteeing their loans, are gone, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pringle: — As the Premier said, the priority with this 

government is shifting to Main Street, Saskatchewan. This 

budget reflects that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would just like to go back just for a moment to 

talk about health care reform in Saskatoon. And I say this very 

sincerely because I know the member from Morse is concerned 

in a very sincere way about health care reform and the concern 

about this Bill with the districts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a district in Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, I'd 

like to give the member a couple of 

examples of where positions have not been lost. We've been 

able to empty out hospital beds. People have had service in 

their home in an enhanced basis. 

 

Now he's nodding his head so he's not even willing to listen. 

But I'm going to read this . . . I'm going to say this anyway . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well this is true. This is true. 

 

In Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, there are about . . . historically 

there are about 500 people per year go into the hospital, spend 

30 days there each — that's 3,000 hospital days — and they lie 

there and get intravenous IV. 

 

What the health board did, Mr. Speaker, with the support of the 

hospital administration and the nursing staff, is that they 

converted some nursing positions, some outreach positions. No 

jobs were lost. 

 

Now what happens is that people get their intravenous IV at 

home, in their own home where they feel more comfortable. It's 

an enhanced service in their own home. And we've converted, 

changed, evolved, and shaped the roles of the health care 

professionals. That's what the potential is of health care reform. 

 

That's a small example. But another example is now, Mr. 

Speaker, if a woman goes into the hospital to have her baby, 

normally the length of stay has been five days. Now there is the 

opportunity to go home after two days, and many women are 

choosing to do that. But instead of going home to be by 

themselves, they've converted nursing positions to following 

those women home with their babies, to visit them every day to 

provide the kind of support again in their homes. 

 

Again they've got economies in health care beds, in hospital 

beds, expensive beds. They are providing a service in people's 

own homes, and, Mr. Speaker, they are saving positions, 

converting positions. And there are several other examples 

where they've gone to central purchasing and saved millions of 

dollars in central purchasing for the institutions there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, in the last year only 12 people 

. . . and I don't say that 12 people should have lost their job — 

but the health board has been able to save and phase in by 

adaptations and changes and innovations and new program 

initiatives all but 12 people out of a hundred-and-some who 

would have lost their jobs. 

 

So converting to a wellness centre where you've got an 

enhanced service doesn't mean you lose jobs. That's a scare 

tactic. We can't build the system and restructure the program, 

Mr. Speaker, with those kinds of scare tactics that aren't 

relevant anyway. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in closing I would like to acknowledge — as I 

think my colleagues have — that this is a tough budget the 

minister did. I don't feel good about 400 public servants losing 

their jobs. Those are my neighbours and your neighbours. 

Those are losses 



564 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1993 

of jobs. Nobody supports that. I don't feel good about that. Mr. 

Speaker, those are tough losses. 

 

But I don't want the members sitting there and saying they had 

nothing to do with this. Mr. Speaker, there's a relationship 

between a $15 billion debt, which is their legacy which is 

growing every day, because the public of Saskatchewan knows 

that the debt is set over here and is piling up at the tune of 

about $2 million a day on interest . . . What this government is 

trying to do is to deal with just the operating deficit, and their 

interest payment is over $800 million a year. We haven't even 

begun to deal with the debt yet. That is their legacy totally. 

Now the public knows that. 

 

But I don't feel good about those job losses, Mr. Speaker, and 

I'm hoping that a number of those people can be absorbed over 

time into meaningful employment and to some of the other 

initiatives that will be created. We need their help in giving 

those people some hope too. 

 

This budget is a three-year plan. What you see there is what 

you get. That isn't to say that we fully comprehend all the 

implications next year or the year after. Other levels of 

government will make their own decisions. 

 

We subscribe to the principle that the closer you are to your 

community, the better informed you'll be and the better 

involved you can be with your community to make the 

decisions that are in the best interests of you. The more 

responsive . . . you can tell your programs to be more effective, 

then you can provide more efficient services. 

 

This budget, Mr. Speaker, time will tell, it will be measured in 

due course, but we'll secure the future. We'll secure the 

economic and financial future of the province. It will allow us 

the financial freedom to rebuild the drug plan the way we 

would like to see it and the income security plan for low 

income people. 

 

And remember, Mr. Speaker, I think my colleague from 

Saskatoon, the Minister of Social Services, has already 

announced that there are SAP increases for low income 

families. 

 

There are FIP (Family Income Plan) increases in this budget. 

Increases for seniors. The compassionate package as best we 

can do. And people trust us on the issue of compassion, 

because that has been our record in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As best we can we will rebuild, as quickly as we can. As I say, 

from this year to year three we, by about seven or eight times, 

we increased the compassion package as we get better financial 

freedom. 

 

The Prime Minister . . . their Prime Minister acknowledges this 

as a tough budget, but it's the way to go. The Liberal Premier 

McKenna of New Brunswick says it's a responsible budget. Mr. 

Wells has a very similar budget in Newfoundland. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the critical . . . Well the people of 

Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You haven't been 

listening. I'm just telling you that you should have listened to 

the radio show the other day. You should have been up to 

Tisdale on Saturday. The people of Saskatchewan are not doom 

and gloom like you. They've got faith in each other and they've 

got faith in their province and they've got faith in their 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pringle: — I'll just say, Mr. Speaker, this budget has a . . . 

And that's what they're worried about.  What they're worried 

about, what they're worried about, Mr. Speaker, is that we're 

going to be so successful in generating jobs that they won't be 

able to stand it. And we're going to get their financial mess 

under control. That's what they're worried about. But that's 

what we're going to do. That's what the public wants us to do. 

That's what they elected us to do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We will have the financial freedom. We will create the 

employment. There are many initiatives here for small 

business. And I will proudly go back into my small-business 

community this weekend as I did last weekend, Mr. Speaker. 

There is a progressivity factor, not as great as we'd like to see, 

but there is a progressivity factor on the drug deductibles. And 

we will monitor and sort out, we will monitor and sort out the 

issues as they can. And the Minister of Health has guaranteed 

that people who need drugs will be able to get drugs. We 

guarantee that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is also in this budget . . . well I could go on 

and on, but the increases, there's a priority, a clear priority in 

mental health, increases to home care for seniors to live 

independently, there is money for child care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government has taken the leadership role to 

get its own house in order and I'm not going to go over all of 

the cuts that were made at the senior levels in the political 

system or here, but those have been highlighted by other 

people. But most importantly about this budget, Mr. Speaker, 

there is light at the end of the tunnel. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pringle: — Mr. Speaker, I will proudly support this 

budget, Mr. Speaker, and I've identified, I've identified the 

areas that cause me some concern and we're very open and 

honest about that. The Minister of Finance has done that as 

well. But within our ability this is a responsive budget. It's a 

responsible and a compassionate budget as best we can, Mr. 

Speaker, as best we can manage at this point in time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are on the road to recovery and I'm confident 

that we'll be judged in three years time with a new mandate, 

Mr. Speaker, and this will have been the turning point. Thank 

you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, it's with a great 



March 23, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 565 

deal of pride in our province and in our government that I rise 

today, or should I say tonight, to address the budget. The 

long-term plan which we have presented will continue the 

journey of renewing our great province. 

 

This is a plan, Mr. Speaker, developed from our government's 

commitment to the social values of cooperation, community, 

humanitarianism, equality, and social justice. It is a plan which 

will allow us to secure our future by regaining control of our 

financial affairs. It is a plan, Mr. Speaker, which will enable us 

to improve the economic and social conditions of all 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

But this plan, Mr. Speaker, was not developed easily. Our need 

to struggle with the horrible fiscal mess left by the previous 

government, combined with the unmet social needs, brought 

out the commitment to social democracy in everyone on the 

government side of the House. All caucus members spent 

countless hours consulting with their communities, listening to 

people's concerns and to their hopes and their dreams of the 

future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan understand the 

difficult choices which this government has made. My heartfelt 

congratulations go to the people of Saskatchewan and to the 

members of the government caucus for their combined efforts 

to renew Saskatchewan. Leadership, Mr. Speaker, is the ability 

to take the steps needed to address the problems at hand. 

Leadership requires the ability to perform an honest assessment 

of the problems, to assess values and to assess the resources 

available to address the problems. 

 

Effective leadership is the ability to create a vision for people, 

to give them a feeling that these problems can and will be 

overcome. And with this budget, Mr. Speaker, we are 

developing this feeling with the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

(2130) 

 

Let's briefly examine the leadership of the previous 

administration. Their assessment of the problem was that big 

business did not have enough freedom in the province. Their 

so-called response to the problem was to announce that we are 

open for business and to subsidize big business. So year after 

year they dumped millions, and I mean millions of dollars into 

megaprojects. They believed in trickle-down economics, Mr. 

Speaker. Did they ever stop once and ask themselves about 

their plan? Well apparently not. Instead they continued to 

dump even more millions into wasteful projects. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let's compare their leadership with the leadership 

of this government. During the last year we performed an 

honest and thorough assessment of the economic problems 

facing Saskatchewan people, and we examined the resources 

available to us to address these problems. 

 

Under the leadership of the Minister of Economic 

Development, hundreds of consultation meetings took place 

throughout the province and a strategy for the Saskatchewan 

economy was developed entitled, Partnership for Renewal. It is 

a fundamental recognition that everyone in the province has an 

investment in the economy. The agricultural sector, rural 

municipalities, cities, workers, unions, students, small and 

large business, and those unemployed or receiving social 

assistance. We are all, Mr. Speaker, all partners in the journey 

of renewal. This, Mr. Speaker, is a partnership. 

 

And leadership, Mr. Speaker, is the ability to recognize 

problems and have the courage to make the necessary changes. 

This sort of leadership characterizes the Minister of Health's 

wellness plan. She has recognized that continued investment in 

a sickness model would lead to the complete dismantling of our 

health care system. She has demonstrated, along with our 

government colleagues, the courage to move medicare to the 

second phase, to reorganize and revamp the entire delivery 

system. 

 

The new approach to health care is seen by this government as 

a challenge, problems which we will overcome to ensure that 

Saskatchewan residents have the best health care system in 

North America. 

 

I only wish to mention it briefly, Mr. Speaker, because our 

province is putting its nightmare behind it, but in addition to its 

record for nine years, the Tories punished the poor and 

disadvantaged people of this province. For nine years they rang 

up massive deficits through mismanagement and corporate 

give-aways while at the same time blaming social programs for 

the deficit. This was a shameful deceit. The Tories' budgets 

came from the values of social Darwinism, from a view of the 

world in which the powerful have a right to plenty and those 

who have little should not expect more. Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm 

proud to be a member of a government which rejects those 

beliefs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The people of Saskatchewan also 

reject the punitive actions of the previous government. Mr. 

Speaker, there are people in our society who have previously 

been forced to live on the outside. Who are these people? Well 

they are those looking for work, those living in poverty, the 

physically and emotionally disabled, often children, sometimes 

senior citizens, many times young mothers raising children 

alone, and the frustrated and lonely adolescent often facing 

prejudices. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this government is working with 

communities to reduce the hurt and the isolation of those 

people. Our government understands the conditions in which 

they live and our government is committed to changing those 

conditions. Since being appointed Minister of Social Services 

and minister responsible for Seniors, I have met with hundreds 

of individuals and organizations throughout our province. 



566 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1993 

I am continually touched by the true sense of caring possessed 

by so many Saskatchewan people. I am thinking of those 

people who give so much to their communities and they are 

rarely profiled in the media. And often, Mr. Speaker, most 

often they do not receive any kind of recognition. So, Mr. 

Speaker, the public is often not aware of their endeavours. 

They quietly contribute their time and energy to change the 

lives of others. And in this day of cynicism and criticism I wish 

to assure this House that the struggle to help one another 

continues in this province, Mr. Speaker. Yes, people do see 

themselves as their brother's and sister's keeper. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under the Tories the Department of Social 

Services was chronically underfunded. They not only punished 

the powerless people in our province, but they also criticized 

those who serve them. We inherited a department stretched 

beyond its capacity to provide supportive services and 

employees who were afraid to speak their minds on behalf of 

their clients and themselves. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, those days are over. I have met with almost 

every front-line social worker and support staff in the province 

of Saskatchewan and I have encouraged each and every one of 

them to speak freely on behalf of themselves and the people 

they serve. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, this invites criticism. I believe that a 

government and in government that we must encourage the 

expression of ideas. This is democracy. We will not muzzle 

employees as was done by the previous government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the vast majority of the 

people who work for the Department of Social Services have 

the best interests of the people they serve at heart. This House 

recently heard second reading of The Social Workers Act, an 

Act which acknowledges the unique education and skills of a 

social worker. 

 

This Act should also lay a foundation from which the 

professional association will advocate on behalf of the 

powerless people of our province. The people of Saskatchewan 

have always held a strong sense of compassion towards 

disadvantaged people. We were offended by the cruel policies 

of the 1980s. Our people in the province understand the 

principle of fairness and support of social policy initiatives. In 

fact, Mr. Speaker, even with fewer resources than in the 1980s, 

this government will do more to improve the condition of poor 

and disadvantaged people in the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to say that in 

this budget the Department of Social Services will receive an 

$18.5 million increase in the 1993-1994 budget year. Effective 

July 1, 1993, the minimum basic allowance for children in 

families 

receiving social assistance will increase from $155 to $160 a 

month. 

 

The rates of $195 for the first child of a single parent, which 

was established last year, will not change. In a time when we 

are faced with horrendous conditions in this province, we on 

this side of the House and all government members have made 

a concerted effort to make sure that the children of the most 

disadvantaged people in this province are protected. 

 

There will also, Mr. Speaker, be an increase of $5 per child per 

month for children of low income, working families who are 

receiving Family Income Plan support. I have to tell you, Mr. 

Speaker, that not once in the last several years has this plan 

been increased, but our government was committed to ensuring 

that children living in low income, working families would 

receive further support, and we're proud of that fact. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, most importantly, we 

have received additional monies in this year's budget to 

introduce a more broadly based children's safety net program 

for children of low income, working families. Our department 

is working very hard in consultation with the community and 

Ottawa to ensure that we have a new children's benefit that will 

broaden the number of children that receive income support in 

this family, and that is another commitment introduced in this 

budget and a commitment of our government. 

 

Over the last number of years, Mr. Speaker, many families 

have had to use food money to pay for their utilities. This 

government has targeted $720,000 to begin to pay actual utility 

costs. Once again, Mr. Speaker, we are hopeful that people in 

this province who receive income security will not have to take 

money from their food budget, which is the only flexibility 

they have in terms of their income support, to pay for utilities. 

We think this is one way, one small way to help in addressing 

child hunger. 

 

While these increases, Mr. Speaker, are modest for families 

receiving social services, when looking at the fiscal deficit they 

show our government's commitment to protect the most 

vulnerable people in society. And for that, Mr. Speaker, I am 

truly grateful and truly proud. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are also continuing to fund the 

community-based children's nutrition and development 

program. Grants which support urban and rural communities 

providing nutrition programs for hungry children, addressing 

the long-term causes of hunger, and enhancing the well-being 

of disadvantaged children will total $1 million in 1993-94. This 

is an increase in support of child hunger and to support those 

people in the community who are attempting to deal with child 

hunger of over 35 per cent since our election in October of 

1991 — another new initiative on our government's behalf, an 

initiative that we are also very proud of. 



March 23, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 567 

We are focusing our efforts on early intervention and 

prevention, Mr. Speaker. The teen parent program will receive 

$290,000 for program expansion, and the development of high 

school infant care centres for teen parents. With 33 new infant 

spaces in the 1992-93 budget, our funding for the teen parent 

infant day care program now totals over one-half million 

dollars. 

 

And education, Mr. Speaker, is absolutely key to ensuring that 

teen moms and their children avoid long-term dependency on 

our income security programs. A mother's education, Mr. 

Speaker, is one of the key factors in determining what will 

happen to her children. Enhanced programs such as this will 

assist teenagers to stay in school and strengthen their parenting 

skills. Once again, Mr. Speaker, another initiative that our 

government is extremely proud of. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we have also committed over 

$1 million in this budget to support in-home initiatives for 

family support services including children with disabilities. 

Further details on these programs will be announced as we 

want to go through a consultation with the community and 

various stakeholder representatives. 

 

We are also working extremely hard, along with the aboriginal 

community, towards aboriginal control of services to native 

children and their families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, difficult decisions had to be made with this 

budget. Tackling the fiscal crisis head on meant that not 

everyone would have had their needs met. The Seniors' 

Secretariat and the Senior Citizens' Provincial Council have 

been eliminated. In making these changes a guiding principle 

was to target our scarce resources to those most in need. 

Saskatchewan Income Plan, which is a plan in support of 

seniors, will continue at the higher rates introduced last 

October. Health coverage for low income seniors will be 

continued for optometric, chiropractic, and other health 

programs, and services such as the many changes under the 

Saskatchewan aids to independent living program. Some 

changes have been made to the prescription drug plan which 

will affect Saskatchewan Income Plan clients and seniors 

receiving the federal guaranteed income supplement. The 

deductible for married or single seniors receiving 

Saskatchewan Income Plan, or SIP benefits, will now be $100 

every six months and a 35 per cent co-payment after the 

deductible is reached will continue. 

 

For seniors receiving the federal guaranteed income 

supplement and living in special care homes, the deductible 

will be $100 every six months followed by the 35 per cent 

co-payment. The deductible for married or single seniors 

receiving the federal guaranteed income supplement will now 

be $200 every six months followed by the 35 per cent 

co-payment. In addition to these provisions, any seniors whose 

drug costs are high in relation to their 

income may qualify for the special support program through 

Saskatchewan Health. As the Minister responsible for Seniors, 

I will continue to work with seniors and our senior 

organizations to ensure that their views are represented in 

government. 

 

(2145) 

 

Mr. Speaker, our social policy initiatives need to be compared 

with recent announcements in Manitoba. This is how the Tories 

east of us are dealing with their deficit. They announced a $6 

million reduction in funding to day care centres, foster parents, 

and child welfare agencies. They announced that the foster 

parents' basic support per child would be reduced by 10 per 

cent. Day care spaces, parent subsidies, and operating grants 

were all reduced. There has also been a $1.2 million cut in 

funding to 11 friendship centres, and, Mr. Speaker, they 

apparently cut $3 million by cutting services to 56 advocacy 

groups in the province of Manitoba. So we can see, Mr. 

Speaker, that Tories in Saskatchewan created a massive deficit 

and punished poor people. Tories in Manitoba now address 

their deficit by also punishing poor people. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I say to the Tories opposite and to the 

Tories in Manitoba, shame on them. This is not the direction of 

this government. Our government has a deep sense of its 

historical roots. When faced with adversity in the 1900s, rural 

people in Saskatchewan developed cooperatives. Working 

people created unions, and small businesses adapted their 

products. Their objective was to gain control over their lives 

and serve the people of their province. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this is the objective of our budget. We are 

going to work with cooperatives, labour, and small business, 

along with working people and disadvantaged people to once 

again gain control over our financial affairs. Our long-term 

goal is to meet the long-term needs of all Saskatchewan 

residents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget is a journey of renewal and I 

contribute my wholehearted support to this budget. Thank you 

very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank my 

colleagues for that warm welcome, and congratulate the 

previous member, the Minister of Social Services, on her 

excellent presentation of some very good news that was 

contained in this budget, the budget delivered by the Minister 

of Finance some short days ago. Mr. Speaker, it's an honour . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, it is an honour to once again rise 

and speak on behalf of my constituents, the wonderful people 

in Regina Albert North, as well as I might venture to speak on 

behalf of other family and friends right across the province. I 

must say I'm delighted to be speaking about this year's budget, 

this budget that's titled Securing Our Future, and that's what 

it is all about, Mr. Speaker. It's about the future of 



568 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1993 

our province and the future of our youth. 

 

Indeed on budget day as you would know, this floor was filled 

with people and there was a chair . . . chairs all along here. 

There was a young gentleman sitting next to me, and after we 

had adjourned for the day I introduced myself to him, and was 

simply delighted with his interest in the budget and his 

acceptance of the message, his understanding of the situation 

that we are all faced, his desire to be part of the solution not 

part of the problem, his desire to live in Saskatchewan, to 

continue to make his province, our province, home. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in a spur of the moment — wonderful idea, I 

think — I signed my budget address booklet to him, and I put, 

"Best wishes for your future, the future that this budget is all 

about." 

 

It's about hope and it's about more than that. This budget is 

about creating jobs and strengthening our economy. This 

budget is about compassion, much of the compassion that was 

addressed so well in the previous member's speech. This 

budget is about controlling government spending. It's about a 

government that is serious about striking a balance between 

revenue and expenditure. It's about rationalizing the delivery of 

services in Saskatchewan. It's about doing things better, doing 

more with less. Not to be confused with the campaign slogan of 

the current MP (Member of Parliament) for Regina-Lumsden 

whose first campaign when he was running against a Liberal by 

the name of Jim Moore, and the MP said, get more with less. 

And that was his campaign slogan. And he did it and has 

served the constituency for the past 25-plus years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget is also — and this is perhaps key in 

the turning point — this budget is about turning the corner to 

balancing the provincial budget within four years. Balancing a 

budget that hasn't been balanced since the last budget that the 

former premier . . . and I'm talking about Allan Blakeney, not 

the member for Estevan, the former member for Regina 

Elphinstone — that was the last balanced budget presented in 

this Legislative Assembly. 

 

I am proud as a New Democrat to say I was in support of that 

government. They did some very wonderful things. That's the 

inheritance that we feel, on the government side of the House 

now, is we want to do what we can to follow in the footsteps of 

the great socialist, Democratic Socialist governments that came 

before us. And you know, Mr. Speaker, there's a little more 

about that later in my speech but I think I am convinced that we 

are living up to that. 

 

The frustration that we've all felt with our fiscal situation, Mr. 

Speaker, I think begins partly because we have said, you know, 

when we formed the government that the deficit for that year 

was $960 million. And in the first five months that we were in 

office, we reduced the deficit by $114 million. So the deficit 

for that year was some $846 million, but it was still a deficit. 

And then we reduced the deficit yet again in our first budget to 

the point where, in 

1992-93, we reduced the deficit from 960 million to $592 

million. And, Mr. Speaker, there are individuals who take that 

to believe that we paid down some $300 million of debt. And 

of course that is light-years from the truth. What we did last 

year was spent $592 million more than we had income. We 

were $592 million in arrears last year. 

 

The frustration stems from the government trying to get out the 

good news of where we're able to save money. A small 

example that comes to mind that was something of an election 

issue — and we did it right away — was we started mailing 

SaskPower and SaskEnergy billings in one envelope instead of 

two, and that saved something like a half a million dollars, 

$500,000 a year. 

 

Now that's again a long, long, long way from balancing the 

budget, but those are the sorts of measures that we have taken, 

trying to do more with less. And the feeling that because we're 

reducing the deficit we're somehow buying down the $15 

billion debt leads to a frustration. 

 

I've actually had some individuals express their frustration that 

we're somehow paying off the debt all at once much too 

quickly, when in fact even with this budget that reduces the 

annual deficit from $592 million to $296 million — cuts it in 

half — we're still this year spending $296 million, or projecting 

to spend that, more than we have revenue, more than we have 

income. 

 

So what we're saying is, look we're not buying down the debt at 

all, but we have to achieve an annual balance before we can 

even consider making that decision about whether to buy down 

debt or whether to spend money on increased programing or 

whatever. But we're still, it looks like at least three years from 

that with this projection, this plan. It's going to be 1996-97 

when we have a $20 million surplus. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — The interest, Mr. Speaker, part of why we had in 

the past year a $592 million deficit is the interest payments. 

The interest on the debt that was ran up by the former 

government, the government that was in power from 1982 to 

1991, the government that ran up $11.5 billion in brand-new 

debt. 

 

Brand-new debt — $11.5 billion — and that's the thing that we 

inherited. It was the hand we were dealt. We had no control 

over that, nor did the citizens of Saskatchewan have any direct 

control of it, because the members in the former government 

said in 1986 in the election campaign, look, we're for balancing 

the budget. We know that deficit spending is no good. We're 

for balancing the budget. And that's why they introduced . . . 

that year Gary Lane introduced a deficit budget that he said 

was going to be $300 million. And you know, by the time the 

smoke had cleared after the election, it wasn't $300 million. 

Whoops! It was $1.2 billion — 1.2 billion. It is unbelievable. 



March 23, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 569 

And members now sitting in opposition wonder why it is that 

the public doesn't trust them. They were fooled, the public were 

fooled in 1986. And I think the public follows an old Confucius 

saying. And the saying goes: fool me once, shame on you; fool 

me twice, shame on me. And you know, the public was not 

fooled. It is no secret why your numbers are so small over there 

and why you couldn't get elected dog catcher if we ever had 

elections for dog catchers. 

 

The history of the former government is atrocious. It has 

heaped abuse on all of the people of Saskatchewan, abuse that 

we all have to share, Mr. Speaker, abuse that this government 

is trying to deal with. This government that was dealt a cruel 

hand full of threes and fours, and not even enough of them to 

make a straight. A terrible hand left to us by the former 

government, Mr. Speaker. And we, once again, the New 

Democratic government, is going to set it straight. And set it 

straight we will. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — In the 1991 election campaign they said the 

deficit's going to be $260 million. To make a long story a bit 

shorter, that became not 260 but $960 million, a mere $700 

million difference; $700 million, Mr. Speaker. Had they been 

accurate our last year we would have been in a surplus 

situation, had they been telling the truth in the 1991 campaign 

when the Premier and the Deputy Premier wrote their minister 

of Finance and the former premier and said, is it true, is it 

really going to be 260? 

 

And because of that, Mr. Speaker, because of the response that 

came back saying yes, it's going to be 260 million this year, we 

made a decision that said, why would we go into a boxing ring 

or an election campaign with one arm tied behind our back. If 

they say it's 260, it's got to be 260. We're going to campaign on 

the same basis as they did. But because of that untruth, we have 

to deal with a much bigger mess than anyone was campaigning 

on in 1991. And as I said, Mr. Speaker, deal with the mess we 

will. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, seeing it near 10 o'clock I beg 

leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 

 


