


















































Hansard: May 21, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1895 

 May 21, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce 

to you and through you to the Legislative Assembly a friend, a 

constituent, and a former colleague of many of you: Bob Long.  

Bob used to be the MLA (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) from Cut Knife-Lloydminster and was also the 

minister of Highways, and he is visiting here today.  So I'd like 

all of you to welcome Bob to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 

delighted to introduce to you and through you to my colleagues 

in the Assembly today 14 students from Riceton, which is a 

wonderful small town in my constituency.  The students are 

accompanied by their teacher, Laurel Herman, and the teacher's 

aide, Bev Ulrich.  And I'm really looking forward to meeting 

with them later on this morning to answer some of their 

questions and have a photograph taken. 

 

So I ask all members here to join me in welcoming them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I would also like to 

extend a warm welcome to the students from Riceton.  They're 

from the school division that I formerly taught in Prairie View, 

and of course I used to live down the road from Riceton, at 

Gray.  So just a warm welcome, glad to see you here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Scott: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce to 

you and through you to members of the Assembly, two very 

important people in your gallery, my children Adam and Heidi.  

They don't have school today and they wanted to come and see 

how hard we work here today, and I'm sure that everyone will 

join me in welcoming them and be on their best behaviour.  

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Johnson: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to take this opportunity 

to introduce to you some adult students from Victoire who are 

attending the Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies.  

They're seated in your gallery. 

 

With them today is their teacher Eric Langley; two chaperons, 

Wayne Lachance and Gilles Chiasson; and the bus driver, 

Harry Bear.  And I would ask the members of the Assembly to 

welcome them here this morning. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to, along with the 

member from Turtleford, welcome the students and the teacher 

and introduce them in their own language, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Electoral Boundaries Legislation 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, this 

morning my question is to the Minister of Justice.  Mr. 

Minister, yesterday I sent the Premier a letter outlining a 

proposal on the electoral boundaries legislation which you 

brought into this legislature last week.  Under this proposal, 

Mr. Minister, there would be 56 provincial ridings created by 

dividing each federal riding into four provincial ridings. 

 

Mr. Minister, we feel that this proposal addresses all areas that 

your government has in mind when you introduced your 

legislation, and that would be cost, fairness, effectiveness, and 

political neutrality.  In fact we feel that it improves on the 

government's proposal in all of these areas. 

 

I'm not asking you, Minister, to pass judgement on this plan.  

What I'm going to ask you to do though this morning is to give 

the Electoral Boundaries Commission the opportunity to 

evaluate this proposal and any other proposal without undue 

influence from the government. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you remove the restrictions you have placed 

on the Boundaries Commission, namely the number of seats 

and the variance, and will you allow them to make that 

determination themselves after studying our proposal, your 

proposal, and any other proposal that may come forward? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the Leader of the 

Opposition for that question.  We had seen the news reports 

with respect to his press conference, and the Premier has, as he 

mentioned, received a letter which we are considering and 

which we will reply to. 

 

I think there are positive elements to the member's suggestion, 

one of which is that they apparently agree that we have to have 

a better equality between various constituencies in 

Saskatchewan.  And I think his proposal was based on that 

assumption, that that would be a desirable thing, and we're 

pleased about that. 

 

I think there are some problems with his proposal, and in a 

press interview I mentioned some of those.  But I was careful 

not to be too negative about it.  Just because there's problems 

doesn't mean that the whole thing is worthless. 



1896 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1993 

So I want to say to the member that we are in the process of 

considering his proposal.  The Premier will be responding to 

his letter in due course.  I can't say that I hold out a great deal 

of hope that we could accept the proposal as he put it forward.  

But as the member knows, we're prepared to consider any 

constructive suggestion with respect to any of our Bills, and 

we're treating this one in the same light. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To the same 

minister.  Mr. Minister, we were simply responding to your call 

for cooperation.  You've asked the opposition to cooperate in 

this particular endeavour of yours.  So I think, Mr. Minister, 

you understand that when too many restrictions are put on an 

Electoral Boundaries Commission, there's always charges 

arising by others that the government of the day, by bringing 

through legislation, using their majority, are using it to their 

own advantage. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I think that the independent commission 

that you've asked us to cooperate on could determine best for 

Saskatchewan people by giving them the power to determine 

the number of seats, the variance, and the way the boundaries 

should be drawn up. 

 

And I say again, let them examine our proposal, let them 

examine your proposal, and any other proposal that might come 

along.  Because I think, Mr. Minister, in all fairness, that is the 

only way that Saskatchewan electors and taxpayers are going to 

get what they truly want, and that is to have good, effective 

representation in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I want to remind the member that 

in my second-reading speech yesterday I referred specifically 

to this question of the suspicion that opposition members have 

that the government may try to draw the map to its own 

advantage.  And I was at pains yesterday to explain movements 

that were made as long ago as 1971 away from the 

gerrymandering kind of situation that we had experienced in 

this province in previous years.  And I think we've done that 

through an Electoral Boundaries Commission which is, I 

believe, the fairest model that we in this province, or indeed in 

this country, have yet come up with.  And I've invited the 

member to participate in that and I believe that he's going to.  

So we will depoliticize that whole process. 

 

We were reluctant to . . . well we in fact did not consider 

leaving to the commission the question of how many seats 

there should be.  That has always been a decision that this 

legislature has made in any redistribution.  The prime 

motivating factor in this redistribution is the fact that we have 

to reduce the size of this Assembly.  The people just demand it 

of us and we have to respond to that.  So rather than refer that 

question to a commission, how many seats there will be, we 

thought it more than appropriate in this financial situation to 

tell the commission how many 

seats there should be and let them then draw the lines. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, it is interesting that the member thinks it's 

a good idea to cooperate with respect to this type of legislation.  

We did not feel that from you when we were in opposition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

same minister.  Mr. Minister, the only problem with the way 

your approach is -- and you can give the most well-meaning 

second-reading speech you want in here, as you've done on a 

number of other Bills, to try and assuage the worries of 

Saskatchewan voters and taxpayers -- but I tell you, Mr. 

Minister, they don't always accept your second-reading 

speeches at face value. 

 

Because what it amounts to, it's like Henry Ford once said, Mr. 

Minister: you can have any colour you want as long as it's 

black, when he was talking about the way he built his cars. 

 

Well your legislation that you brought in basically gives that 

kind of instructions to the commission.  You know, you can 

have any colour you want as long as it's black and it's the NDP 

(New Democratic Party) way. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, you can draw your boundaries any way you 

want.  But if your system stands all the tests of fairness, of cost 

saving, of effective representation -- as you say it does -- then 

why are you afraid to let it be evaluated by an independent 

commission? 

 

The Premier has said . . . And all we're asking the Premier is, 

remove any restrictions from an independent commission and 

let them do their job for the best interests of the Saskatchewan 

people.  Mr. Minister, don't just paint the colour of the car 

black.  Let Saskatchewan voters and taxpayers have a choice of 

the colour that they want. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I want to point out to the Leader of 

the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, that we won't be drawing the 

boundaries.  That's what this independent commission is all 

about.  And I don't think the member is attacking that 

commission and its composition in any way at all. 

 

I want also to say to the member that we're not painting 

anything black.  We're trying to come up with something that 

works and something that responds to the expressed wish -- 

we've all heard it -- of the the Saskatchewan people that we 

bring down the size of this Assembly and reduce it. 

 

We have selected the number 58.  I've made it clear there's 

nothing magic about that number.  It just seemed to us to be an 

appropriate reduction because it reduces the size of this place 

by 12 per cent, which is significant. 



May 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1897 

I want also to say to the member that he should not just assume 

that we're totally negative about his suggestion.  It just seems to 

us that there's a lot of problems.  That map is based on data, on 

census data that dates back to 1986, and we know from the 

enumeration done in the last . . . in the referendum campaign, 

that there are significant differences in the sizes of the federal 

constituencies, that weren't present, there now. We've got fresh 

numbers in 1991, so it just seems to us more logical that we 

draw this map based upon the most recent data and not the 

second-last census data. 

 

But having said that, I want to point out to the Leader of the 

Opposition that we are giving serious consideration to his 

letter, and we will be fully responding to it as soon as we can. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A question to the 

same minister.  Mr. Minister, if the commission is truly 

independent . . . As you've said yourself, there was no magic 

when you selected 58.  You just reached up and plucked it out 

of the air one day.  We have come forward with a proposal 

which is based on a . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Fifty-six is 

because of the number of federal ridings.  There was no magic 

to it.  I guess we could have had five members per federal 

riding, but the wish of Saskatchewan taxpayers to cut back on 

this Assembly, as you've said, meant that you should go with a 

number less than what we have.  It seemed logical then at 56.  

The Liberal leader may come in with a proposal that is at 57 or 

55 -- I don't know -- based on another premise that she feels is 

equitable. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, there should be no fear in the hearts of this 

New Democratic Party government to allow a commission of 

independent men and women from the province of 

Saskatchewan to pass judgement on those various proposals, to 

see which has the proper merit as far as cost cutting, fairness, 

and effectively delivering equal representation on behalf of 

citizens of the third largest province in Confederation as far as 

land area.  I would think that is the type of chore we would 

want to charge the commission with, Mr. Minister.  Your 

legislation prohibits that. 

 

Mr. Minister, why do you have fear in allowing that to happen?  

Mr. Minister, please respond. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, fear is not one of the 

emotions that affect our judgement in this situation.  Fear has 

nothing to do with it. 

 

We have problems though tying our wagon to the star of the 

federal electoral boundaries rules.  We are trying to put forward 

a Bill here that will continue year after year, so it won't be 

necessary to . . . or census after census so it won't be necessary 

to come back to this House with a fresh piece of legislation 

every time it comes time to redistribute the constituency 

boundaries.  And we're reluctant to tie that idea to the 

federal legislation which permits a plus or minus 25 per cent in 

the Act.  And that number just doesn't work for us.  We're not 

prepared to accept plus or minus 25 per cent because it 

damages so badly the principle of one person, one vote, which 

is an ideal to which we all want to move.  It's a sound 

democratic principle. 

 

Now in the last federal distribution they actively achieved less 

than plus or minus 5, which is what we got on the Bill.  And 

that's good.  But of course the next time they redistribute they 

may not do that.  They are allowed to vary by as much as 25.  

Now maybe that works in a federal electoral situation where 

you have the vast kind of territories that they have to draw seats 

in, but it doesn't work in Saskatchewan, demonstrably so.  We 

know that from the last distribution.  It does not work.  So 

we're reluctant to tie our legislation to that. 

 

Now the member is . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  Next question.  Next 

question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Economic Policy 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, yesterday we saw the 

Saskatchewan business coalition become so frustrated that they 

started running their own advertising campaigns.  And today 

we see the Saskatchewan Construction Association is doing the 

same thing. 

 

Mr. Premier, these groups would rather be meeting and 

working with the government than working against it.  These 

are groups that would rather be spending their money on job 

creation and economic activity rather than on advertising to get 

their messages through to the government. 

 

The problem is, Mr. Premier, that the government isn't 

listening.  This is the only step left for these people to try and 

get their message through to you.  Mr. Premier, why don't you 

meet with and start working with the business community 

instead of against them? 

 

And I know that the Premier or one of his ministers will stand 

up and say that you're meeting with these people all the time.  

But will you really meet with them and listen? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well I want to tell the hon. member 

opposite that we really have been meeting with them and that 

we will really meet with them in the future. 

 

I indicated to you yesterday, to the Leader of the Conservative 

Party, that we had met with the new president of the chamber 

on Tuesday night for a couple of hours to deal with legislation 

and potential amendments.  And I know my colleague, the 

Minister of Labour, has met with them often.  And one 

shouldn't 



1898 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1993 

be surprised that the business community will try to lobby the 

government to get Acts and legislation that better meet the 

needs of the business community, much as labour will lobby 

and try to get amendments or settlements of contracts that will 

be in their best interest.  None of this should surprise anyone, 

that this is the process that we are now going through. 

 

But as far as meeting with the business community of 

Saskatchewan, the Premier has on many occasions . . . I know 

he's meeting with business people this weekend in Saskatoon.  

We have meetings planned in the weeks ahead with chambers 

of commerce around the province.  And I want to tell the 

member that we really will be meeting with business people, as 

we have been in the past. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it's good to know 

that the Premier is making his presence available to business.  

The only problem is, he's not listening while he's present. 

 

Mr. Premier, your minister stood in the House and said that the 

union-only preference policy in contracting was not going to 

cost the taxpayers any extra money.  But the contractors don't 

believe this, Mr. Minister.  The people who work in the 

industry have seen firsthand how your government has tried to 

secretly change its policies. 

 

And they can tell you how much money this change is going to 

cost.  According to the Saskatchewan Construction Association 

your new tendering policy is going to cost as much as 239 

million extra dollars this year alone -- 239 million.  At a time 

when you are asking every person in the province to sacrifice, 

at a time when we're struggling to create jobs and get the 

economy going, how do you justify this totally unnecessary 

expenditure of an extra $239 million? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear 

to the hon. member opposite that as the investment dealers of 

the country have indicated, the reason for the slower than 

normal growth in Saskatchewan has little to do with whether 

there are union contracts as you had in the past or non-union 

contracts as you had in the past. The fact of the lower growth in 

the province is due to the wind-down of some very, very 

unsatisfactory investments that you people made in the past few 

years leading up to the election.  And they say very clearly that 

it's due in large part to the megaproject sector which is 

wrapping up. 

 

Now for you to insist that we go out and borrow another billion 

dollars to build another Rafferty or to build another Co-op 

upgrader doesn't seem to be in the best interest of contractors, 

taxpayers, or the people of the province of Saskatchewan.  The 

simple fact is that the rating agencies tell us over and over 

again that there is a real damper put on economic development 

in this province because of the problem we have of digging out 

from under the $15 billion in 

debt that was left by you people. 

 

But on the positive side, in the first quarter of this year, in the 

oil sector with no subsidy from taxpayers, we have seen 184 

per cent growth in the oil and gas sector, with no subsidies, no 

subsidies.  Housing construction in the province . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Next question. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you talk about the 

investment dealers and their comments.  They commented in 

1990 that the projects being brought forward by the previous 

administration were good and worthwhile projects.  And in fact 

when you go to New York now, you use those very 

investments as an example of how . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  Order.  Please give the 

member from Souris-Cannington a chance to ask his question. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  When you go 

to New York you use these very investments as an example of 

diversification and the benefits to Saskatchewan.  When you 

come home you use a totally different story. 

 

Mr. Minister, your policies are going to cost, according to 

business in this province, an extra $239 million a year, and this 

is from the government that promised to be open and 

accountable.  Mr. Minister, this $239 would operate 52 

hospitals for five and a half years; $239 million would pay for a 

thousand nurses for five and a half years; it would fund the 

drug plan for 24 years; it would provide children's dental care 

for 24 years . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member has to ask his 

question.  I wish the member would put his question directly. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Why is it more 

important, Mr. Minister, to spend $239 million on your 

anti-business agenda rather than on these other items? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

hon. member that he may have misspoke himself but the $239 

he mentioned is probably closer to the fact than any other 

number that he has mentioned. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the hon. member should be 

aware of the growth in the province in the past 12 months in a 

number of areas that is occurring without any support or 

assistance from the taxpayers of the province.  And I want to 

list them out because they obviously don't know.  Housing 

starts . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- It's not because of you either. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- No, I'm telling you, it's not as a 

result of government.  That's right, it's not as a result of 

government. 



May 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1899 

We're not taking hundreds of millions of taxpayers' dollars and 

plugging it into Raffertys and Co-op upgraders.  These are 

happening without any incentives from the government. 

 

Now you may not know about any economic development 

without government support, but I want to tell you about some.  

Housing starts last year, up by 65 per cent; this year, up by 80 

per cent.  In the oil and gas sector in the first quarter of 1993, 

up by 184 per cent; that's significant.  Our non-traditional 

exports last year, up by 15 per cent; that it is important.  And in 

every one of these areas, the business people are saying: 

Saskatchewan, people, is a good place to invest now that we 

have a government that is dealing with the $15 billion deficit 

that you people brought in. 

 

Now you may argue for more megaprojects.  You may argue 

for more of these deep holes dug in the ground that people look 

at and marvel at.  We're seeing if we can turn them into tourist 

attractions, but we just haven't quite got to that point.  We're 

looking at places where they . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The minister 

talks about the oil industry.  The reason the oil industry is 

moving in this province is because you haven't changed the 

policy that was put in place under the Tory administration. 

 

Mr. Minister, I'd like to read a quote to you from the 

Leader-Post: 

 

 "If you put the emphasis on tax increases, you are going to 

discourage investment, slow growth, and it will be 

counter-productive.  You will not achieve the kinds of 

deficit-reduction figures you want . . ." 

 

This is what a Mr. Russell said. 

 

Mr. Minister, at a time when you're asking everybody to tighten 

your belt -- their belts -- why don't you show some leadership 

and save Saskatchewan taxpayers the $239 million by simply 

giving contracts to the lowest qualified bidder as the 

construction association is asking? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear 

to members opposite that when they were in government, they 

did projects using union contracts.  My understanding is that 

Rafferty was a union contract project.  And if you go to that 

project and look at it today, you will see a project that was 

designed by your government, whether union or non-union, 

that turned out to be a bad deal.  Hundreds of millions of 

dollars of wasted taxpayers' money which has nothing to do 

with whether it was union or non-union. 

 

You'll see a boat ramp up on the side of a hill.  If you go to 

Rafferty, you'll see a boat ramp that was built by 

your government that cost a great deal of money, up on the side 

of a hill.  There isn't water within 10 miles of the boat ramp. 

 

Now this has nothing to do with union or non-union, nothing to 

do with union or non-union.  Are you blaming the unions for 

the fact that Rafferty was built?  Come, my friend, that simply 

isn't accurate.  That was bad decisions by your government. 

Bad decision . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and to the minister responsible 

for Economic Development.  I want to ask you a question about 

your vast volume of improved business and the quality of life. 

 

Go to Swift Current and speak to the chamber of commerce in 

Swift Current and you ask them -- and they gave you a roasting 

too, Mr. Minister -- you go ask them whether they are accurate 

in their . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Will the member please direct 

his question through the Chair rather than any particular 

member in the House. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, the people 

there were not very happy with you or the member from Swift 

Current for the kinds of economic development that they have 

there. 

 

Would you provide us an answer to the reason why they're 

dealing so greatly with their retail sales in the business 

community in Medicine Hat versus the people in Swift Current.  

Would you provide us the reason why they're doing that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to address the 

hon. member and his issue on Swift Current by saying to him 

that one of the big issues in Swift Current is a project called 

Impact Packaging started by your government, which is now 

closed, which cost the taxpayers of this province $17 million 

and now sits on the edge of town, a huge project, empty and no 

workers in it -- $17 million put there by you people with all the 

equipment and no one working there. 

 

You made that decision.  You were on the treasury benches at 

that time.  The leader was I believe minister of SEDCO 

(Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation) at the 

time the project was brought in.  And you have the audacity to 

sit there and ask why we have to raise the provincial sales tax 

by a per cent this year.  It's to pay for the boondoggles that sit 

in Swift Current empty as a result of your misguided economic 

policy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, it's time you 

got on your horse and rode over to find out and see what was 

going on in the industry so that you could get business into that 

community.  That's what 



1900 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1993 

your responsibility is, and providing assistance to the 

community on the basis that the project was good.  It was an 

opportunity for economic development in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  And that, Mr. Minister, is a fact. 

 

I want to say to you also, Mr. Minister, that why are the people 

going to Medicine Hat -- that's the question -- why are they 

going to Medicine Hat to purchase goods?  And the reason as 

indicated in the Leader-Post, Mr. Minister, the reason is 

indicated in the Leader-Post.  It says that if you raise the taxes 

too high, the people in the province will go elsewhere.  On the 

west side of the province they do that, Mr. Minister.  Why are 

240 cars sitting in the parking lots in Medicine Hat versus 

Swift Current in dealing with the retail sales?  Why is that, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I want to say this to the hon. 

member, Mr. Speaker.  Clearly there are problems with the 

sales tax on the west side of the province.  Nobody doubts that.  

Nobody wonders about it.  It was a problem when you were in 

government; it's a problem now. 

 

But I want to tell you why the provincial sales tax had to be 

increased.  All the bond rating agencies know, all of the people 

in eastern Canada know, and I believe most of the people in 

Saskatchewan know the reason the tax regime had to be 

changed was to deal with the $15 billion debt that is consuming 

a larger and larger portion of the taxpayers' money of this 

province. 

 

One of the projects is the very project in Swift Current, the area 

you talk about, Impact Packaging.  How was the decision made 

to put that amount of taxpayers' money into a project that has 

never delivered product anywhere.  It sits empty.  We're trying 

to sell it.  You made that decision.  That's why the taxes of this 

province are as high as they are -- because of the $15 billion 

debt.  If the debt was 5 billion, we wouldn't have had to 

increases taxes; in fact we could have lowered them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 88 -- An Act to amend The Provincial Court Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

amend The Provincial Court Act be now introduced and read 

the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: -- Before orders of the day, I'd like to table 

pursuant to section 222(1) of The Election Act a report 

respecting annual fiscal returns of registered political parties 

for the fiscal year 1992. 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, for question 112 I 

believe I have a response that I'd like to table. 

 

The Speaker: -- Response tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 77 -- An Act respecting the Implementation of 

Certain Treaty Land Entitlement Settlement Agreements 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my 

pleasure, my distinct pleasure today to rise to move second 

reading of The Treaty Land Entitlement Implementation Act. 

 

On September 22, 1992, an historic Indian land agreement was 

signed by Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, Saskatchewan 

entitlement bands, and our own Premier. 

 

I was present with the Premier on September 22, 1992, as the 

minister responsible, Mr. Speaker.  I'll never forget the day.  It 

was a beautiful fall day, typical of a fall day in Saskatchewan -- 

nice, hot, high sun, wind blowing.  And we were gathered in 

the outdoor amphitheatre at Wanuskewin which is the site of 

Indian encampments and constant use for thousands of years.  

The site, Mr. Speaker, lent a sense of history, almost timeless 

history to our purpose there that day.  And the scene, Mr. 

Speaker, was one of powerful emotion to the accompaniment 

of traditional Indian singing. 

 

The Prime Minister and the Premier signed the agreement.  

And then in a ceremony filled with emotions that were 

overpowering, the chiefs of the entitlement bands accompanied 

by members of their council came forward, sat at the table, and 

signed the agreement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no one present will ever forget the drama and the 

excitement of those moments.  No one present will forget the 

dignity and the bearing of the proud leaders, the chiefs of the 

first nations, first nations who once owned and occupied all of 

the land that we now call Saskatchewan, as they came forward 

to sign the document that will finally deliver the land promised 

to them at the time of the treaties more than a century ago.  I 

and all other people at that ceremony were indeed deeply 

moved. 

 

The purpose of the legislation before the Assembly today is to 

give full effect on behalf of the province of Saskatchewan to 

certain provisions contained in the Treaty Land Entitlement 

Framework Agreement.  A companion legislation has been 

approved by the Parliament of Canada. 



May 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1901 

Our government is very proud to have played a part in 

concluding this historic agreement.  We were and are strongly 

committed to working with first nations people to resolve the 

debts of the past and to forge a better future for all Indian 

people. 

 

I believe that Indian people must be full partners in decisions 

that affect their lives and communities.  The agreements signed 

last September are an expression of that partnership.  We have 

honoured both Indian treaty land entitlements as well as the 

province's obligations under the Natural Resources Transfer 

Agreement of 1930.  This is a significant beginning, Mr. 

Speaker -- an historic achievement. 

 

Before outlining the specific provisions of the Bill, I'd like to 

briefly review the events which led this province to the signing 

of the treaty land entitlement agreements and the need for the 

legislation that is before the Assembly today. 

 

Between 1874 and 1906 Canada entered into certain treaties 

with bands of Indians residing on land which is, I say, is now 

the province of Saskatchewan.  These treaties, Mr. Speaker, 

required Canada to provide to each family of five, one square 

mile of land or 128 acres per person. 

 

In 1930 Canada transferred to Saskatchewan all Crown lands, 

including minerals and other natural resources within the 

province.  This transfer, however, was not without its 

conditions.  Under the terms of that agreement, the province 

was and is obliged to set aside out of the unoccupied Crown 

lands transferred to it such further lands as the federal 

government may require to fulfil its treaty obligations with first 

nations. 

 

For many years, Mr. Speaker, it has been obvious to the 

Governments of Canada and of Saskatchewan that there were 

not sufficient unoccupied Crown lands and certainly not 

adequate unoccupied Crown lands to fulfil the outstanding 

treaty land entitlements.  For many years this fact frustrated 

attempts by governments to meet their moral and legal 

obligation to first nations. 

 

In 1990 the long awaited breakthrough in this impasse came 

about based on a report issued by the Office of the Treaty 

Commissioner.  And I want here today to commend the Treaty 

Commissioner, Cliff Wright, for the splendid work that he did 

in finally breaking this very difficult impasse.  At the heart of 

the commissioner's report is the concept that governments 

could provide dollars rather than specific land in order to meet 

their obligations. 

 

This concept, dollars instead of land, formed the foundation of 

the Treaty Land Entitlement Framework Agreement.  The 

agreement marks the beginning of a new chapter in the 

relationship between the Government of Saskatchewan and 

Saskatchewan's first nations.  Indian first nations which are a 

party to these agreements have never received the land 

promised in the treaties.  These promises are now being met. 

More importantly, first nations are now receiving sufficient 

monies and lands to allow for the creation of a strong economic 

base -- a base from which to build and to improve their society 

and their way of life.  Saskatchewan and its people are also 

presented with the unique opportunity for economic 

development and diversification in partnership with its first 

nations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while the negotiations culminating in that 

framework agreement were between the entitlement bands and 

the Governments of Saskatchewan and Canada, the concerns 

and needs of the municipal governments and the school 

divisions were not ignored.  Over the next 12 years 

approximately $450 million will be provided to Saskatchewan 

bands.  This funding will permit the purchase of approximately 

1.7 million acres of land which will be eligible to receive 

reserve status. 

 

Throughout the process the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities and the Saskatchewan School Trustees 

Association were consulted.  In addition to providing for the 

lands and the monies, as I mentioned, which will be received 

by first nations, provision has also been made in the agreement 

for the establishment of two tax-loss compensation funds.  One 

for rural municipalities and the second for the rural school 

divisions.  Each of these funds contains $25 million.  

Provisions in the Bill now before the Assembly provide for the 

establishment and administration of tax-loss compensation 

funds for school divisions through amendments proposed to 

The Education Act. 

 

Provision is also made to authorize urban municipalities to 

enter into binding agreements with Indian bands with respect to 

tax-loss compensation, by-law compatibility, and dispute 

resolution.  Under the Framework Agreement, these 

agreements are necessary as a prerequisite to the establishment 

of Indian reserves in urban municipalities. 

 

Further amendments to The Rural Municipality Act are 

proposed to confirm the obligations in municipalities receiving 

tax-loss compensation to maintain roads within, adjacent to, or 

providing access to new reserves at the ordinary standards that 

apply. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the education of our youth is the key to our future.  

We all agree on that, and nowhere is this more important than 

among the children of our first nations.  As the size of reserves 

grow through land acquisition, existing facilities owned and 

operated by school divisions may more logically be transferred 

to first nations in some cases.  Amendments to The Education 

Act will authorize school divisions to sell facilities to bands 

and will provide for an impartial arbitrator to set the price in 

the northern school divisions. 

 

My government, Mr. Speaker, places a high value on the 

establishment of formal and structured relations between 

municipalities and first nations.  In the weeks and months 

ahead, we will be making every effort to facilitate this 

important relationship. 



1902 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1993 

I wish to acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, the significant 

contributions which were made by Mr. Bernard Kirwan, the 

president of the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities), and Mr. Daryl Chambers, the executive 

director of SARM.  I also should mention very, very 

emphatically the role played by Chief Roland Crowe and First 

Vice-Chief Dan Bellegarde of the Federation of Saskatchewan 

Indian Nations.  President Ken Krawetz and executive director 

Craig Melvin from the Saskatchewan School Trustees 

Association have made a significant contribution to this 

process.  Without question, the Treaty Land Entitlement 

Agreement is a product of their leadership and their vision and 

their dedicated effort to resolve the problems that were posed 

by this very important and historic step. 

 

I might mention, Mr. Speaker, that yesterday in Saskatoon 

there was a very large conference convened by the Federation 

of Saskatchewan Indians and attended by the people I have just 

mentioned as well as many other municipal, education, and 

community and industry leaders in Saskatchewan. 

 

It was a full house in a large conference room in the 

Bessborough hotel in Saskatoon, and the subject was the Treaty 

Land Entitlement Agreement and how things would work 

under the agreement and how their relationship would develop 

and how they would manage it.  It is the first of many such 

meetings. 

 

And the spirit in the room, I am happy to report, was positive, 

constructive, and very, very cooperative.  There were a lot of 

good vibrations among the people there and I think that it 

launches a process which will be important in the 

implementation of the Treaty Land Entitlement Agreement. 

 

(1045) 

 

Mr. Speaker, most of the land purchased by bands will be 

transferred to Canada and provided with reserve status.  And 

that process is of course known to us and it will be the situation 

here. 

 

In keeping with tradition and the policies of the Canadian 

government, amendments to The Crown Minerals Act and The 

Water Corporation Act are proposed in this Bill to allow for the 

transfer of minerals and beds and shores of water bodies as set 

out in the agreement. 

 

More specifically, Mr. Speaker, the province will be able to 

meet, where required, the expectation that minerals be 

transferred along with the reserve lands.  The interests of 

current mineral disposition holders will of course be protected.  

These individuals will be able to negotiate separate agreements 

with first nations or continue under provincial programs for the 

duration of their lease. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a standalone provision is also contained in this 

legislation which ensures that no unintentional reservations are 

withheld from reserve lands in favour of the province.  This 

provision was insisted upon by 

Canada during negotiations as a fail-safe measure to ensure that 

all provincial interests in lands to be designated as reserves are 

disposed of. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Treaty Land Entitlement Agreement is a 

landmark for which all Canadians can be proud, Indians and 

non-Indians alike.  In this regard, Mr. Speaker, I want to 

acknowledge again, as I have in the past, the work and the 

encouragement from the members opposite, and particularly 

the Leader of the Opposition in his cabinet portfolio in the past 

government. 

 

The commitments and decisions made by the previous 

government to proceed with these negotiations and to oversee 

the early stages of discussion and the negotiations for a 

cost-share agreement, set the province on a course which 

resulted in this historic achievement. 

 

While I have to say, as I have also said in the past, that we were 

not happy with all aspects of the cost-sharing agreement that 

was negotiated, we made the decision to go with it and we will 

honour it.  In this instance both sides of the House have been 

united in their commitment to do the right thing in this 

situation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure today to ask for the 

continued support of all members of the House in the passage 

of this legislation.  And I just might add, Mr. Speaker, while 

I'm congratulating ourselves and the members opposite, we can 

be justifiably proud of these accomplishments, but much credit 

must go to Indian elders and Indian leaders. 

 

Over the many years, these individuals have made significant 

sacrifices and have shown the wisdom that was required by all 

persons who had an interest in those unresolved questions.  

With their support we have found a way to fulfil their vision 

and to pay this long-outstanding debt, and to do so in an 

honourable manner. 

 

This has not been an easy process.  But the results are most 

worthwhile and heartening.  In these times of financial 

problems, we have I believe met our commitments to Indian 

people and met our legal obligations under the Natural 

Resources Transfer Agreement, and we have done so in a 

financially responsible manner. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I want to quote the words of our 

Premier at the signing of the framework agreement in 

September at the Wanuskewin park.  And I quote: 

 

 We are reaffirming principles of natural justice.  We are 

celebrating our links to the land.  We are acknowledging a 

shared destiny.  May we also live in mutual respect and 

genuine affection. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Treaty Land 

Entitlement Implementation Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to just 



May 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1903 

respond briefly and then I'll adjourn debate for others to get 

into the discussion. 

 

I want to make some observations that I believe will compare 

and correspond to what the Minister of Justice was saying to us 

earlier. 

 

I believe that this agreement that has been reached in dealing 

with our entitlements to the native people in the province of 

Saskatchewan is significant.  And the reason it is significant -- 

it has gained support from all of the levels of government, it 

has gained support from the Indian community, and also from 

the non-Indian community. 

 

And I believe that that's been done in two areas, Mr. Speaker, 

that I think are important.  First is the area of compromise and 

consensus, a willingness to participate in compromise.  And 

when you reach an agreement of this magnitude with this 

volume of people and the amount of players, there has been 

significant amount of flexibility on individuals' parts in order to 

have a consensus and a compromise reached. 

 

And I want to say that we on this side of the House believe that 

this has been done.  We believe that the volume of work 

required to make this happen has not just taken one decade, it's 

taken two decades to accomplish.  And I believe that that is 

significant in the volume of discussion that has taken place. 

 

And what it has done, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, it has 

moved the typical Canadian solution-making process into the 

focus of the people of the province of Saskatchewan.  It has 

done that in a very clear and precise kind of a way.  And it has 

done that by doing the two things that Canadian people are 

willing to do, and that is compromise, and from that 

compromise give a little bit, and in that light have a great deal 

of consensus reached. 

 

And that has been done, as I said earlier, by all the levels of 

government.  And I want to compliment the school trustees 

association. I want to compliment the SARM.  I know that they 

have worked long and hard to make their membership aware of 

the details of the process, the details of the agreement, and they 

have worked hard to raise that positive consensus that they 

have made in endorsing the agreement that has been reached. 

 

I want to point out to the Assembly that the people who 

negotiated on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan -- 

going back to the former administration and even going back 

into the '70s when the government opposite was in power -- 

these people need to be commended for their foundation, their 

groundwork, and the things and the decisions that they made. 

 

I want to pay recognition to one of the people that worked on 

our behalf in relation to this, and that was Mr. Wakabayashi.  

And I believe that his insight into the kinds of things that we 

have in the agreement are an undercurrent of the kinds of things 

that he as an 

individual felt and needed to be there.  And I think that those 

are important for us to consider. 

 

I want to compliment Mr. Wright on the way that he handled 

himself.  And I believe that he not only gained credibility as the 

former mayor of Saskatoon, but also as an individual who 

respected the dignity of the individual.  And I believe that that 

is important to consider. 

 

I want to also say that without the help of people like Roland 

Crowe I don't think that this would have been accomplished.  I 

really think that he needs to be complimented in a very, very 

special way in dealing with this because of his flexibility and 

also because of the credibility he had within the framework of 

the people that he represented.  I believe that that is very 

significant in dealing with the whole, total concept of the 

negotiations but also in its relationship to the native 

community.  I believe that that is very significant. 

 

And I believe that the consensus reached on that basis is 

important, that we tell these people that they have achieved a 

milestone in the history of Saskatchewan.  And I think that it's 

important for the players to be acknowledged as a part of that.  

I believe it's an important part for us as an Assembly to 

recognize the contribution they have made to society. 

 

And I guess what I believe is significant is that we have all of 

these players and taking a time line that did not have a specific 

end time to complete the negotiations.  It took that . . . it did not 

put any pressure on that time line to complete it.  It became the 

part of an evolution of time. 

 

And you know what I think, Mr. Speaker? -- the public in the 

province of Saskatchewan agree with this.  I believe they agree 

with it.  And because of an agenda that did not qualify a time 

line, I believe that that was accomplished because of that very 

principle.  And in the native community it didn't have a time 

line, and in the rest of society in Saskatchewan, it didn't have a 

time line.  And that is significant in dealing with the kinds of 

things that we were talking about here. 

 

Because you have to take time to sit down and let the people 

come with you to the point where they're agreeing with what's 

being done.  I think that's happened here because the school 

trustees association and the SARM who are local people had 

their requirements met or their . . . the things that they wanted 

to have in the agreement, they were met, Mr. Speaker.  And I 

believe that that took a time to develop. 

 

I recall very clearly the first day that Mr. Kirwan decided to 

have Mr. Crowe at their district meetings throughout the 

province of Saskatchewan.  I recall that very clearly, Mr. 

Speaker.  And I said to myself, is this going to accomplish what 

Mr. Kirwan and the executive of SARM have set out to do? 

 

And you know what, Mr. Speaker?  Mr. Crowe, through his 

capacity as an individual and as a communicator, did exactly 

accomplish what he set 



1904 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1993 

out to do and it accomplished what SARM wanted to have 

happen.  And I believe that's a good thing. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, as we take a look at this Bill that 

establishes this entitlement for the claims that were set back in 

before my grandfather even came to this country, those kinds of 

claims are being addressed today in this Assembly. 

 

I want to point out another thing that is significant to me in this.  

As my grandfather came to this country and he left property in 

the Ukraine -- and he left a significant amount of property in 

the Ukraine, Mr. Speaker, and he came here -- and if I went 

back there, I likely wouldn't get any back.  But it is significant 

to me, Mr. Speaker, that we honour the things that our 

forefathers did in this country, and we respect that dignity.  

And to those people that lived here before, we respect their 

individual rights and freedoms and the things that they had.  

We're showing some respect for that even though the majority 

of people who came to this country had their properties taken 

away. 

 

And so that is a significant milestone to bring those individuals 

who have had their land entitlements taken away from them 

from the countries they came from.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

significant for the people of Saskatchewan to have moved to 

that extent and said to the people of the province, this is a good 

thing to do. 

 

And so I want to say that I believe that the people in the 

province of Saskatchewan have moved, in my involvement in 

public life, from a position where they were firmly against this 

sort of thing to the place today where they will publicly say and 

accept what is going on here today.  And I think that that's 

important for us to consider as a part of the evolvement of this 

land entitlement. 

 

(1100) 

 

So I want to say, as I conclude my remarks, that I appreciate 

the speech the minister gave and I know that there are many 

people who agree with that, and I do as well.  And therefore, 

Mr. Speaker, because I think there's others that have been 

directly involved in this discussion that will want to speak on it, 

I move to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 78 -- An Act to confirm an Agreement between the 

Government of Canada and the Government of 

Saskatchewan varying the Saskatchewan Natural 

Resources Transfer Agreement 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise to move second 

reading of the Saskatchewan Natural Resources Transfer 

Agreement (Treaty Land Entitlement) Act. 

 

As I said in my remarks on the previous Bill, Saskatchewan -- 

that is the Governments of Saskatchewan and of Canada and of 

the Indian bands 

in Saskatchewan -- signed historic land settlement agreements 

on September 22 and September 23 of 1992. 

 

The one on September 23, Mr. Speaker, I had the honour to 

sign on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, and it was 

in connection with the specific claim of the Nikaneet Band in 

Saskatchewan, one of the entitlement bands. 

 

These agreements contemplated, Mr. Speaker, that amendments 

would be made to the Natural Resources Transfer Agreement 

of 1930.  This agreement, the Natural Resources Transfer 

Agreement, entered into between Canada and Saskatchewan, 

was duly approved at the time by both parliament and by this 

legislature.  It was declared to have the force of law by an Act 

of Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and 

Northern Ireland, entitled the Constitution Act of 1930. 

 

The effect of the Natural Resources Transfer Agreement was to 

transfer to the province of Saskatchewan all Crown lands, 

minerals, and natural resources within the province.  As I said 

earlier, Mr. Speaker, this transfer was subject to certain 

conditions including an obligation on the province to set aside 

out of the unoccupied Crown lands transferred to it, such 

further lands as the federal government may require to fulfil its 

obligations under the treaties with first nations. 

 

With the successful conclusion of the Treaty Land Entitlement 

Framework Agreement, Saskatchewan's commitment to the 

entitlement bands under the Natural Resources Transfer 

Agreement is fulfilled.  The debt has been paid. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan also agreed in the treaty land 

entitlement implementation Bill -- will agree when that Bill is 

approved -- to waive its rights under section 11 of the Natural 

Resources Transfer Agreement to one-half of future mineral 

revenues from new reserves. 

 

This right has not historically been relied upon, and under the 

terms of the Treaty Land Entitlement Agreement, bands must 

pay full compensation for minerals acquired from the province.  

It would be unfair in those circumstances to claim back 

one-half of the revenue in these circumstances, and so we 

propose to deal with that in this Bill. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan and the Government of 

Canada have amended the original Natural Resources Transfer 

Agreement as set out in the schedule attached to this Bill.  In 

order to give this amendment the same force and effect as a 

constitutional document, it is necessary that this agreement be 

confirmed by this legislature and that similar recognition be 

provided by Canada through an Act of Parliament which has 

already happened.  The Bill before us accomplishes the 

province's responsibility in regard to this amendment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I noted in my earlier remarks in this 



May 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1905 

Assembly that the successful conclusion to outstanding treaty 

land entitlements is of great historical significance and of great 

current importance to the first nations people of Saskatchewan.  

I was very pleased to note that the hon. member from Morse 

addressed this subject in such eloquent and positive terms in his 

intervention under the previous Bill.  I think that he will agree 

with me that this legislation that I'm addressing now 

complements our broader undertakings under the previous Bill. 

 

And I am pleased, Mr. Speaker, to move second reading of the 

Saskatchewan Natural Resources Transfer Agreement. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to just add to 

my remarks just a little bit of the things that I mentioned 

earlier. 

 

In reaching a consensus, there are certain things that you have 

to give up, and one of the things that I believe is happening and 

is in this Bill perhaps to some extent and is in the other one, 

and that is the whole aspect of water and the water shore line 

and the water beds. 

 

And I have pretty strong feelings about those rights because 

nobody else in the province of Saskatchewan has those rights 

and nobody . . . even the federal government doesn't have those 

rights of those natural resources in the context that we're giving 

them to the first nations. 

 

And so there are certain things that have been given up by the 

public of Saskatchewan to have these rights enshrined in a 

piece of legislation.  And I know that there are areas where 

other people have given up things that they figure are fairly 

significant. 

 

And I just want to say that it is . . . unity is not the concept that 

everybody agrees.  There is a willingness to participate in unity 

when some people are prepared to give up some of the things 

that they are prepared to . . . would have normally been 

prepared to fight for or defend or stand for. 

 

And therefore consensus and unity is not that everybody 

necessarily agrees on the principles, but they have put aside 

their differences and said there is a better goal and a common 

goal to reach.  And I believe that this is what we're doing with 

this Bill, and I recognize that. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that under the formation of the 

corporation, the Sask Water Corporation, I started that right 

from the very time it began in 1983 and 1984, and the concept . 

. . and going back in the history about water rights and 

individual privileges as it relates to water development in this 

province.  And so I have some understanding of the 

significance and the value that it is. 

 

And going back in my background, Mr. Speaker, my 

background is Dutch, and therefore I have a little bit of 

building dykes and holding thumbs in dykes and that sort of 

background.  And I want to say to the Assembly 

that I appreciate the willingness of people to compromise to 

gain consensus, and have compromised to gain unity because 

the goals and principles set out that are first and foremost. 

 

And I know that other people want to have something to say 

about this legislation, and therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move 

adjournment of debate also. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 

 

At 11:10 a.m. Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 

to the following Bills: 

 

Bill No. 21 -- An Act to amend The Labour-sponsored 

Venture Capital Corporations Act 

Bill No. 54 -- An Act respecting the Department of 

Economic Development 

Bill No. 31 -- An Act to amend The Heritage Property Act 

Bill No. 52 -- An Act respecting Culture and Recreation 

Bill No. 27 -- An Act to amend The Association of School 

Business Officials of Saskatchewan Act 

Bill No. 37 -- An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 

1984 

Bill No. 30 -- An Act to amend The Local Government 

Election Act 

Bill No. 33 -- An Act respecting Security Interests in 

Personal Property and making Consequential 

and Related Amendments to Certain Other 

Acts 

Bill No. 48 -- An Act to amend The Police Act, 1990 

Bill No. 40 -- An Act to amend The Municipal Employees' 

Superannuation Act 

Bill No. 35 -- An Act to amend The Certified Nursing 

Assistants Act 

Bill No. 36 -- An Act to amend The Registered Nurses Act, 

1988 

Bill No. 61 -- An Act to amend The Vital Statistics Act 

Bill No. 62 -- An Act to amend The Medical Profession Act, 

1981 

Bill No. 58 -- An Act to amend The Northern Municipalities 

Act 

Bill No. 60 -- An Act respecting Condominiums 

Bill No. 01 -- An Act to amend An Act to Incorporate 

Aldersgate College 

Bill No. 02 -- An Act to incorporate the Bethany Bible 

Institute and to amend An Act to incorporate 

Mennonite Brethren Church of Saskatchewan 

Bill No. 34 -- An Act to amend The SaskEnergy Act 

Bill No. 44 -- An Act respecting the Inspection of Gas 

Installations and Gas Equipment 

Bill No. 45 -- An Act respecting the Inspection of Electrical 

Equipment, Installations and Materials 

Bill No. 75 -- An Act to amend The Freehold Oil and Gas 

Production Tax Act 

Bill No. 76 -- An Act to amend The Oil and Gas 



1906 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1993 

  Conservation Act 

Bill No. 51 -- An Act to amend The Wildlife Act 

Bill No. 65 -- An Act to amend The Corporation Capital Tax 

Act 

Bill No. 66 -- An Act to amend The Income Tax Act 

Bill No. 72 -- An Act to amend The Superannuation 

(Supplementary Provisions) Act 

Bill No. 67 -- An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue 

Sharing Act 

Bill No. 68 -- An Act respecting Financial Arrangements for 

Urban Parks 

Bill No. 69 -- An Act to amend The Assessment 

Management Agency Act 

Bill No. 70 -- An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 

1984 (No. 2) 

Bill No. 71 -- An Act to amend The Local Government 

Election Act (No. 2) 

Bill No. 83 -- An Act respecting Registered Psychiatric 

Nurses 

 

Her Honour: -- In Her Majesty's name I assent to these Bills. 

 

Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 11:15 a.m. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 82 -- An Act to amend The Change of Name Act 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the Associate Minister of Health to 

please introduce the officials who have joined us here this 

morning. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  With me 

today is Mr. Wilmer Berg, who is the director of vital statistics 

and health insurance registration; and also Glenda Yeates, 

associate deputy minister, Department of Health. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, in 

order to give the public some idea of just what exactly it is that 

you're trying to accomplish here, I wonder if you could put into 

your own words a brief summary of what the Bill is intended to 

do and what it will accomplish for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, I can do that.  I'm sure the 

member's aware that the Minister of Health described the intent 

and so on of the Bill in her second-reading speech on the Bill, 

which I'm sure he's read and considered. 

 

There is a body in Canada called the Uniform Law Conference 

that endeavours to bring our various provincial jurisdictions 

into uniformity when it comes to various laws and regulations.  

In this case the Uniform Law Conference of Canada has 

provided to each province a draft of a model change of name 

Act. 

 

In essence what this Bill does is to bring our legislation into 

line with the model proposed by the Uniform Law Conference 

of Canada, and therefore bring our 

legislation into uniformity with other provincial jurisdictions.  

And so there are essentially four amendments, each of them 

having to do with the process of change of name in our 

province. 

 

The first amendment, as you will know from reading the Bill, 

revises the definitions of parent and lawful custody, so that 

someone who has lawful custody of a child under the age of . . . 

a person under the age of 18 could apply in that case for a 

change of name for the child. 

 

The second amendment has to do with the removal of the 

requirements for spousal consent in the case of a change of 

name if one spouse or the other wishes to engage in a change of 

name or in children's names. 

 

A third amendment provides a clearer definition in our 

legislation of what constitutes a legal name. 

 

And the fourth amendment permits those persons who would 

be widowed, divorced, or whose marriages have been annulled 

to resume their previous surname without the current situation 

of having to submit a formal application and a fee. 

 

I may say there is one further benefit here in that this will 

clarify some issues that are now in fact before the Human 

Rights Commission. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

appreciate that quick overview which has jogged my memory 

back to the discussions we had on the Bill and has reopened my 

mind to the reading and studying of it that we did some time 

back. 

 

I recall that the minister explained to us that there are certain 

names that can't be used.  Or I guess what we should better say 

is there are certain forms of descriptive letterings and that kind 

of thing that people are not allowed to use as a name.  Roman 

numerals, I particularly remember she made the comment of, 

cannot be used as a name.  How far does this limitation of 

names go?  Could you get into that just a little bit further.  Just, 

you know, what kind of things can't you use for a name? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- The Act will indicate that the names that 

we will choose must be entirely written in characters of the 

Roman alphabet.  The names that we will have filed, that is 

officially with vital stats, must just use characters of the Roman 

alphabet and therefore would disallow the use of any symbols, 

numerals, or characters.  And in this what will not be allowed 

for the purposes of actual registration for vital statistics would 

be, for instance, the description Mary Brown senior, Mary 

Brown junior.  The senior and junior could not be used in the 

actual registration of the name in vital stats.  It would also 

disallow the, as you point out, the John Brown the first or 

second or third. 

 

It should be made clear that that's only for the purposes of 

registration.  If we want to use that in our common, everyday 

usage -- if I wish to describe myself as the first or second or 

third or senior or junior 



May 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1907 

 -- that's fine.  This only applies to the actual registration of the 

name with vital statistics. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

see the potential for a little bit of problem here because I know 

of a family that has three generations all named Bill.  I guess 

William is probably the formal name.  And we in our 

community have always referred to these people as Bill the 

first, Bill the second, and Bill the third, and I suspect that they 

have some considerable problems with their banking and with 

their post office deliveries of mail.  Those kinds of thing must 

all be very confusing, in fact to the point where I sometimes 

wonder why people would continue to use the same name. 

 

But the ability of them to be able to then register their name as, 

say, Bill the first, Bill the second, Bill the third, would seem to 

me to be able to assist the federal programs such as social 

insurance numbers, old age pension applications, drug card 

distributions.  Those kinds of things must also be very 

confusing to know which one of those Bills is actually getting 

the bill, I guess. 

 

Revenue Canada, for example -- whose tax form is this that's 

being challenged for sure?  How do we identify people with 

those exact same names if we can't add some kind of a 

supplement that distinctly identifies them as someone special, 

other than maybe taking their fingerprints?  How will we do 

that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- I'd say to the member I find that I, at the 

end of every month, find lots of bills around our place too. 

 

I want to reassure the member and members that this Act is 

only for the purpose of registering a name with vital statistics.  

And so in community, with your bankers, with your 

storekeepers, with your friends and neighbours, we can 

continue to use Bill the first, Bill the second, Bill the third -- no 

problem. 

 

In the more kind of official documentation which you refer to, 

whether it be through . . . with the federal government or so on, 

the differentiation is made, not on the basis of the name, but 

always on the basis of the birth date and the social insurance 

number which of course is a different number for every 

individual.  So when it comes to those federal matters like the 

income tax and so on, we're differentiated by our birth date 

rather than if we have to share the same name. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I take it then that 

you see no problems arising that anyone would be going to 

vital statistics and picking up the names of a particular family 

line and being able to get things sorted out.  You have no 

problem with that then. 

 

I hope you're right because we certainly have enough 

confusion.  And I would hate to think that we might come to 

that point in time where, as predicted in the good book, we 

might end up having numbers tatooed into the foreheads of the 

people to identify them. 

 

Is there any diversion, Minister, from the general form 

that was as you pointed out distributed, the form of the Act 

itself or the direction that it should go?  You suggest that this 

has been done to all jurisdictions to try to get uniformity.  Have 

we deviated from that normal form that went to all other 

jurisdictions in any way? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- The answer is no, we have not. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Is there any reason to suspect that any other 

jurisdiction might deviate in any way?  So have we in fact then 

maintained the uniformity that we set out to accomplish? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- It's our understanding that on all the 

substantive points of the proposal by the Uniform Law 

Conference, that there will be uniformity across the country.  

Yes. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I think that's really important, Minister, and I 

appreciate the fact that we do some of these things to get 

uniformity.  In fact I would even go so far as to suggest that 

your government could do well to look at some uniformity in 

some other areas with some of the Acts that we have. 

 

I'll just make you an example of that so that you'll be able to 

reflect on it.  In western Canada we have three prairie 

provinces -- Manitoba, Alberta, and Saskatchewan -- with 

relatively the same types of agricultural background in that 

industry.  We're relatively the same.  We use basically the same 

types of equipment.  And our machinery dealers have I guess 

what you might call the implement dealers' Act or some farm 

machinery Acts.  I'm not exactly sure of what the names are, 

but I think you understand where I'm coming from. 

 

There are Acts that regulate how agricultural equipment dealers 

can operate and how they do operate.  And we find that there's 

some considerable difference between, you know, one 

jurisdiction and the other.  So I'm suggesting to you that your 

government might in fact use this as a model to investigate 

some of those types of things, to get some uniformity between 

the different problems that we have within the prairie region. 

 

And that's just one that I know is causing some significant 

problems for some people, so I pass that on as an example of 

what we could be looking at in order to accomplish even more 

in this area of uniformity. 

 

If I were going to change my name to, oh, whatever -- I guess it 

doesn't matter, I can't think of a better one than the one I have 

right now; I've gotten kind of used to it -- but anyway, if I were 

to change my name, what exactly would I have to do?  Would I 

have to go to a lawyer or would I just phone up vital statistics?  

Would I have to pay a fee? If so, what would that fee be?  

Would I have to have a waiting period?  Would I have to have 

my wife's permission?  Would I have to ask my kids?  Could 

you let us know what that process would be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- I'm told, in response to your question -- if 

you wanted to change your name I 



1908 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1993 

could suggest a few -- but I'm told if you wanted to change 

your name it is through vital statistics.  You do not need to 

have a lawyer or consult legal advice or anything like that.  

There is an application form that you would complete and 

provide to vital statistics.  There is a fee; the fee is $100.  If you 

are married, you would need to provide notice to your spouse.  

You would not have to have your spouse's consent, but you 

would have to provide notice to your spouse. 

 

If you would want a new birth certificate with your new change 

of name that would be provided for a fee of $20.  And it is 

required that the change of name be placed in the Gazette, and 

that would cost $10.70.  And there is essentially no waiting 

period other than the few days it takes to do the actual 

paperwork. 

 

(1130) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, in dealing 

with this, is the federal government making the requirements 

and setting out the pattern for the uniformity?  Where does the 

uniformity come from in relation to setting this as a standard?  

I'd like to have that information, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, the Uniform Law 

Conference to which I referred, and on the basis of their 

recommendations we're dealing with this piece of legislation 

and some others in this session. The Uniform Law Conference 

is a federal-provincial group made up of representatives of the 

federal government and of each provincial jurisdiction. 

 

They look at Acts that will be common to all provincial 

jurisdictions, work with the Acts, try and develop consensus, 

and then provide to each and every provincial jurisdiction the 

model.  It's not binding.  It's simply provided as a model and 

then provinces are asked to, through their own legislative 

process, to amend or adjust their legislation as they see fit.  So 

it's a federal-provincial group -- federal reps and reps from 

every province. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Has the federal government a similar statute 

in its books that relates typically, where this one would be 

similar to that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, the answer is no.  The 

change of name legislation is a provincial jurisdiction and so 

it's consistent across the province.  The federal government has 

no jurisdiction in this regard. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Have you made room for a name that has an 

apostrophe in it like Legre or the member from 

Souris-Cannington I think has a slash in his name?  Is there 

room for that sort of thing in the kinds of names that are 

allowed?  Or is just the number not allowed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- No.  As is the case today, apostrophes, 

hyphens, and accent marks can be included in the name. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well just to clear this up.  Muller is a name 

that in German used to have two little dots 

above the "u" and it was Mller.  Is that available to people in 

dealing with their name change? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- It's our understanding that this has never 

been a request that vital statistics has received.  And if it was a 

request, I'm sure they would look at it favourably.  There's 

something about computer technology and printers and so on 

that perhaps the documentation, the machine, can't do it. But 

vital statistics would certainly be willing to look at having 

someone imprint it just by hand on the documentation.  But it's 

not been a request that's been made up to this point. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I'm familiar with that because German was a 

background language of my family.  And I think that that's 

something that needs to be considered because people may in 

fact want to go back to that sort of thing in time. 

 

With that, I have no other questions, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, my colleague brought up how easy it is to make a 

name change.  I'm just wondering, what kind of checks or 

balances are there in place for this?  Do you check to see if 

somebody else has a similar name, or that the person who is 

applying for the name change is actually the person who he 

says he is?  What kind of checks do you have in place for that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, I'll thank the member for 

his question.  When someone comes to make an application for 

a name change, their documentation is very carefully reviewed 

in terms of their birth records, birth certificates, marital status, 

and so on.  So it must be to the satisfaction of vital statistics 

that the person who is making the application is indeed the 

person whom they say they are, and so there's a careful check 

done in that regard. 

 

There is not provision that prevents someone from choosing 

any other name that one would want to choose, and therefore 

one could choose a name of a . . . an existing name of someone 

else.  But at the end of the process of course the names must be 

gazetted -- put in the public Gazette -- so there is the public 

scrutiny therefore of the new name. 

 

And our department of vital statistics, also when a name change 

has occurred, will be sure that that change is then reflected on 

birth documentation and so on.  It may be held here in 

Saskatchewan, or in fact they'll ensure that it's changed on the 

birth documentation wherever it's held, if they have access to it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  So if my 

colleague wanted to change his name to Howard Hughes for 

some particular reason, he could do so provided he can prove 

who he is today.  But would it go back to his birth records and 

the name would be changed there to Howard Hughes so that on 

the record itself it would show that he was born as Howard 

Hughes? 



May 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1909 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- No, Mr. Chairman, what would happen is 

that the birth record would simply show an amendment, but it 

would continue to show the original birth name and then the 

date and the new name. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  You 

mentioned that you were making it easier for people who are 

divorced to change their names.  In what way will it be easier?  

Will they still have to go through the courts to make those 

changes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Of course the individual would have to, 

for the divorce proceedings, would have to go to the courts.  

This only refers to the name that a person . . . and it would 

apply to not only those who might be divorced but those who 

may be widowed or whose marriage has been annulled. 

 

Simply what this does, it simply eliminates the process of 

application and fee in this circumstance.  And this will most 

often, I expect, most often be a woman who is either widowed, 

divorced, or marriage annulled, who wants to return to her 

maiden name, her surname.  And so what it does, it just simply 

removes the process of application and fee that we would 

otherwise do if we wanted a change of name. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay.  Thank you, Minister.  So this 

person would still have to go through posting the name in the 

Gazette, etc., to make those changes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Well in this narrow circumstance, no; the 

answer is no.  It would not have to be gazetted, simply because 

in the situation of if the married woman at the time of divorce 

or widowed or marriage annulment wishes to return to her 

maiden name, if that's the move she wishes to make, that is the 

name that is already shown on her birth record.  And so then 

the process of gazetting doesn't need to happen. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, I would simply like to 

thank those officials who have joined us here today, Mr. 

Wilmer Berg and Ms. Glenda Yeates, and to thank members of 

the opposition for an interesting discussion around this piece of 

legislation. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The 

opposition would like to join with the minister in thanking the 

officials for coming in today and thank the minister and their 

officials for the answers they provided us.  Thank you. 

 

Bill No. 84 -- An Act to amend The Litter Control Act 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the Minister of the Environment to 

please introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, I'd like to 

introduce to you, on my immediate right, David Beckwermert, 

the director of legislative services for the Department of 

Environment and Resource Management.  Behind David is Bob 

Blackwell, the assistant deputy minister, management services, 

of the Department of Environment and Resource Management.  

And directly behind me is Larry Lechner, the director of air and 

land protection over the Department of Environment and 

Resource Management.  Thank you. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, I think everybody in Saskatchewan is aware of the 

problems that garbage causes and the need to handle our refuse 

properly.  I'm just wondering, who did you consult with before 

bringing forward this legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, thank you for that question.  

The major elements of The Litter Control Act were introduced 

last year, and the broad public consultation occurred then.  

What we're doing now is some housekeeping amendments for 

which there was no public consultation. The discussions have 

been internal within government. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister. As you 

know I was part of the Environment Committee that toured the 

province this past whatever -- in spring, looking into 

environmental concerns across the province.  And one of those 

issues that was a recurring problem in just about every 

community we visited was waste disposal, particularly if you 

went into the smaller communities. 

 

They had some very real concerns about this situation, 

particularly the concerns about whether to burn or not to burn, 

and how do you dispose of the combustible materials such as 

paper and woods in your disposal sights.  And this seems to be 

a major problem, Mr. Minister.  Will this Bill have any effects 

on that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, no, this Act does not deal 

with the general waste management issues from that side.  

Those are under The Environmental Management and 

Protection Act.  This Act deals with basically recycling 

initiatives and the funding for them. 

 

(1145) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister. That's one 

of the problems in particularly the rural areas again, is under 

the environmental Acts they're not allowed to burn.  And yet 

how do you dispose of these materials?  Do you simply dump 

them in your landfills and cover them up and dispose of them?  

That causes problems in the landfill because your landfill is 

soon full and you have to go about trying to find new landfill 

sights. 

 

Recycling is coming forward in a number of places, but the 

problem here, Mr. Minister, is the cost.  If you're in Hazlet -- 

which was one of the communities 



1910 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1993 

that brought forward concerns -- they've collected paper and 

yet the paper sits there because they can't afford to transport it 

to the recycling place which is in Regina.  And so how do you 

get the recycling in place in this province in a manner that can 

be economical to the people involved?  And that seems to be 

the major problem, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, the matter you raise is 

the reason for The Litter Control Act, is to in fact try to 

coordinate the efforts of the public with the efforts of 

government with respect to taking pieces of the waste stream 

and putting them to a productive use as a resource and not 

adding to the burden of cost and the long-term burden of 

having materials landfilled for no . . . if one could avoid it by 

recycling. 

 

And clearly there are a number of initiatives for which there is 

a great deal of public interest.  The issue of used oil and tires 

and batteries are issues on the front burner in most provinces in 

Canada, and plastics are emerging as an issue.  There are many 

initiatives that can be put in place but each has a specific need 

to first be identified as a product and then to have that 

identified as a resource in the market-place that people can use. 

 

So the initiatives that can be begun under The Litter Control 

Act are in fact identifying waste streams which once one has 

identified that one can collect a waste resource, it then becomes 

a marketable commodity in time, even though for the initial 

period one may have to establish some processes for collecting 

the resources. 

 

I want to say on the larger question of trying to get towards a 

high level of recycling and a reduction of landfilling, we have 

set up this spring two municipal waste management pilot 

projects, one in the southern part of the province called the 

Frenchman Valley project; and the other in the Humboldt area, 

the Carlton Trail project, by which municipalities have 

collected together and planned regionally to establish a regional 

system.  And a significant part of their planning will be on how 

to identify individual waste streams and how to handle them in 

order to minimize landfilling. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, most people in the 

public are aware that most of the things that we think of as 

garbage can be recycled -- such as your cans, such as your 

plastics, your paper, your wood.  It's a matter, though, of 

making it economical.  You talk of markets in the future.  Well 

markets in the future are good, but what do you do with that 

commodity today? 

 

If you gather up all your plastics and all your woods and all 

your cans, all your cellulose, at your garbage sites and you fill 

your site up with these collected materials, in the first place 

who collects it?  That's a major problem in most smaller centres 

is who does the collection.  Do you pay somebody to sit there 

at the dump site and inform people, well this pile and this pile 

and this pile?  Or does that person stand there and do the actual 

sorting themselves?  That becomes a major problem and there's 

a cost associated. 

Once you have this material collected and sorted, you have a 

storage problem.  One of the major concerns with garbage sites 

around the province is rats.  If you have a large amount of this 

material sitting around in storage, that's just going to compound 

your rat problem, Mr. Minister. 

 

So I think before we start getting into this too deeply, you're 

going to have to have something in place to handle those 

concerns: the cost of the sorting, the cost of the storage, and the 

rat problems that you can generate if you don't properly handle 

that storage. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, again I appreciate the 

question.  I want to say that there have been some good 

initiatives in the past.  And I'd like to give your colleagues in 

government credit for the SARCAN initiative which has been a 

very successful project, both for employment and for recycling 

materials.  The mandate of that group is still quite narrow.  

They are interested in broadening that, but there's an example 

of what can be done. 

 

There is a lot of public discussion though around on to how 

many products one wants to place a fee and a handling charge, 

a returnable charge.  It's interesting that while the western 

provinces near us are implementing tire fees, the Ontario 

government removed it in the last budget.  So I think it tells 

you that the policies around some of these individual products 

is in flux.  The objective for the public is to collect these 

products and properly treat them. 

 

I think you correctly identify the challenges that happen when 

you stop burning, and again the public needs to balance the 

nuisance of smoke from waste sites if they were burnt.  Clearly 

the public concern is very, very high around that question.  You 

need to assess the toxins that come from low-temperature 

burning which is the kind of burning that happens in waste 

sites.  And the judgement was made in the department, again a 

few years ago, that it was no longer in the public interest to 

allow burning, while permits allow you to burn wood under 

special circumstances. 

 

So because there are many areas here that are of public 

concern, I've established an advisory group on waste 

management matters -- that includes a very broad 

representation from the public, municipal government, and 

others -- to help us priorize those issues, to deal with the kinds 

of questions you're asking because we really do need to balance 

the interests of the public from a safety and convenience point 

of view with the practicality of the disposal methods. 

 

Clearly one of the major initiatives that we will be taking part 

in, in Canada and in Saskatchewan over the next number of 

years, is the activity of reducing waste, of minimizing waste by 

reducing packaging, by encouraging people to reuse at home. 

 

I am encouraged by the commitment of young people.  I'd like 

to give credit to our education system because 



May 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1911 

somehow with people who have no more sensitivity than you 

and I coming into the system, we have children who have no 

more knowledge than their knowledge of the world entering the 

school system and becoming advocates for proper management 

of waste, advocating the reduction of consumption and the 

reduction of waste.  And I think that demonstrates that in the 

future these initiatives will continue to be driven by people who 

understand that we need to maximize the way we use our 

resources, minimize waste, and minimize the kinds of problems 

you identify when we have large quantities of waste 

accumulating. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  One of the 

things that we have to do as we proceed on this is move with 

what again came out of the Environment Committee is 

common sense, that you move forward at a speed that you have 

solutions for the problems, that you just don't make demands 

on the public that you will do this before there's a solution 

available to handle the new problem that you've created. 

 

One of the things that also came out in the environment 

hearings was the concern about unnecessary packaging filling 

up our landfill sites.  If you go down into any of the retail stores 

you'll see commodities for sale with a large amount of 

packaging on them which is not in size relative to the 

commodity that you're actually buying.  And in fact in 

Saskatchewan we should be promoting, Mr. Minister, 

elimination of the loose styrofoam packaging that you get on a 

number of materials. 

 

We should be supporting and encouraging puffed wheat to be 

used in this commodity.  It's a product that we can grow here, a 

product that we can develop and supply, and so I think we 

should be pushing that.  It's biodegradable; there wouldn't be 

any problems with it.  The only problems that I can see of right 

off the top would be problems with perhaps insects.  But I think 

it is one of those things that can be used.  I believe in some 

areas popcorn is already being used as a packing material.  So I 

think it's something that we should be trying to encourage in 

this province. 

 

You talked about the two regional sites, the one at Humboldt 

and the one at Shaunavon area.  It seems kind of surprising 

though that the member from Shaunavon would be prepared to 

support a new garbage collection system within his area and 

allow the elimination of four hospitals, but I guess that's his 

priorities. 

 

These regional sites, Mr. Minister, what kind of cost factors are 

going to be involved in these things for the local communities, 

for the RMs (rural municipality), for the villages and towns 

involved. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I just want to make it very 

clear that the initiative for these projects have come from the 

community, and I'm sure that the members of the legislature for 

the areas are supportive of these initiatives.  There were in fact 

17 proposals from various parts of the province, all believing 

that it's important to look for new ways of properly 

managing our waste. 

 

The funding arrangements for the pilot projects are 50 per cent 

from the community and 50 per cent provincially, recognizing 

that they will be experimenting with a variety of procedures 

and processes, that will then be good advice for the rest of the 

province so other people won't have to experiment with those 

same practices. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, how do these costs 

compare to what has been the normal circumstances up till 

now?  Are these costs higher or lower? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- One of the realizations that people in 

Saskatchewan and Canada and around the world are beginning 

to come to is that we have not properly addressed the full cost 

of our consumptive habits and the full cost of our production 

systems here.  And what is just coming to be realized is that a 

part of the cost that needs to be attached to every product is the 

cost of finally disposing of all of the materials used in 

producing the product and then packaging it to sell it. 

 

So this is a recognition that's happening now and the 

municipalities are recognizing this now. And what the 

municipalities are looking for is a way of addressing that cost, 

which clearly will be an increased cost over the traditional 

practices in many areas.  But they want to look at a way of 

addressing those costs in the most practical way by cooperating 

regionally. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'm sure that the 

RMs and the villages and the municipalities involved want to 

minimize the amount of cost it is to them, while still handling 

the material.  But if that cost is going to be significantly 

greater, they're not going to be able to afford it with all the 

other added costs that have been placed on municipalities, both 

rural and urban, up till this point.  So is that cost significantly 

greater, or just marginally greater than current practice? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- That depends very much on current 

practice.  Clearly I know from my own area -- I've met with the 

municipalities in my constituency -- the practices vary 

considerably, and people who've made recent investments in 

their facilities, like buying more land, have pretty high cost 

levels.  Others who are operating on a traditional site where 

they haven't had to make a major investment recently are 

operating at a significantly lower cost.  So it depends on the 

situation. 

 

I think the recognition that happens in the regional waste 

management project is that in time we all will have to upgrade 

what we do, and we want to do it in the most practical way that 

we can.  One of the facts is clear that we have . . . our economy 

has a great deal to gain from us looking at using our resources 

more wisely.  That means reducing the resources in production.  

It means reducing the resources applied to packaging, means 

reusing as many of the resources as we can once we've 

established an initial product. 



1912 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1993 

And we have a number of initiatives through the Canadian 

Council of Ministers of the Environment where we have 

engaged in national packaging protocols and those kinds of 

initiatives to commit ourselves to reducing, in the areas of 

production in Canada and in what's sold in Canada, reducing 

the amount of waste that actually is generated when the 

products come to our homes. 

 

(1200) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Everyone 

wants to recycle and to reuse these products, but we're not yet 

at the position of financial viability in a lot of cases for that 

because if everybody in Saskatchewan was . . . 1 million people 

lumped in one city, we could handle that.  But we're spread out 

over a very huge area, and it's still not financially viable to 

bring those commodities in from the 100 and 200 town areas 

into a large collection site.  And so until that point in time, it's 

going to be a problem, Mr. Minister. 

 

And if we as a society want that collection to take place, then 

we as a society are going to have to be prepared to pay for that.  

And it's not going to be able to just be downloaded onto the 

back of that 100-person village to accomplish that if they live 

500 miles from the major collection site.  So everybody is 

going to have to pay for that. 

 

When you look at these sites, such as the Humboldt and 

Shaunavon sites, Mr. Minister, how do they exactly work?  Do 

the municipalities collect their garbage, their refuse, in the 

normal manner and then transport it to the central site?  Is it 

stored at the farm sites or in the villages until such time as 

somebody else comes by perhaps a month later and picks it up?  

How does the system actually work? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I just want to come back to the cost 

question generically first, and then I want to respond to that 

question.  The reason municipalities are getting involved, and 

this goes in part way to explaining the next question, is that 

when they make an investment in waste management facilities 

they want it to be an appropriate investment for the long term, 

so that there will be, I think, at the initial stages as you're 

making a regional investment, an increased regional cost 

because of the capital investment. 

 

But then in the long term, because most of these areas that are 

moving this way will be using fewer landfill sites, the 

long-term operating cost will be lower than the alternative of 

managing a number of sites in a less centralized fashion. 

 

Now the issue that has to be measured in each of those cases is 

the merit of the hauling distances and those kinds of questions.  

The detail of how many sites there are going to be within an 

area and what is collected where, that is in fact the purpose for 

which the pilot projects have been established. 

 

The pilot projects were approved on the basis that 

there was a general plan and a cooperation indicated by both 

urban and rural municipalities in each area to structure this new 

process, one with a smaller group of municipalities, the other 

with a larger group of municipalities. 

 

They laid out their general plan about where it was going.  But 

they will now sit down collectively with the support of the 

departmental resources and say okay, now what really makes 

sense, so that we don't haul bulky products too far, so that we 

properly take individual products from the stream for recycling, 

so that we again minimize the total cost and maximize the reuse 

of resources. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Out of the current tests then, how are 

they working?  What's the process?  Do the municipalities still 

carry on as the way they had been prior to the test and just 

move their refuse into the central location?  Or are there storage 

sites on the individual homesteads and around the villages? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- This will be an evolutionary process where 

the cooperating municipalities will continue to use their present 

practices until they've provided alternatives.  This is outside of 

the regional projects, but I know in my own area the 

department has had some discussions with municipalities. 

 

There's an interest because a few of the 17 municipalities I met 

with, their landfill sites are becoming close to the end of their 

lives within a year or two.  So they're saying if we want to 

make an investment we would like to make it fitting a model 

that's going to be here a few years from now. 

 

So I think there's going to be some cooperative discussions in 

that area apart from the pilot projects saying, well if we were 

going to change the model, if we're investing some money, 

maybe we would invest it centrally.  And so that when we want 

to make our next investment maybe we can together buy some 

land and the system by which we landfill and regionally 

process our products. 

 

I think in a number of those areas the existing landfill sites may 

still remain collection points for specific products even though 

there may not be landfilling at them all.  So again there will be 

a variety of arrangements worked out that minimize 

transportation, maximize reuse. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- How long are these studies, these two 

proposed studies going to take place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- They'll be completed in four years. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister. Under the Bill 

you talk about licensing of depots and licensing of suppliers 

and collectors.  I'm sure that when it comes to licensing there's 

also the matter of fees involved.  Is there fees involved in this, 

and if so, what will these fees be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The mention of licensing in this 



May 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1913 

Act is a preliminary step in discussing the longer-range 

recycling initiatives so that we can begin to establish, if 

necessary, sites for collecting of specific recycling products.  

So there is . . . It's part of the development of a scheme for 

which later there may be fees, for example, or other strategies 

that also facilitate collection and processing of recycled 

products. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, when it talks about 

licensing of suppliers or collectors, the licensing even of 

depots, will these be only municipal sites, municipal collectors 

or will private industry be allowed to be involved in this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- That's wide open.  One of the observations 

I've made, for example, on the used-oil question, since I've had 

this responsibility, is that there is a variety of opinions about 

how the collection system should work and who then should 

carry it forward.  Some people want guaranteed access to all 

the used oil from the prairie provinces.  Other people are ready 

to go right now with smaller initiatives. 

 

I think the ideal goal for us would be to achieve our 

environmental objective in terms of full recycling with 

minimum government involvement.  What that means in the 

end is uncertain.  My general sense is that it will, for a number 

of products at least initially, mean a government facilitation of 

the collection network and hopefully then releasing a product to 

the market.  But that's just a general sense of where I feel it's 

going. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, this Bill also talks 

about the environmental protection fund and it seems that this 

Bill will discontinue that fund, that the monies in that fund will 

be transferred to the Consolidated Fund.  And any monies that 

would have been collected to that fund in the future will carry 

on to the Consolidated Fund.  How much monies are currently 

in that fund? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I'd like to just take a minute to clarify the 

issue you raise because your statement is both true and in some 

ways doesn't convey accurately what has happened in terms of 

the transfer of the fund. 

 

The fund has in fact been discontinued, and within it now are 

about $300,000 that are there to pay for commitments made 

under it previously.  But the fund has been replaced by a line in 

the budget estimates called the environmental protection 

subvote. 

 

So what you will find in this year's estimates is a very unique 

page that I would refer you to for your own reading pleasure 

which for the first time in . . . ahead of the expenditures 

outlined, environmental expenditures, special project 

expenditures, is outlined the revenue sources from which those 

expenditures are derived. 

 

What this does is it respects the public expectation that monies 

collected for environmental purposes are in fact spent for 

environmental purposes, and at the same time achieves the 

objectives of the auditor, the Gass Commission, when they said 

that these expenditures should be subjected to the same 

discipline with spending as all other government funds so that 

you in fact have a chance, in budget estimates, to review this 

page like any other.  Not that the old fund didn't have its own 

processes of discipline, but it was not through the regular 

processes. 

 

So this in fact exposes these funds to the discipline of the 

budgetary expenditure examination that goes on here in the 

House and yet displays for the public the revenues and 

expenditures together so that the public can see the similarity 

between the two and know that their money has been spent for 

the purpose for which they have paid it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, because indeed 

the public does have a serious concern that the monies they 

believe they're paying into it for the environmental protection 

does indeed end up doing that. 

 

I know I've received a number of complaints from people about 

Tetra-Paks and about glass, that they feel that they're paying for 

a deposit on a product on which they cannot receive any return.  

The Tetra-Pak one seems to be a particular irritant to a good 

number of people.  They don't stop and think about the fact that 

at some point in time that Tetra-Pak has to be disposed of and 

there is a cost associated with that.  But perhaps, Mr. Minister, 

you could take a look at that idea of the Tetra-Pak and finding 

some manner in which they perhaps could be recycled to allow 

people to have a portion of that deposit at least returned to 

them. 

 

The environmental protection fund, when new taxes are put in 

place dealing with that as has been discussed, people want that 

assurance that those funds will be used for the environment, for 

environmental purposes, for cleaning up things such as the 

underground storage tanks, etc.  And I think that's very 

important that that should carry on, Mr. Minister. 

 

My colleague has a few questions he'd like to ask you. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

couldn't help but note in your comments your reflection that if 

we wanted to have some enjoyment, we could read some of 

your documentation on the environment.  And I would like to 

suggest that in view of the fact that you consider this to be a 

joyful event, perhaps you'd really like to break loose and have a 

whole bunch of fun and review the transcripts from the meeting 

that was held in Maple Creek with the environmental review 

committee that our colleague from Souris-Cannington was on. 

 

I tell you that you are really going to have a blast on this, 

because seeking enjoyment in this way, if that fulfils your 

satisfactions, you will be really, really turned on when you read 

these transcripts because they point out so very clearly and 

concisely the way that people in Saskatchewan feel about two 

key issues that are of burning necessity in their communities 

and need to be treated with an awful lot more caution and 

discretion than seems apparent. 



1914 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1993 

I'm not suggesting that you are being ruthless, but I will suggest 

to you that the impression people have is that the power of 

government is being ruthless in attempting to force changes on 

them that they view to be extremely financially costly, that they 

view to be extremely difficult to comply with, and that quite 

frankly they believe they're not as guilty of such a big sinful act 

as the process seems to imply.  And obviously I'm talking about 

the burning of garbage in small-town dumps which you've 

talked about with my colleague.  And the other burning issue is 

of course the fuel tank issue. 

 

I guess the points that need to be repeated . . . and I realize that 

I am repeating what other people have said, but they need to be 

repeated, and they need to be re-emphasized.  And nobody 

could have said it to you better than the transcripts from that 

Maple Creek meeting.  The people there laid it right on the line.  

They didn't hold anything back.  And in spite of the fact that 

they're considered to be outspoken, they wanted everybody to 

know exactly where they're coming from and exactly where 

they stand. 

 

(1215) 

 

In the area of garbage burning the point has been made -- and I 

will make it for them again -- that if you take a comparison of 

the problems we have with our environment, then you can relax 

a little.  The reality is that our environment is very important.  

There isn't a person in my constituency that won't go along 

with you when you say that we have to do things that help our 

environment.  Nobody wants to live in the garbage dump.  And 

nobody wants the world around us to become a garbage dump 

that we all have to live in.  Nobody wants the ozone to be 

depleted.  Nobody wants to get sunburned to death.  Nobody 

wants to get cancer. 

 

People do say though that there are some fundamental realities 

of comparison that we have to make here in order to keep our 

perspective on the issue.  In other words, they're suggesting we 

may be trying to overkill in Saskatchewan.  And the 

comparison that best came to mind, as a good one for me, was 

when a person suggested that in the city of New York where 

you have 10 million people, you have 10 times the number of 

people that we have in Saskatchewan.  You have 10 times as 

much garbage in one city in the United States of America than 

we produce in the entire province of Saskatchewan on an 

individual, personal basis. 

 

Now I do understand that Saskatchewan people seem to 

generate more pounds of garbage per year than individuals in 

some other jurisdictions, even if it were half.  Suppose we only 

produced five times or, you know, one-fifth of the garbage 

instead of one-tenth; the point still is well taken.  One 

American city produces more garbage than all of 

Saskatchewan.  So here we are, here we are suggesting that we 

can clean up the environment of the world by cleaning up 

Saskatchewan totally.  I suggest to you that you could clean up 

every problem of the environment in Saskatchewan 100 per 

cent and probably not change 

the world pollution problem by a quarter of 1 per cent, maybe 

not even a tenth of 1 per cent. 

 

And so I'm suggesting to you that while we have to do our 

thing and play our part, we have to include ourselves in the role 

of world assistance to save our world from ourselves, we don't 

want to put ourselves in a position where we destroy a lot of 

other good things around us and put ourselves into a position 

where we can't financially and economically tolerate the kind 

of changes that are required in order to become 100 per cent 

efficiency. 

 

So what I'm saying is maybe 100 per cent efficiency is too 

much to strive for all at once.  If we don't allow our small 

towns to burn garbage, for example, without having in place 

people who do professional incinerating within a reasonable 

transportation distance, then we are stuck with a dilemma that 

we have with newspapers, for example, in some of our small 

towns that decided to get onto the bandwagon a year or two 

back and thought that recycling of some newspapers would 

definitely help to save some trees. 

 

Great idea.  I agree with it 100 per cent.  Let's not chop down a 

tree to make new paper; let's recycle the old Leader-Post and 

what not.  What happened was that we collected all these 

newspapers and I know of a town where people phoned me and 

said, we've now got a small warehouse -- obviously it's 

probably somebody's granary but they called it a small 

warehouse -- full of newspapers, and no place to take them. 

 

The only way they could get rid of them was to hire a truck to 

transport them I think it was to Regina at about 2 or 300 miles.  

The cost was phenomenal.  It was worth more than to go out 

and cut a tree really.  And it made absolutely no economic 

sense. 

 

I'm saying to you that the people want you to take into 

consideration the reality that we can't achieve your goals 

overnight.  And recognizing that to be the reality of the world 

we live in, then perhaps we have to move a little slower to 

allow people the chance to get things into place. 

 

One of the questions I would like you to answer is: are you 

working in the direction of getting some of these disposal units 

into place?  For example, we hear that there are people that will 

come in and dig up the dirt and take out the crude oil that has 

been spilled, the salt water that has been spilled, those kinds of 

chemicals that are used in the petroleum industry.  They seem 

to think that they can wash that out of that dirt, reclaim the soil, 

put it back clean, and those kinds of things. 

 

There are operations like that in Alberta, we understand.  We 

have approached SEDCO and different arms of government for 

financial help.  Community bonds have been challenged to 

support these.  And yet nothing seems to be happening in that 

area.  Maybe there is something going on that we don't know 

about.  So I'll just finish my rhetoric about the other area and let 

you comment on that along with some other questions. 



May 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1915 

The fuel tank issue is another burning issue, although we hope 

it never really gets truly on fire.  The fact of the matter is that 

we've got many fuel tanks in my constituency in the small 

towns that are some years old.  But these fuel dealers have 

pointed out to me, and I'm sure you've heard this a hundred 

times before, that they've measured these tanks on a daily basis.  

The volume that they sell is subtracted from the volume in the 

tank, and if there's one litre missing, somebody has to account 

for it.  It's not like you could run a hundred gallons into the 

ground and not miss it.  It is accounted for. 

 

Now there are some operations, I'm sure, that have fuel tanks 

that are not measured and not watched, but I don't think that 

they are from the retail outlets, the ones that are most likely to 

be first affected by your regulations. 

 

And the reality is that a fuel tank that is maybe 15 years old 

that has 10 years of life left, in my opinion quite frankly, 

should be allowed to continue as it is for eight or nine more 

years or whatever time it is that it tests to be good, to allow it to 

generate all of the economic benefit that should come from it 

on a depreciating basis as it goes from day one to day whatever 

its limit of lifetime expectancy is. 

 

Obviously we should reduce that lifetime expectancy enough to 

ensure a reasonable chance not to have a pollution problem, but 

at the same time, economically speaking, you have to allow 

installations enough time so that they can depreciate their value 

by their usage.  And if we don't do that then we're saying to 

business people, investments that you have made no longer 

have time to recapture your investment; you have to make a 

new investment. 

 

And quite frankly the banks won't guarantee anybody's loan to 

bury a tank in the ground.  It just won't happen.  We've talked 

to bankers.  I've talked to all kinds of fuel dealers that said, if 

the banker would give me the money, I'd put it in.  But they 

won't give us any loan guarantees on a tank that we're putting 

in the ground because they just simply won't touch it.  It's one 

of those things that you cannot get collateral or backing from a 

bank on. 

 

So I'm going to suggest, Minister, that we may have to, if we're 

going to force this issue, provide some kind of 

government-backed guarantees of loans for these people.  

Otherwise we're not going to have them.  Every town in my 

constituency will almost lose all of their fuel tanks under the 

suggested regulations of about six months back in that process 

that we went through when we reviewed this matter. 

 

I couldn't find a fuel tank in my constituency that would not be 

somewhat affected.  There may be a chance that the Co-op in 

Gull Lake might have some tanks that would still qualify, but 

they themselves, recognizing that the rest of their operation in 

the south-west is so vulnerable, were suggesting that it would 

be cheaper for them to go out in the middle of The Sand Hills 

and put up a whole new distribution centre out there and locate 

far away from all 

communities out in The Great Sand Hills and truck from that 

central location to the rest of the south-west. 

 

If that had to be done, I suggest that the cost would so 

phenomenal that no other company would be involved.  We 

would then have a monopoly situation.  Unfortunately for those 

that think that the Co-op would be a great outfit to have that 

monopoly, it might not be the Co-op that does it.  It might be 

Imperial Oil; it might be someone else.  We will have a 

monopoly situation developed throughout the province because 

only one distributor of fuels could afford to put any such type 

of facility into any part of Saskatchewan. 

 

So you'd end up having regionalized fuel distribution system 

where you might have six distribution systems in the province 

in each region around the province; I'll suggest to you the 

SARM lines for their districts in their political structure as you 

may understand it.  That splits the province into six places or 

six divisions, and you might have one in each one, and that's all 

you'd have.  You'd have absolutely no competition left in the 

fuel distribution system, and you wouldn't have any small town 

service stations left, absolutely none whatsoever.  The 

liabilities -- the costs of installing new tanks, all those things -- 

will drive them out. 

 

And here we suggest, Minister, that you're once again falling 

into what has become your government's depression 

philosophy.  I'm going to call it a depression philosophy 

because that's what it is, and it's expanding.  And what happens 

in this philosophy, sir, is that when you try to clean up one 

problem which is finances, you do it by trying to cut back on 

the creation of jobs or the existence of businesses.  And you 

also find yourself into this trap in environment.  If you 

eliminate all of those service stations, every . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  I'm trying to understand the 

member's remarks and how they have anything to do with the 

Bill that's before us.  If the member is interested in pursuing a 

line of questioning on the issue that he raises, I would point out 

that estimates for the Department of Environment are likely the 

appropriate place to do so.  But the member must and should be 

able to establish some relationship to the Bill before us.  I can't 

ascertain that from his remarks so far. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you for that observation, Mr. 

Chairman.  Certainly it is difficult to get specifically to the 

issue on such a broad-ranging problem as litter and 

environmental considerations.  Mr. Chairman, I suggest to you 

that the problems that we're having relating to fuel tanks and 

relating to the burning all do come together in a broad, general 

question to the minister.  You worry about things being related 

directly to the Bill, and we do too because if you don't burn 

garbage, for example, you will get a lot of litter.  If the wind 

comes up in south-west Saskatchewan and you don't have your 

papers and things tied down, they're definitely going to end up 

in Regina.  I can assure you that we get enough wind to take 

litter from the town of Maple Creek's dump site all across the 

province of Saskatchewan.  And I can assure you that there are 

some studies that have been done that 



1916 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1993 

indicate that topsoil that has blown off of the farms in the 

Maple Creek area have in fact ended up some 300 miles into 

the ocean to the east of us. 

 

So litter is a real problem.  And if we don't take care of it, it 

will certainly be all over. 

 

I just want to wrap up by asking the minister a couple of direct 

questions with regards to this issue.  What becomes of our 

rodent problem in our dumps?  What becomes of our insect 

problems if we don't burn out the garbage dumps to kill them 

out?  Will they expand?  Have you put into place any kind of 

control mechanisms, any kind of monies for poisons or 

anything like that, to control these problems? 

 

And I guess I should allow the minister a chance to respond to 

the several issues and questions that I've raised before I go into 

a segmented part of the explanatory notes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the difficulty I have is that 

most of the issues which were raised in the address just heard 

have very little to do with this Act and a lot to do with The 

Environmental Management and Protection Act. 

 

I do want to comment though on a few specific comments that 

the member opposite made.  He said it was foolish to be putting 

in place regulations before we have other mechanisms in place 

in order to deal with these issues.  I think those are very 

important words for him to consider, because the regulations 

that he is complaining about were put into place in 1989 and 

1990 by the previous government.  And since we've come into 

office, I have been consulting with the broad community about 

trying to sensitize them to maintain the public health goals, the 

public safety goals that are implied here, and yet making them 

sensitive to the circumstances he describes. 

 

I suspect in all the fun that your colleague was having at Maple 

Creek or wherever he had his meeting, he didn't bother to 

mention the fact that the source of the insensitivities that the 

people were complaining about rested with him. 

 

I want to say, when you talk about overkill, that that comment 

also applies.  That is the reason why we have changed the 

approach in the department and we are consulting on both of 

the issues that you raise.  With respect to the landfill issue, we 

are consulting with the communities and dealing with the 

problems as they arise and we are getting good cooperation.  

And the communities, when we're discussing landfilling 

questions are cooperative in looking for alternatives to 

landfilling and that is the way this should occur. 

 

In respect to underground storage tanks, you may have missed 

the announcement yesterday, but a series of announcements 

were made yesterday with respect to the sensitization of the 

regulations around underground storage tanks and around 

chemical warehouses.  And we can make available to you a 

copy of the press release from yesterday if you didn't have a 

chance to read your paper or watch the news. 

I want to say that it is clear that environmental management 

issues require cooperation and consensus processes.  The 

department has established broad stakeholder groups for all of 

the issues that you describe.  And without getting into any 

specifics that you made with respect to the issues of 

underground storage tanks and burning, I simply want to assure 

you and the public that the department is in close consultation 

with those people affected in order to have the regulations that 

provide the degree of public comfort and safety that's required 

and is sensitive to the financial issues you raised. 

 

(1230) 

 

You raised a specific question with respect to hazardous 

substances which is also part of another Act and not this one.  

And I want to say that we are meeting cooperatively.  I called a 

meeting of western ministers of the Environment last week and 

we discussed these issues that affect us across the border.  And 

I want to say that these issues, we're developing cooperative 

western strategies on all the issues with respect to waste 

management. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I appreciate the 

fact that you're getting on top of this, Mr. Minister.  You refer 

to the fact that the past administration brought in some of these 

regulations that are causing some of the concerns.  And my 

reflection on that would simply be this: you and your 

government have taken a lot of time explaining to the people of 

Saskatchewan how wrong a lot of the things done by the past 

administration were.  And in fact if you feel that way about it, 

obviously you should change those things.  You are now the 

government in control and you are in charge of not 

complaining about what happened, but of making the changes 

necessary to make society better. 

 

I will take no credit whatever for the initiatives though that 

were performed by the past administration, not having been 

personally involved with that.  So you can leave me out of that 

part of it in your deliberations. 

 

I wanted to ask, under the Bill itself, Bill 84, under the section 

3 of the explanatory notes, it says here that under 2(g) of 

number 3 -- I don't know why it's lettered that way -- but 

anyway the definition of waste minimization places some 

parameters on what the minister will have power to undertake 

respecting waste minimization initiatives. 

 

Now how does that in fact affect your powers?  And I also, 

when I read the first part of that about the reducing 

uncertainties . . . can these new regulations in that section be 

done by an order in council or by the cabinet in some way 

without coming back with further legislation?  Kind of two 

questions there because it's a kind of a split thing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the disclaimers 

the member opposite makes.  I wouldn't take any credit for the 

actions of your colleagues previous either if I were a wise 

person.  And I think 



May 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1917 

you're wise in separating yourself from the actions of those 

who have gone before you. 

 

I only commented on the question -- your very own comments 

that you said it would be foolish to set up a regulatory regime 

without having a full plan in place.  I thought that was a 

comment that was appropriately directed towards those same 

colleagues from which you disassociate yourself at the time 

when they initiated them.  I just wanted to make that clear.  

And you might want to have this out with your colleagues in 

the back room afterwards, because they may wish to bring you 

into a more cooperative spirit with them. 

 

With respect to the meaning of waste minimization, it is 

everything from the reduction of packaging to composting to 

taking special streams of product and dealing with them 

differently as a resource, separating them from the waste 

stream. 

 

With respect to the regulation thereof, there will be no 

significant initiatives.  I want to say that it was contemplated at 

one point for this Bill to actually have fees and charges 

implementable by regulation.  We chose not to do that.  It 

certainly does happen.  But it's more common that those kinds 

of fees and charges are placed on a specific product by 

legislation. 

 

It would be our purpose now to plan those special streams of 

products, and where fees and charges are a desirable strategy, 

introduce them by legislation next spring in the legislature.  But 

there is no intent by any empowering regulation here to do that 

now. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

appreciate your explanation.  Just in passing, I would say that 

you're right.  There are some things that the past administration 

did that I don't totally, wholeheartedly agree with; but there 

were many things that they did that were very, very well done 

and very good for the province of Saskatchewan.  And in 

overall consideration of weighing the good against the bad, I 

thought the administration was a lot better than any we've ever 

had in the province.  I'm particularly happy with the 

agricultural programs that actually did put money into the 

hands of farmers in the province and actually did attempt to 

build a tax base. 

 

So we can always point to our mistakes and I'm sure that you 

will make a few.  I suspect maybe a few folks pointed some 

fingers at you when you were minister of Agriculture and 

might have suggested that you weren't totally on the mark with 

the decisions you made to destroy the agricultural base of this 

province. 

 

So having said that, I want to go back into this Bill and the 

existing provisions and under section 7, the existing provisions 

in the explanation, my question that I made just a brief note 

here:  who gets the power out of this process in that section? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Just want to ask the member if he might 

provide us with a list of those things of which he was proud.  

The issue of trying to build a tax base, I think what you built 

was a debt base but we will not discuss that further here.  The 

issue in that section of 

the legislation is simply a power of government. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, I missed one set of questions I wanted to ask you 

about.  This Bill talks about establishing planning and research, 

development, the coordination of policies and implementation 

of those policies.  Just what kind of costs are we talking about 

here, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, there are no additional 

costs planned.  Those are simply . . . will be departmental 

functions. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you must have some 

funds allocated from within your department budget for this 

type of proposal.  What would those funds be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- They are the departmental costs that are 

built into the estimates now. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  One of your 

colleagues is suggesting this is slower than the ice age.  Well I 

would suggest to that minister that we are trying to prevent the 

ice age from forming in this province by handling wastes in the 

proper manner. 

 

Mr. Minister, how much would the total cost for this 

programing and everything -- the initiatives, the waste 

reduction -- cost for everyone across the province?  That 

includes the provincial government, the municipal government, 

and the individuals who may be involved. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I'm not sure how to answer the question 

because I . . . waste minimization may . . . waste efforts begin 

at the point of regulations when you describe what levels of 

contaminants are allowable in effluent, in air; when you 

describe how hazardous substances have to be disposed of; 

when you describe the transportation systems; when you 

describe the storage system as in a chemical warehousing; 

when you describe the appropriate dealing with a 

contamination that results from industrial activity or personal 

activity; when you describe the waste collection system and 

proceeding onward from it. 

 

So the planning initiatives are not large, costly endeavours. 

 

If you want to study the cost of properly dealing with the 

environmental consequences of living in a sustainable society, 

then we need more time than today to discuss that kind of a 

paper because clearly the society here . . . and I mean, the Rio 

conference, the Earth Summit last year, that was a major theme 

of their activity, was putting together 900 pages of plans, out of 

which there were only two major agreements. 

 

But to address the very question you're asking -- like what 

impact on our present activity do we have to have in order to 

make our society sustainable?  So it's a very difficult question 

to answer on a large scale.  It's just that it is going to have to be 

the way we do 



1918 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1993 

business and the way we live in the future, and whatever costs 

there are will be the costs inherent in being able to live safely 

on this planet. 

 

With respect to the planning costs, with respect to help in 

coordinating activities, those are nickels and dimes by 

comparison. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it may be nickels 

and dimes to you but to a good number of the people across this 

province who will have to be involved in things like waste 

minimization, it can be a very significant financial impact. 

 

Have you done any studies to what the costs associated with 

implementing your study program that you have in place right 

now of all the collection and recycling, if that was spread 

across the province, what would those costs be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The purpose of the regional waste 

management strategy is in fact to test some ideas about how 

regional waste management processes can work.  And until 

those tests have been done and people identify what the proper 

strategies are, you can't cost them. 

 

So the whole idea of the pilot projects is to give us those kinds 

of numbers that you're describing, what would be the costs of 

doing things in this fashion that would be sustainable in the 

long run. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  Would 

you be prepared to give us some interim study reports and 

costing reports as this study goes along? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes.  I appreciate the positive results of 

the cooperation on other Bills where we've worked together, 

and we'd be pleased to share any information with you that we 

have. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank our 

officials for their support in addressing the questions of the 

opposition on this Bill.  I thank the members of the opposition 

for their interest and their questions on this matter, and their 

cooperation. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'd also like 

to thank the minister's official and the minister for coming in 

today and answering those questions.  We look forward to the 

papers that he will supply us.  Thank you very much. 

 

(1245) 

 

Bill No. 81 -- An Act to amend The Alcohol Control Act and 

to make certain Consequential amendments to certain Acts 

as a result of the enactment of this Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 Mr. Chairman, to my left I have Gord Nystuen, the acting 

chairman of the Liquor Board and the Liquor Licensing 

Commission, also acting chief executive officer of the 

Saskatchewan Gaming Commission.  Behind me I have Paul 

Weber, the vice president of liquor operations.  To my right I 

have Susan Amrud, Crown solicitor with the Department of 

Justice.  Immediately behind her is Hal Kathol, director of 

licensing and registration with the Gaming Commission.  And 

to his right is Don McRobb, director of compliance and control 

with the Gaming Commission. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I'd 

just like to have you identify where in the Act you have 

differences that are there that relate to the former two Acts that 

deal with the blend that you've got here.  And if there are any 

differences, I'd like you to identify them and provide me the 

reasons why you have, and then we'll probably dispense with it 

quickly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  

Basically there are two changes that you had asked for.  And 

one would be the ability to regulate and manufacture gaming 

equipment -- and that's found in the definition of gaming 

services which would be to the front of the Act -- and 

collecting mark-up at the border which is section 11.1, which 

would allow Saskatchewan government officials to work at 

border crossings to collect mark-up when there might be some 

imports. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- You're talking about equipment that's coming 

in from the United States or, well, it might even come in 

offshore, but it might come in through the United States or 

wherever so that you have opportunity to be there to investigate 

bringing that material in or that equipment in.  Is that right? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Basically what it does, to the hon. 

member, is it gives you the opportunity to regulate the 

manufacturing.  We can regulate leasing in the province here 

now, and those kinds of arrangements.  But it also gives you 

the opportunity to regulate the manufacturing of equipment. 

 

The Chair: -- Can I ask, will the committee grant leave to deal 

with the approval on a page-by-page basis?  Is that agreed? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 62 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Schedules 1 and 2 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- If I may, I'd just like to thank the minister and 

his officials for coming in and answering the questions. 



May 21, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1919 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you.  I'd like to thank the 

member for his questions.  What this does prove is that on 

occasion the member from Morse and I can agree on certain 

items.  And I'd as well like to thank my officials for their 

patience. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 82 -- An Act to amend The Change of Name Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move this Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 84 -- An Act to amend The Litter Control Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move this Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 81 -- An Act to amend The Alcohol Control Act and 

to make certain Consequential amendments to certain Acts 

as a result of the enactment of this Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move this Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- If I could wish everyone here a good 

weekend, a good long weekend, and with that, Mr. Speaker, I'll 

move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 12:56 p.m. 

 


