




















































Hansard: April 01, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 769 

 April 1, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 

 

Clerk Assistant: — Mr. Solomon, the chairperson of the 

Standing Committee on Crown Corporations, presents the 

second report of the said committee which is hereby tabled. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm very pleased to 

report that the Standing Committee on Crown Corporations has 

completed its review of all outstanding tabled annual reports of 

Crown corporations within our purview in a timely fashion for 

the first time since 1981. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — As members would recall during the period 

1982 to 1991, the committee did not complete its business in a 

timely fashion. Answers to members' questions concerning 

various Crowns were invariably late or were not responded to 

at all by the ministers of the former government. And indeed, 

the committee did not even meet during the last year of the 

former government's term. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in these difficult economic times government 

expenditures and services are under a magnifying glass of 

public scrutiny, and so should they be. I want to report to the 

Assembly and to the public of Saskatchewan today that the 

Crown Corporations Committee over the past 15 months has 

been applying a magnifying glass of public scrutiny to the 

existing Crowns. 

 

What this means is that now more than ever, the Crowns sector 

through our legislative committee is responsible and 

accountable to the taxpayers of this province. 

 

I'd like to put into perspective this very issue, Mr. Speaker. 

Last summer I had an occasion, on behalf of the committee and 

on behalf of the Public Accounts Committee, to attend the 

annual meeting of the Canadian Council of Public Accounts 

Committees and conference of legislative auditors, along with 

my colleague, the member from The Battlefords. The main 

conference topic was accountability of Crown corporations and 

as chair of the committee, I attended as a resource person. 

 

The point of all this is that Saskatchewan's accountability 

process for its departments, agencies, and particularly the 

Crown corporations, is second to no other jurisdiction in 

Canada. This is a little-known fact of which all of us in this 

Assembly should be very proud, Mr. Speaker. 

We are the only jurisdiction in Canada which reviews every 

Crown corporation annually. We are the only jurisdiction in 

Canada which has both the ministers and their officials appear 

before our committee to answer questions and to be responsible 

and accountable to the public. Indeed we are the only 

jurisdiction in Canada that takes seriously the role and impact 

of Crown corporations on our tax dollars on a regular basis. 

 

As chair of the Crown Corporations Committee, my message in 

tabling our report this afternoon is twofold. Saskatchewan 

people should know that their legislative committee on Crown 

corporations is now working in the public's interest, and that 

Saskatchewan has the most exhaustive, comprehensive 

accountability system for review of Crowns anywhere in this 

nation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — But even though Saskatchewan is the most 

diligent and accountable when it comes to reviewing the 

operations of the Crown sector, our committee believes there is 

still room for improvement. 

 

We have made significant changes in our committee's 

procedures since December 1991 to become more effective 

ourselves, but more importantly to make our Crown 

corporations more accountable to the public. 

 

Much of the credit for this new era of accountability must go to 

the government ministers who have been most forthcoming and 

open in their responses and participation in committee 

deliberations. And our committee thanks those ministers for 

their past and continued cooperation. 

 

Finally I wish to thank all members of the Standing Committee 

on Crown Corporations for their hard work, dedication, and 

cooperation. Without your support the committee simply would 

not function. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, all our committee and on behalf of 

our committee wish to extend a vote of appreciation and thanks 

to the Clerk, Mr. Greg Putz, for his very able and competent 

assistance over the last year. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — I move: 

 

 That the second report of the Standing Committee on Crown 

Corporations be now concurred in. 

 

Seconded by the member from Moosomin. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I just 

want to join with the member from Regina, the chairman of the 

Crown Corporations, and present a presentation of this report. 

But I first of all would like to make a couple of comments. I 

would have been more 



770 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1993 

than happy to have assisted the member in putting together his 

report. I like the fact that the member talked about the openness 

and forwardness of government members, and certainly the 

cabinet members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we would trust that in the future the cabinet 

would — and ministers and anyone involved — would be so 

forthcoming with their answers, as on some of the occasions 

we experienced in the recent debate in Crown Corporations. 

 

In fact I would have to commend the chairman for his work on 

committee but I would have to suggest, as we did recently in 

this House, that certainly a chairman has the opportunity to 

take part in debate but should allow someone else to — when 

he wants to get into the debate — to take a moment to fill his 

position in the chair. And I just bring that to the attention of the 

chairperson so that when we get into the further debate, if he 

wants to enter, he takes the proper procedure. 

 

The other thing I would like to bring to the attention of the 

House, and I think the member brought it forward, is the fact 

that the openness that was there. Going back . . . I think the 

member could have maybe gone back to the '70s in talking 

about how the Crown Corporations have worked. And maybe 

there's been a little more forwardness in the past year and a 

half, if so. But we certainly . . . if we were to look back over 

the period of time I believe that all members certainly want to 

see Crowns operate more openly and smoothly. 

 

And I must admit that it was certainly a help to have the auditor 

come into the Crowns and make some of his observations and 

present them to us. And I think in the future we will see that the 

auditor is going to look forward to come into the Crown 

Corporations to present some of the concerns he has. And it 

gives us, as individual members, a greater ability to sit there 

and effectively question the ministers and make sure that the 

Crowns operate and function properly. 

 

So at this time I concur with the member from Regina North 

West. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to this Assembly 27 grade 8 

students from St. Joseph's School in Swift Current. They're 

seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, on the right side of the 

clock here. We have with them their teacher Kelly Hammond 

and the chaperons Kathy Cuthbert and Dennis Hyggen. 

 

It is a pleasure for me to see these students here today. And I'm 

sorry that I cannot meet with them right after the question 

period but my colleague, the Minister of Education, is prepared 

to meet with the students and 

have their picture taken with her and they might even enjoy 

that more than having their picture taken with me. 

 

So please welcome these students to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you and 

through you to the members of the Assembly a group of 

students that are visiting today from my constituency, a group 

of grade 11 and 12 students from Pangman, Saskatchewan, 

who are sitting in the west gallery. 

 

I also want to welcome their teacher and a former colleague of 

mine from Prairie View School Division, Angus Addley, and 

their bus driver Robert Bell. 

 

I look forward to meeting with them after, about 3 o'clock, for 

pictures, juice, and some good questions. And I'd like all 

members just to join with me in welcoming them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I'd join in welcoming as well 

the class but especially Angus Addley who used to reside in my 

constituency. It's nice to see you here and I so seldom get to 

introduce guests who come down from the far North, so 

welcome Angus. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's a pleasure for 

me to introduce to you and to all members of the Assembly 

today 25 grade 5 and 6 students that are from Rouleau School 

and they're seated in your gallery, sir. They are here today with 

their teacher, Judy Nicholson, and chaperons, Hazel Anaka, 

Kim Clarke, Merrylyn Coward, Karen Payant, and their bus 

driver, Dianne Sanborn. 

 

The group are in to watch proceedings today and learn all about 

parliamentary procedure and I am going to go out afterwards 

and have a picture and a drink with them and then try to 

explain exactly what does go on in here. So welcome the 

students from Rouleau, please. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Patronage Appointments 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a 

prominent Saskatchewan politician once said and I quote: 

 

 My general proposition is that . . . political people, party 

people, and defeated MLAs and candidates ought not to serve 

. . . because they give the wrong perception. . . . If we don't 

succeed in it and continue to appoint party hacks, . . . then 

I've gotten nowhere. 



April 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 771 

Mr. Speaker, the politician that made that bold pledge was the 

current NDP (New Democratic Party) Premier of the province 

of Saskatchewan, and that quote was from the Leader-Post on 

March 1, 1991. Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, we had the Minister of 

Community Services appoint the Premier's personal assistant, 

Mr. Al Shpyth, a long-time NDP party hack, to a panel, to a 

panel reviewing surface rights in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

My question today, Mr. Speaker, my question is to the keeper 

of the provincial seal, the Deputy Premier: Mr. Deputy 

Premier, I'm wondering if you have reneged on the Premier's 

assessment regarding political patronage? And I wonder, given 

that this is a blatant partisan appointment, are you saying that 

you weren't wrong then but you are wrong now or is it vice 

versa? 

 

So, Mr. Premier, or Mr. Deputy Premier, would you please tell 

the people of Saskatchewan whether it was right to say that 

then or if it's right to say it now? Would you do that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 

hon. member for that question. I would like to provide for the 

members opposite the following information. 

 

Our surface lease agreements that we are now in the process of 

negotiating with the companies in the North have been part of 

government process for probably 20 years. I'm sure the last 

government also negotiated surface lease agreements. 

 

As you know, in January the federal-provincial review panel 

for uranium mining recommended to the government that they 

hold consultations in the North. The standard practice has been 

with government that we use our own personnel, people within 

our department, to go out and do the preliminary consultations 

before we negotiate an agreement. 

 

At this point in time we didn't have anyone within our 

department who had the background expertise to follow up on 

the extensive consultations that the federal-provincial panel 

recommended. But I would remind members opposite that it 

has been standard practice for people within government to 

hold consultations prior to negotiating a surface lease 

agreement. 

 

We're following through with that, but the problem we have at 

this point in time is our personnel within our department is very 

limited. Mr. Shpyth has extensive background in doing 

environmental consultations. This is his profession and he was 

a logical choice within government to do the job. So we have 

recommended that he be the government chair in the 

consultation process. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam 

Minister, there are a couple of other qualifications that go with 

it. You got to be objective and you got to be non-partisan, and 

I'm not sure that having worked for the Premier and having 

worked for the New Democratic Party all these years, if he 

exactly qualifies. 

 

I have a new question, Mr. Speaker, to the Deputy Premier. Mr. 

Deputy Premier, there's a perception problem out there that 

your government says one thing and does another. You gave a 

pledge to end political patronage in this province. So I wonder 

if you could tell the Assembly today, Mr. Deputy Premier, why 

you have appointed the former New Democratic Party 

treasurer, Mr. Gordon Nystuen Jr., chief executive officer of 

the Saskatchewan Gaming Commission. I'm wondering, Mr. 

Deputy Premier, and I'm sure everyone present is, including 

your own back-benchers, exactly what the qualifications are of 

this individual to head up the Gaming Commission. Would you 

do that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. In answer to the question posed by the Leader of the 

Opposition, I'd be more than pleased to outline Mr. Nystuen's 

qualifications with respect to the position that he's about to 

take. 

 

He has been appointed as the acting chief executive officer of 

the Gaming Commission, the Liquor Board, and the Liquor 

Licensing Commission, and I underline sir, acting. The 

qualifications of this particular gentleman, to make the member 

— the Leader of the Opposition — aware is that he has been 

heavily involved in the organization and the reorganization of 

government departments since this government embarked upon 

that. He was in that process as it began and we would like to 

see him in this very important area as it continues. 

 

Gaming, as you will know, is a priority of this government at 

this point in time with the VLT (video lottery terminal) project, 

with the casinos, and the bingos all in need of some direct 

attention and some reorganization to that area. And I think he 

will do a very good job. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to the qualifications of Mr. Nystuen, 

he's been a managing partner in a seed farm, a financial adviser 

to the Farm Debt Review Board, a credit adviser to the Farm 

Credit Corporation, involved in the banking industry. I think he 

is well qualified to handle this consolidation and I'm sure he 

will serve the people of this province well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'll place my 

question to the minister in charge of politics for the 

government, the Deputy Premier. 

 

Mr. Deputy Premier, your minister has just said that giving the 

chief bagman of your political party the number one position in 

the Gaming Commission, a 



772 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1993 

commission that is up to its ears in controversy, is the right 

thing to do. You've got a commission under your government's 

direction which has awarded $20 million in taxpayers' money 

in contracts to American firms that have been accused in other 

jurisdictions of bribing government officials, of fraud, and even 

having mob connections. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Premier, I think we have a perception 

problem here. Don't you see the problem with hiring a 

long-time NDP activist, your chief bagman, to oversee the 

Gaming Commission, a commission that has to be absolutely 

independent and without political interference? Don't you see 

the problem, Mr. Deputy Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I'd be more than 

pleased to answer that question to the Leader of the Opposition. 

This is not a perception problem. This man is clearly able to 

handle the job to which he was appointed on a temporary basis, 

that being to reorganize the Gaming Commission and the 

Liquor Board. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I say what this is is a credibility 

problem, and it's a credibility on behalf of the member who sits 

across, the Leader of the Opposition. Because you, sir, in 

asking questions with respect to these types of things, would 

want to look at your record and look at the record, not of 

citizens and business people of this province, but defeated 

MLAs. 

 

So let me share with you the list: Bob Andrew; Eric Berntson; 

Larry Birkbeck; Gordon Currie; Gordon Dirks; Louis Domotor; 

Sid Dutchak; Tim Embury; Ralph Katzman; Myles Morin; 

Keith Parker; Paul Rousseau; Jack Sandberg; Paul Schoenhals; 

Bud Smith; Graham Taylor. 

 

Mr. Leader of the Opposition, this is not a perception problem; 

this is a credibility problem and the credibility and the lack of it 

is from over there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess, Mr. 

Speaker, that the minister wasn't paying attention in the first 

question that I asked. And I quote again: 

 

 My general proposition is that . . . political people, party 

people, and defeated MLAs and candidates ought not to serve 

. . . because they give the wrong perception . . . If we don't 

succeed and continue to appoint party hacks, . . . then I've 

gotten nowhere. 

 

Well the member from Riversdale has obviously gotten 

nowhere, Mr. Minister. Now the rock that you're hiding behind 

is getting smaller by the day. 

 

You've got a gaming industry that is nothing short of a disaster. 

You've got commission members charged 

with fraud. You've got commissions dealing . . . the 

commission dealing with questionable American firms. You're 

hiding security checks from this Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Minister, the CEOs (chief executive officer), the executive 

directors, the chairmans — I mean they go on without end. 

You've had four ministers in that position. You were only the 

latest in a series of failures. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, tell this Assembly today that this is simply 

an April Fool's joke, that you don't have the chief bagman of 

the New Democratic Party being the head of the Gaming 

Commission, the head of gambling in the whole province of 

Saskatchewan. Tell us it's an April Fool's joke, Mr. Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I will say to the 

member, Leader of the Opposition opposite, the only April 

Fool's joke is the line of questioning that he poses in this 

legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, as I've indicated, the 

appointment of Mr. Nystuen is number one, in an acting 

position, to oversee the amalgamation of the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Commission and the Liquor Board. It's part of the 

cost-saving measures and part of the streamlining of 

administration that this government started a number of months 

back that Mr. Nystuen was involved in quite intimately and 

will continue to be until this project is complete. 

 

And I want to say to the members opposite that this 

government realizes that we need to streamline, and part of the 

reason that we need to streamline is because of the actions of 

you and of the member from Estevan and of the member from 

Morse and all of your colleagues, the front-benchers who 

saddled this province with $760 million worth of interest 

annually that we have to pay. 

 

Mr. Nystuen is qualified to handle this job. I have all of the 

confidence in the world that he will do just that, what the 

people of Saskatchewan are asking from this government and 

that's to deliver an efficient and a fair government, and he'll be 

part of it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 

to the minister responsible for the Gaming Commission. Mr. 

Minister, on July 29, 1992 I stood in this House and I asked the 

minister responsible for gaming, the minister — actually the 

member from Churchill Downs — when the government would 

develop an overall coherent gaming strategy. And I quote his 

answer from Hansard: ". . . we have a coherent (gaming) 

strategy." 

 

Since that day, one minister announced a new gaming 



April 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 773 

framework and you, sir, announced yesterday that your 

department will be drawing up an overall strategy. Mr. 

Minister, can you tell us why after the minister told us on July 

29, 1992 that the NDP had a coherent gaming policy, why 

you're now starting all over again to develop a strategy for the 

fourth time in 16 months? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, in answer to the 

member's question, let me say this. The government has a 

policy. We have had a policy in place for a number of weeks, 

number of months, and I think the member is well aware of the 

fact that there is a gaming policy. It involves aboriginal people, 

it involves the exhibition associations, and it involves the 

Government of Saskatchewan. There are seven points to the 

policy and I'll send a copy across so that the member will 

clearly understand that we do in fact have a policy. 

 

What I want to say to the member is that we are developing 

strategically, with the people of this province, the placement of 

casinos because we want to see a long-term and a viable 

industry. And we believe within the framework of the policy 

that we have established, that you are well aware of but that I 

will refresh your memory on, that we do have a policy and we 

are with the people of this province developing long-term 

strategy, and that process will continue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Minister, the people of the province 

really do want to know what your fourth gaming strategy will 

be. They need to know whether all casino operations must be 

joint ventures between exhibition boards and native groups. 

They want to know under what terms and conditions the White 

Bear Indian Band will be able to reopen their casino. Since 

there is no A or B class fare in their area of the province, with 

whom would they enter into a joint venture? Or are what you 

are saying today is that this casino will never reopen under 

gaming strategy no. 4? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, in answer to the 

member's questions, this is gaming strategy no. 1. It is the only 

strategy that we have had in place and it is the only policy that 

we feel is necessary at this time. 

 

With respect to negotiations in different areas of the province, I 

guess I'll ask you to use your imagination. If aboriginal people 

from the north-west corner of this province, perhaps 6, 10, or 

12 or 15, or perhaps even 20 Indian bands were to decide that 

they wanted to sit down with perhaps the Prairieland Exhibition 

Association in Saskatoon or perhaps the exhibition association 

in North Battleford, in conjunction with the Government of 

Saskatchewan, in a joint venture, that we would sit down and 

negotiate just that. 

 

And I think that she understands quite clearly that there are 

many variations as to how that can happen. If she has in her 

mind a set pattern with identified players and who exactly that 

should be, exactly what the cost-sharing or the revenue-sharing 

arrangements 

should be, exactly who the partners should be, perhaps she 

would be willing to share the specifics of what she sees in 

terms of the casino industry in this province. What is the 

Liberal policy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well let's just 

look at some of the gaming strategy you have for the province. 

 

Mr. Minister, your Gaming Commission is meeting today with 

bingo hall owners who've been breaking the rules and giving 

out far too much prize money — a problem which began in 

1982 and still exists today despite the life and death of three 

different gaming strategies. 

 

Now the Gaming Commission doubled the amount of the 

money that it collects from bingo licences, now to the millions 

of dollars, continues to dump that money into government 

coffers, and yet you still have not implemented the one 

necessary control to clean up the bingo industry. 

 

Can you tell us, Mr. Minister, how much money is being 

budgeted by your government to implement an audit control 

system on bingo paper in all bingos throughout Saskatchewan 

to enforce the rules, and when that system is going to go into 

operation? Or are you still studying this one too? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I think, Mr. Speaker, in 

answer to the member's questions, it's really quite clear. What 

we're doing is restructuring the organization of the Gaming 

Commission. We're tying that in with the operations of the 

Liquor Board and the Liquor Licensing Commission. We're 

setting together one organization to deliver programs to 

administer these programs . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Streamline. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — . . . to streamline government's 

expenditures, and I would hope that the member would support 

that. 

 

On one hand, she talks about government not generating 

revenue, because that to her is painful, in every instance that I 

can recall that she's ever raised. On the other hand, she tells 

government to get in line with controlling the deficit and the 

expenditures on the provincial deficit. And I say to you, you 

can't have it both ways, Madam Minister. 

 

This government inherited the most horrendous mess that any 

government in Canada has ever inherited, from that PC 

(Progressive Conservative) operation that sits opposite in the 

opposition. We're trying, and we're working with the people of 

Saskatchewan, to cut government costs. We're working to get a 

control on the amount that we're spending on the deficit on an 

annual basis. And I say to the member opposite that we are 

going to do that. We're going to, by the measures we're taking 

. . . 



774 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1993 

The Speaker: — Order. Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 

you've had 16 months. I raised this with a previous minister 

many, many, many months ago. That's one of the most 

problematic things in the bingo industry and you don't even 

know what money can come in and go out because you haven't 

bothered doing the audit controls. 

 

Now you talk about making sure that there are no, and I quote: 

unsavoury characters in the gambling business. I'm interested 

in knowing, sir, if there are rules, rules today in the Gaming 

Commission to prohibit people with criminal records from 

working in the bingo industry, especially individuals who have 

actually served time in jail for crimes relating to their 

involvement with the bingo business. Now will you 

acknowledge that there is no rule prohibiting individuals such 

as this from owning a bingo hall licensed by the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Commission. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — First of all, thank you. Mr. 

Speaker, let me comment on a couple of things that the 

member raised. First of all, if she would care to look through 

the blue book she will find that there is more money for 

accounting procedures dealing with the issue that she asks. So 

do your homework, Madam Member. 

 

With respect to criminal involvement in terms of bingos, in 

terms of the VLTs, yes there are prohibitions in that regard. 

With respect to retroactivity, Madam Minister, you can check 

and we can discuss that in terms of that particular issue. But I 

say to you this. We are concerned about who's involved in 

gaming in this province, we will regulate, and as this industry 

progresses and grows, we will continue to modify and change 

as the requirements become necessary. 

 

These are regulations that have been around, many of them for 

a long time. And we are in the process — it's an ongoing 

process — of amending and changing to make them better. 

And I want to just say in closing . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Next question. 

 

Purchase of VLTs 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the minister responsible for the Gaming Commission. The 

Premier's appointment of an NDP fund-raiser to the head of the 

Gaming Commission, Mr. Minister, certainly adds a new twist 

to a very twisted issue. 

 

My question to you, sir, is this. Yesterday in this Assembly you 

promised to provide information regarding the tendering and 

awarding of the video lottery terminal contract to VLT (Video 

Lottery Technologies Inc.) and GTECH. Mr. Minister, will you 

tell this Assembly the date on which the tender or proposal was 

first called, when the short-list was prepared, the date when the 

contract was awarded, 

and the dates when the security review was initiated and when 

the report was completed. And would you also tell the 

Assembly which of the various ministers over the past couple 

of years has been responsible for each of these items, in the 

time that they were ministers responsible for the Gaming 

Commission. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 

member again for his question. First of all, I guess for probably 

the sixth, seventh time, let me explain to you that a contract has 

not been awarded. I mean that's plain and simple. Have you got 

that now, a contract has not been awarded? 

 

With respect to the dates I can say to you this, Mr. Member for 

Morse: I took to cabinet two days after I was appointed to this 

position in charge of the Gaming Commission, an information 

item from the Saskatchewan Gaming Commission that 

indicated that they had chosen two companies off of a short-list 

of four and were going . . . after the criteria was checked they 

were going to sit down with these two companies to see if they 

in fact could arrange and come to a contractual arrangement to 

have these VLTs purchased by the Gaming Commission and 

put throughout this province in age-restricted venues. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, you have 

claimed that you had never seen the security report; you said 

that to the media. I am sure you have acquainted yourself with 

the contents to this point. 

 

Can you tell this Assembly whether the numerous accusations 

of bribery, fraud, and corruption which surround the American 

contractors were in that report, and whether the various 

investigations included one by the FBI (Federal Bureau of 

Investigation)? Were they also included in that report? Would 

you answer that for me, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess, 

day by day, I think I'm getting the member closer and closer to 

understanding the process that's available to him and I'm going 

to take him one step further today. 

 

First of all, I want to say that I haven't seen the report and nor, 

sir, do I intend to look at it. But let me say this. I brought with 

me today an access to information request form. All you have 

to do is on this line here you put your name on, your address, 

you put the provincial institution that you're requesting the 

information from, you ask for a detailed description of what 

you would like to see, and then you sign your name. 

 

And if you're in trouble with respect to finding the 

commissioner's office, I can help you with that, maybe 

tomorrow. But if a Clerk will take this, I'll pass this on to the 

member. 



April 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 775 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Future of Rural Health Care 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question, Mr. 

Speaker, is for the Minister of Health. Madam Minister, 

yesterday I extended an invitation to you but since I didn't get a 

clear answer, I just wanted to extend it one more time to you. 

 

This evening in Eatonia, Saskatchewan, there is a meeting with 

respect to health care services in this province. Madam 

Minister, I expect there will be a large turnout because of the 

great concern that there is about health care. 

 

Madam Minister, will you come to Eatonia this evening to 

explain to those people what kinds of changes that they are 

going to have to expect with respect to health care in this 

province? Will you come to Eatonia, Madam Minister, to 

explain your damaging health care wellness plan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, thank you for 

the question. The people . . . I have checked with my office 

before lunch and it's my understanding that we have not been 

contacted by anyone from Eatonia. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I 

think that I'll be very interested in hearing what the concerns 

are from the people of Eatonia. 

 

I think that they have probably received a letter from the 

president of the SHA (Saskatchewan Health-Care Association) 

yesterday which describes the manner in which it is intended 

that bed targets, for example, be implemented. There is a 

process in place for the Department of Health to go out and talk 

to communities in the days and weeks to come. As well, the 

Saskatchewan Health-Care Association will be going out to 

help people get involved in developing district boards and 

implementing bed targets and explaining to them what is going 

on. 

 

Now the member opposite obviously is interested in making as 

much as he can out of . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — May I with leave of the Assembly 

revert to ministerial statements. I couldn't hear you when you 

made that announcement. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Government Acceptance of Mediator's Report 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 

and thank you to members of the House for allowing us to go 

back to ministerial statements. I'm pleased to rise in the House 

today to inform the members that earlier today the government 

was able 

to tell the Saskatchewan Government Employees' Union 

bargaining committee that we were able to accept the 

recommendations of conciliator Vince Ready in the SGEU 

(Saskatchewan Government Employees' Union) . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Ready's recommendations were 

communicated to us only yesterday, Mr. Speaker, but we felt 

quick action was needed in this . . . in an effort to end this long 

dispute. The recommendations in Mr. Ready's report recognize 

the difficult financial situation this province is in, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Ready was able to accommodate our fiscal situation while 

at the same time addressing the concerns of the union 

respecting job security, part-time employment, and other 

issues. The government believes the recommendations 

presented by Mr. Ready are a fair compromise on the 

outstanding issues. We hope the union's bargaining committee 

and members feel the same way. I'm very hopeful that the 

union's bargaining committee will accept the recommendation 

soon so a ratification vote can be held. 

 

Mr. Ready's assistance in this matter has been invaluable. He 

has always been regarded with a great deal of respect in 

Saskatchewan for his abilities in mediation and conciliation, 

and I believe his most recent report confirms his reputation. 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased he was able to find what I believe to 

be a fair solution to a difficult situation for both the 

government and its employees. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

reply to the statement by saying that we in the official 

opposition are always happy when there can be peaceful 

settlements to negotiations of this type. However, perhaps the 

minister should confirm to the taxpayers of this province who 

will actually pay for this settlement, how much this settlement 

is in fact going to cost them. Before this process continues, I 

think that would only be fair. And perhaps the minister could, 

if not right away, very quickly confirm the belief that the 

unions have won flat out over the taxpayers and the other 

workers in this province who have had to accept wage freezes, 

cuts, and downloading. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if this union has in fact been offered a zero, zero, 

and 2.5 per cent settlement, as has been rumoured, I am sure 

that the minister will want to be very, very clear to the general 

public in telling them the exact facts, which are that this union 

has been out for almost two years. That, and in effect the 2.5 

per cent wage settlement, would apply to this year — the only 

jurisdiction that has received that kind of a settlement through 

the entire province. And then it becomes abundantly clear that 

this is a totally unfair and unacceptable situation to the rest of 

the workers 



776 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1993 

in the community. It will soon become apparent, Mr. Speaker, 

that the union bosses that ran the NDP election for them are 

now being paid off. 

 

The Speaker: — Will the member from Regina Rosemont 

please come to order. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Interim Supply 

 

The Chair: — Order. The business before the Committee of 

Finance is interim supply and in particular the motion by the 

Minister of Finance: 

 

 That a sum not exceeding $340,881,000 be granted to Her 

Majesty on account for the twelve months ending March 31, 

1994. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 

would you just mind reconciling the difference between what's 

to be voted and the estimates. I have this one page here that has 

the 1993-94 to-be-voted numbers and then I have the '93-94 

estimates. And what we're voting on is a little bit different than 

the estimates; in some cases they're the same, in some cases 

they're different. 

 

I wondered if you would tell us, for example, Agriculture and 

Food, they're identical but when you look at Environment and 

Resource Management, Executive Council, interest on the debt, 

and some others, they're not. Could you reconcile those two 

columns. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The reason 

for the difference in the numbers is that there are some 

statutory amounts that have to be paid, and that's why you see 

the difference in the estimates and the actual amount requested. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Would the minister just explain that in a little 

more detail so that we totally understand what that means in 

layman's terms? So if the average taxpayer out there was to 

ask, why is it, for example, that we're going to vote on 

$167,824 for Municipal Government but you estimate spending 

about $10,000 more than that. Why are those two different? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — The statutory amounts that I mentioned 

before are those that are provided by law, and these have to be 

paid, and some of them are interest on the public debt, for 

instance. And if we did not provide this by law, that the interest 

on the public debt would be paid automatically, we would have 

some nervous creditors and investors, as I'm sure the member 

from Estevan would recognize; that these people expect their 

money first and it's by statute and by law that we have to pay 

these. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Minister, if that's the case, if this is 

to pay the interest on the public debt and by 

statute, could you just explain then why interest on public debt 

is zero to be voted on and yet it's $847,500. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — The answer, and I think if the member 

would check the amounts, at the 847,000 . . . 847,500 is the 

amount listed on the Estimates and this is . . . We're not voting 

on the Estimates. 

 

I don't know what the question really is. We're voting on 

interim supply which is one-twelfth. And the reason we're not 

voting on the interest is simply because the interest has to be 

paid by law, so we're not voting that. And besides, we're not 

voting on the Estimates, so the number he's reading comes 

from the estimate column. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Just so we make it clear. You're saying that 

then in the Municipal Government account, most of it is not 

statute and we don't have to reconcile it. There's no need to 

reconcile it with the Estimates. 

 

It's a little confusing when you see some of them are virtually 

zero, to be voted on, and then when you go to the Estimates, 

it's a very large number. Some are less; some are more. Just 

walk through one of those examples. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, on page 93 of the blue 

book you'll notice on the top of the page the Meewasin Valley, 

the Wakamow Valley, the Wascana Centre Authority, the Swift 

Current Chinook Parkway, and on page 92 the amounts given 

to SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency), 

are statutory amounts and do not have to be voted. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Minister, what the average taxpayer 

would like to have clearly laid out to them is that when you're 

voting on this column, one-twelfth of the 1993 amounts, why 

they don't relate to . . . or how they're connected to what you 

estimate the total expenditures will be. And we see no 

connection between what's to be voted on and what's estimated. 

 

Can you give us a little better linkage? What's the linkage 

between what we're voting on and what you think you're going 

to spend? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, the estimated amount 

minus the statutory gives us the to be voted. And there's a 

difference of about a million . . . a billion dollars here between 

the estimate and the to be voted. That approximate a billion 

dollars is statutory, and that is provided by law. Then you take 

one-twelfth of the $3.969 billion and you come up with the 

exact amount that we're asking for in interim supply. 

 

Mr. Devine: — All right. Would the minister tell us: is there 

any difference in the source of money going into statutes 

versus what we're voting on today? In other words, the money 

going into statutes, does that come from sales tax and income 

tax and general taxes? Is it any different than the revenue 

coming in for what we're going to vote on today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — The amount that goes into the . . . 



April 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 777 

the statutory amounts comes from the General Revenue Fund 

so there are no other monies. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Minister, obviously the general 

taxpayer is concerned about this interim supply, in part because 

we've been through two special warrants. And you promised, 

and your administration and the NDP Premier promised, there 

would be no special warrants. Now we're into interim supply 

and we've got meetings and public outcries all across the 

province because of tax increases and cuts. So the confidence 

level is declining very rapidly, as we speak, in your ability to 

provide the kind of revenue that you think is here. 

 

Could you tell us, have you done any work at all, anything that 

you could publish — and from my recollection there always is 

some research done — on the impact of raising the sales tax, 

the impact of raising the sales tax on general economic 

conditions and on the ability to pay in the province of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, the question that the 

member from Estevan asks is really not part of interim supply. 

But I believe that yesterday the Minister of Finance did explain 

to the House and to the members opposite that there were no 

special studies done on this. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Well the minister, for example, being from 

Swift Current, has no . . . no analysis of what an increase in the 

sales tax does to (1) his community, or (2) the Saskatchewan 

economy in terms of economic impact. In other words, if you 

raise sales tax to 10 per cent or 11 per cent — you've now 

raised it 29 per cent, from 7 to 9 — you have no analysis at all 

on, if you will, the tax elasticity of demand or the diminishing 

marginal return from revenue as you raise taxes. You have no 

idea what this might do to either your community or to the 

people of Saskatchewan as you raise sales tax. 

 

Is that what you're telling us, that you've done no analysis at 

all? You just raised the tax and you say well I hope this is the 

amount of money that'll come in. Are you assuming that as you 

raise . . . it's a straight-line relationship, as you raise taxes, 

you'll just get a proportionately more amount of income or 

revenue from the people, that we'll just continue to pay. Is that 

what you're assuming? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, I believe the member 

from Estevan is getting into, or wants to get into a debate on 

the E&H (education and health) tax, and I think he'll have an 

opportunity to do that when we get into more detail. He asks so 

many questions and he wandered all over the place so I'm a 

little at a loss to answer any of them, but I think that's the 

answer I'm going to give him. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, we'll just take them one at a 

time. Okay? Do you think, Mr. Minister, as a former high 

school principal in the city of Swift Current, do you think a 29 

per cent increase in sales tax will affect business in Swift 

Current? 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, I believe that I answered 

that question before. That has nothing to do with interim supply 

and I'm not sure that we're in this House here to debate what I 

think or what I don't think. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Minister, we are here to ask the 

minister questions about your attitude about raising revenue, 

because you have statute money here, you have money going 

into general revenue, and you are responsible for responding. 

And we're simply asking: if you have so much money in statute 

and so much money coming into general revenue and you want 

us to vote on it today, how can we vote fairly for the people of 

Saskatchewan and the taxpayers if you don't have any idea 

whether increase in taxes hurts the business community or not, 

or if in fact you'll get your revenue? Can't you tell us, Mr. 

Minister, if you raise taxes 10 per cent, do you expect the 

revenue to increase 10 per cent? Can you tell us that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Well, Mr. Chairman, now the member is 

asking me about my attitude towards these things, and I don't 

think that that has anything to do with interim supply. If they 

will stick with their questions on interim supply, we'd be happy 

to answer the questions. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Mr. Minister, if we can't ask you about your 

attitude, can we ask you about, have you done any research or 

do you have any information that would explain to the public 

the relationship between tax rates and revenue? If you raise 

sales tax 10 per cent, do you expect, Mr. Minister, revenues to 

go up 10 per cent? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to just 

repeat, again, the answer that I gave before. These are 

questions that properly belong when we talk about the 

education and health tax which will be debated later on when 

we get to committee. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Mr. Minister, you're asking us to give you a 

vote of confidence on $340 million that you're going to raise 

revenue. You're going to raise that money, and we're asking 

you, where you going to get the money? 

 

Now obviously, one of the ways is sales tax, and you've raised 

sales tax. Can't you tell the taxpayers of Saskatchewan what the 

impact is on the Saskatchewan economy or the impact in terms 

of how fast you'll raise revenue by raising sales tax? 

 

I mean I've asked that question of ministers before, and I've 

certainly seen my ministers respond in a polite fashion: yes, 

here's our best estimate of what it's going to be. Here's how we 

calculated it. And I know the young fellow sitting beside you 

has calculated that for several years. 

 

So I'm just asking: in these economic conditions, under these 

times and with your budget, can't you give us any indication of 

the relationship between your tax increases and the revenue 

you're going to generate from sales tax? It's a simple, 

straightforward, 



778 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1993 

honest question that deserves an answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — The answer, I think, is just as simple as 

the question. Let's get out of interim supply and into 

Committee of the Whole and we'll be ready to debate the E&H 

with you at length. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Minister, why do we have interim 

supply and why is this House set up like it is? Why do you 

think it is? I mean, respectfully, why do you think we're here? 

What is this all about? 

 

Is this just so that you can browbeat somebody or just say, let's 

get on with it, vote, and go home? 

 

These are sincere questions. You want one twelfth. You want 

$340 million. And all I'm asking you, if you raise taxes, what's 

the relationship in terms of revenue that's raised? That's an 

honest question. Any mayor would have to answer that; any 

alderman; any Finance minister. If you raise taxes, your 

worship, how much revenue do you get? What's the 

relationship? 

 

And then I want to ask in terms of income tax, because maybe 

it would be better to do income tax rather than sales tax, and if 

you're asking for $340 million you must have some indication 

what the relationship is. 

 

It's not acceptable, Mr. Minister, to say that we can't ask you 

questions about where you're getting your money. You're going 

to spend a great deal of money. Please respond. Any research at 

all. And if you have no research, I would be very surprised. 

 

But if you want to admit that to the people of Swift Current or 

the people of Regina or the people of Melfort or the people of 

Prince Albert, that you have no indication at all, no idea what 

you're doing and the relationship, then fair enough. You'll 

stonewall some more. 

 

It's a sincere question. Do you have any information to give to 

the taxpayer on the relationship between raising sales tax 10 

per cent and the amount of money that you're going to generate 

for revenue? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Let me answer the first question, Mr. 

Chairman. Interim supply is an interim measure so that we can 

get through the next month until we get to committee where we 

can discuss all aspects of this budget. 

 

The member keeps harping at me not answering the questions. 

I don't think that this is the first time that he has heard this, 

where the House has ruled, previous to me being here and 

previous to many other members being here, that those 

questions are not properly directed at interim supply. They're 

properly directed when we come to Committee of the Whole, 

when we discuss the budget. 

 

In fact it was your Finance minister, Lorne Hepworth, who 

insisted that the Speaker rule on this, that those 

questions were out of order. And I think the member from 

Estevan knows that, and if we could get on to interim supply 

we'd be happy to answer his questions. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, if the minister wants to get on 

to the Committee of Finance, if he wants just to bypass this and 

get into the Department of Finance, we can do that. Is that what 

you want? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, the answer to that 

question is: if they want to get on to the Committee of Finance, 

just pass the interim supply and we'll move on to the next item. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Mr. Minister, what is this, in your view? 

Would you describe then to the public and to the taxpayers that 

are watching you, what this committee is for. Would you take 

the time to explain why we're here in interim supply before we 

go into the Committee of Finance? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — In answer to the question from the 

member from Estevan, this is an expenditure motion, as I 

indicated earlier, to get us through the next month of the 

expenditures that the government is going to have to make. 

That's what this is. 

 

This is not a Finance committee meeting or questioning; this is 

simply interim supply, and as the word implies, it is for a short, 

interim period of one month to get us through the expenditures 

until we get on to rest of the business of the House. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Mr. Minister, in British parliamentary history 

this whole procedure is called grievance before supply. In other 

words, the opposition and the public are allowed to ask you 

questions before they grant you the privilege of spending this 

one-twelfth. 

 

Now I'll tell you, I'll tell you, Mr. Minister, people are not 

happy, number one, and don't believe that your tax increases 

are going to generate the revenue you think they are. And if 

you're wrong, you're not going to have this amount of money to 

spend in terms of one-twelfth. They want some comfort that 

maybe you know what you're talking about. 

 

In other words, I would bet you, sir, that the people of Swift 

Current, the people of Maple Creek, the people of Moose Jaw, 

the people of Rosetown, Kindersley, and Lloydminster would 

not agree with you at all — that 29 per cent increase in sales 

tax is going to increase economic activity in those communities 

that I just mentioned — and you are not going to get the tax 

revenue there. And if that's the case, you're going to find it 

move way into the middle of the province. And if you have no 

comment about that, if you don't understand it, fair enough. 

 

But you, sir, are before a committee that is grievance before 

supply. You have grievances out there, legitimate concerns that 

you might not be able to raise the money that you say you can. 

If you are wrong, then you won't have the one-twelfth you're 

asking for. So all we want to know is that you've done your 

homework or you can somehow justify coming up 



April 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 779 

with this amount of money — one twelfth. 

 

Can't you give us any indication that your tax hikes are going 

to generate the revenue that you say is here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — First of all, I'd like to comment, Mr. 

Chairman, on one of the earlier points that the member from 

Estevan made. We are quite prepared to answer questions as 

they pertain to the request that we're making on interim supply 

— no problem. You ask those questions on that and we're quite 

prepared to answer those questions. 

 

And that's exactly what we're here for; that's the purpose of 

having this kind of a Bill here so that we can talk about the 

things that we're going to spend, not about the whole program 

of the government. That comes at a different time. It's not 

something that we discuss here because we could be here for 

months discussing that kind of stuff. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Mr. Minister, fair enough. You want to ask 

what you're going to spend. But a corollary question is: where 

are you getting your money? Where are you getting this 

money? And if it's coming from income tax and sales tax, we 

want to know. 

 

Why don't you take a moment then and describe for me and to 

the taxpayer, on the terms of one-twelfth — take your whole 

budget and divide it by one-twelfth — where are you getting 

the money to do what you say you're going to do here? What 

percentage of it comes from sales tax, what percentage comes 

from income tax, and what percentage comes from other 

sources? 

 

Now if you can't tell us there, then I don't think that you know 

where you're going to get your money because getting the 

money is one hand, spending it is the other. And then we can 

get on to find out whether you really know what you're doing 

with it or not. 

 

But the first part of the question is: can you describe where 

you're getting the one-twelfth from in terms of sales tax and 

income tax? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it seems to me I've 

answered this question about half a dozen times, that there is a 

forum in this legislature where the member from Estevan can 

ask those questions and will get the answers in detail as to 

where we're going to get the money from. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 

Associate Minister, I think it's obvious for everyone who has 

been listening over the last 10 or 15 minutes that you are just 

absolutely stonewalling the opposition from getting 

information from you. 

 

I find it kind of queer that on such an important situation and 

occasion such as this, when you are asking the taxpayers of this 

province for the right to spend over $340 million of their tax 

dollars, that first of all, we don't even have the courtesy of 

being able to ask the Minister of Finance these questions; that 

what we are forced with is to contend with an Associate 

Minister of Finance who the other member there called the toy 

ministers. 

 

So we are finding ourselves in a situation by being stonewalled 

not even with the real thing, a facsimile of the real minister. 

And you're refusing to answer the member of Estevan's very, 

very legitimate questions. Where are you going to get this 

money from? 

 

You're quite prepared to spend 340-some million dollars of 

taxpayers' money but you refuse to say, this is where we're 

going to be getting it. And you use that excuse — and that's all 

it is, is a lame duck excuse — that this is not the proper forum 

for it, that this is interim supply, that there are other areas that 

the Department of Finance, that you would be willing to 

answer those questions. 

 

All right, Mr. Minister, we want those answers. You say you're 

prepared to give them in a different form. So, Mr. Chairman, I 

move: 

 

 That we now go to the Committee of Finance, vote 18. 

 

Which will give the minister all the leeway he needs in order to 

answer these questions. 

 

That motion, Mr. Chairman, is made by myself and seconded 

by the member from Estevan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Pardon me? It's non-debatable? Well I am fortunate that I gave 

all my reasons before then. Thank you very much. 

 

The division bells rang from 3:12 p.m. until 3:21 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Britton 

Muirhead D'Autremont 

Neudorf Goohsen 

Martens Haverstock 

Toth  

— 9 

Nays 

Thompson Johnson 

Tchorzewski Trew 

Lingenfelter Draper 

Teichrob Serby 

Solomon Whitmore 

Atkinson Sonntag 

Kowalsky Flavel 

Carson Roy 

Mitchell Cline 

Penner Scott 

Upshall McPherson 

Hagel Kujawa 

Koenker Crofford 

Lorje Stanger 

Lyons Knezacek 

Pringle Kluz 

Lautermilch Renaud 

Calvert Jess 

Murray  

— 37 



780 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1993 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I think what we have just witnessed over the 

last while — ever since question period — is pretty good 

evidence, I think, to the people of Saskatchewan how this 

government is operating. And I don't blame the members 

opposite for blushing and having red faces over there, because 

they got caught in the act. They got caught with their hands in 

the cookie jar. 

 

We have the associate member . . . Minister of Finance telling 

members opposite here that the proper place to ask the 

questions of where are you going to get the $340 million that 

you want us to agree to, of taxpayers' money . . . where are you 

going to get it from, we have been asking; and the Associate 

Minister of Finance says the proper place is to ask those 

questions in the Department of Finance. 

 

Well that's what this vote was all about, Mr. Chairman. We 

called your bluff. We said, we agree, we want those questions 

answered. So if you say it's in the Department of Finance, we 

say, let's go there. But your ponderous majority won out again. 

When we called your bluff and say, let's get answers to our 

questions, let's give you the proper forum in which to answer 

those questions, you refuse; you hide. You played 

hide-and-go-seek with the taxpayers of this province. 

 

You don't want to answer, Mr. Deputy Minister . . . or 

Associate Minister. You do not want to answer our questions 

and you'll do anything — anything — to hide. And this is the 

open, honest, forthright government that the people of 

Saskatchewan put their trust in. You're hacking and slashing 

across the province, no plan, most of things that you're doing 

are counter-productive, and then you have the audacity to say 

that this forum is not the proper place to ask you the questions: 

where are you going to get the money from? 

 

Now, Mr. Associate Minister, and Mr. Government House 

Leader, I'll tell you the reason why I'm becoming a little bit 

agitated is because the people want to know the answers to our 

questions. I'm not smart enough to dream up these questions 

myself, but the people are the ones that are saying, pass these 

questions on. And we're asking those questions on behalf of the 

people. 

 

And then we have shenanigans being played here with the 

House rules that do not allow us to ask those questions and 

there was a 10-minute bell ring. And there will be more 

10-minute bell rings because we've got to draw it to the 

attention of the people that you folks are not . . . I don't think 

it's not that you're not capable — your bureaucrats are 

extremely capable. Your assistant there, Mr. Associate Minister 

of Finance, has got all the answers . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — In his head. 

Mr. Neudorf: — He's got all the answers not only in his head, 

he's got them all written down. All he has to do is pass the 

paper over to you and you could read the answer for us. We 

know how it operates; that's the way it is. 

 

But you are just refusing to answer our questions and the 

questions that the member from Estevan was trying to get from 

you — the answers are very legitimate. And you choose to hide 

behind the rules of the House where we can't get at you. 

 

Won't happen, Mr. Minister. We want answers. We want 

answers. In order to accommodate that I'll start off very slowly, 

very simple question, and then perhaps in the spirit of 

answering that we'll be able to progress as the afternoon goes 

on and the evening wears on, where one answer will follow the 

other. 

 

Now the question that I want to ask is a piggyback on what the 

member from Estevan was answering because I didn't . . . again 

in my slowness, I was not able to follow all of the contortions 

that you were going through in some of your answers. Now we 

were discussing at that time that there are two columns: one is 

the 1993-94 estimate and the other one is a '93-94 

to-be-voted-on column. And then there is the one-twelfth figure 

on the third column which is the appropriation, the interim 

supply that you are asking for now, and that's one-twelfth of 

the total amount. All right. 

 

Now understanding then that that is one-twelfth of the amount 

to be voted, there are some discrepancies in there and if I direct 

you specifically to the Environment and Resource 

Management. Now on the Executive Council, for example, it's 

6,531 but the amount to be voted is 5,885. So there's a 

difference there between those two, and the way I understand 

it, the reason for that is the difference would be that which is 

under the . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Statutory vote. 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Statutory vote, thank you. It's a statutory vote 

because it's by law — that amount has to be paid. 

 

So am I understanding that correct so far, Mr. Minister? The 

difference between the 1993-94 estimates and the to-be-voted 

column, that difference will always be made up for the amount 

that is by statute or by law has to be paid. Is that correct, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — The answer is yes and I'm pleased to see 

that the member from Rosthern understood the mathematics, 

that the difference between the estimates and the voted is equal 

. . . to be voted is equal to the . . . or minus the statutory is 

equal to the to be voted and divided by 12. So that's correct. 

 

Then on page 51 of the blue book, you'll notice under 



April 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 781 

 Executive Council it says, "Authorized by Law", near the 

bottom of the page, no. 6, there's 646,000, and that's the 

difference. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — All right, Mr. Minister, the next question that 

I would have then is to go from Executive Council, one line up, 

and there we find Environment and Resource Management. 

Now here we have reversal. The second line to be voted on is 

not less than the previous one, but rather more. So what is the 

relationship there and why would that be, that Environment and 

Resource Management has 95,617, but the amount that is going 

to be voted is more, 96,102? So there's an increase. 

 

So obviously it's not that it's less than the statutory amount, it's 

more. So what are you asking for? Would, for example, 95,617 

be the statutory amount, but now you want to spend more than 

you could have by law, or what would the reason for that be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, I refer the member to 

page 47 and . . . actually 47, 46, and 45, we'll go backwards 

here. On page 47, near the bottom of the page, he will notice 

that it says, "Authorized by Law", 485,000; it's a bracketed 

figure. And if you go to page 45, he will notice in item no. 8, it 

says, "Commercial Revolving Fund" of 280,000, and then 

there's the "Resource Protection and Development Revolving 

Fund" of 205,000. That accounts for the difference. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Now, Mr. Minister, do you see how simple it 

is? A well-placed question gives a very adequate answer, and I 

appreciate that. 

 

Could you answer the following question. What, in your 

consideration of this one-twelfth in determining the amount of 

money that you want to spend in your estimates, what impact 

would the fact that you've raised the GST (goods and services 

tax) . . . pardon me, the PST (provincial sales tax) from 8 per 

cent to 9 per cent have? What impact would that have had on 

that figure? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Well we got along reasonably well for 

two questions, and now he's back into the old line of question 

again. And I would again say to the member that this is not 

something for interim supply. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There, in full 

public light, is the attitude of the government. As soon as it 

comes to asking a question that is going to demand a hard 

answer, that will give us an insight into the machinations and 

the scheming with which this government operates, they go 

back into the shadows. For a while there, Mr. Minister, you had 

come out into the sunlight and I appreciated that. I'm sure the 

viewers appreciated that because we were getting somewhere. 

And then suddenly you decide to go back into the shadows and 

say: no that's a deep, dark secret within cabinet; that's the 

treasury bench's, and only they will know the real reasons why 

we are doing things. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, you want $340 million, plus more . . . 

you want over $340 million of the taxpayers' money but you 

won't tell them why. You won't tell them how you got that 

money. You say, I'll tell it to you but in some other day, in 

some other place, and some other forum. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, that doesn't fly. We'll take half an hour out 

from this particular estimate on interim supply. We gave you 

that opportunity before. We said: well let's go to vote 18; it's 

the Department of Finance; we can delve into these and any 

fears that the public might have we can address in the 

subsequent questions. But you refuse to do that. Because we 

want answers to those questions, and we don't seem to be 

getting anywhere. And I think that's a sad, sad situation, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

In deference to the colleague from Saskatoon Greystone who 

has indicated that she would perhaps try a different tack . . . 

Maybe she's more successful in getting information from this 

government than we have been, but I would wish her the best 

of luck as I turn the podium over to her. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is a pleasure 

to have an opportunity to question the Associate Minister of 

Finance today on behalf of not only my constituents of 

Saskatoon Greystone but Saskatchewan taxpayers as well. 

 

Mr. Associate Minister, prior to last year's budget, your 

predecessor conducted an opinion survey regarding what your 

government was planning to place in the budget. A copy of that 

survey was provided to me. It cost the taxpayers of this 

province $59,000. Given that you are now asking for money to 

pay for such surveys, did you in fact conduct any prior to this 

year's budget? And if so, would you be willing this year to 

table a copy of those surveys in the Assembly today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, I'm very pleased to 

answer the question for the member from Saskatoon Greystone. 

And I just want to have a little preamble here. In a previous life 

that I lived and that the member from Greystone lived, I used to 

ask the questions and she had to give the answers when we sat 

in a math class together. So it's nice to see the role reversed 

here for a minute, so I'm pleased to answer the question. 

 

I think the question does not pertain to the '93-94 budget, 

because had we conducted any kind of polling or surveys, that 

would be expense out of the '92-93. So I simply say that those 

numbers would not be in this particular interim supply; they 

would be in the current year's budget. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Associate Minister, 

I'm to understand then that all outstanding bills have all been 

paid from 1992, so that in fact none of the monies you're 

requesting today would go forward to pay off any work that's 

been done previously? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. Any bills that 



782 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1993 

have been received would have been paid out of the '92-93 

budget. Any bills that come after now would be paid out of the 

'93-94. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you. I am looking forward to 

having the opportunity to receive the surveys that were done 

for this budget, as I did last year. I hope that you will continue 

that practice. 

 

Mr. Chairman, Mr. Associate Minister, last year you estimated 

that the deficit would be $517 million. Instead the final 

numbers were $592 million. And what we were told was the 

result of the discrepancy in these numbers was the decline on 

the revenue side of the equation. 

 

What assurances can we have that this year's expenditure 

figures are not going to rise by another 14 per cent or $67 

million? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The numbers 

that we have here today on interim supply, one-twelfth 

calculation, as I'm sure the member has the sheet, these 

numbers cannot rise because they were only voting on these 

particular numbers today. So those numbers cannot change. We 

are not allowed to spend more than $340,881,000 for the 

one-month period of the month of April. So those numbers 

cannot change. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Associate Minister, I 

can understand then that this is the one month of all the months 

in 1994 where we can be assured that this will stay exactly as is 

shown here. Can we have that kind of guarantee for the 11 

other months of 1994? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — The third column here, the 340 million, 

as I alluded to before, is the maximum that we can spend in the 

month of April. Now if we have to overspend this for some 

reason, if it has to be overspent, there would have to be a 

special warrant which would have to come to the House. 

 

So without a special warrant, this is the amount that we can 

spend, no more. This is the absolute maximum that we can 

spend. 

 

(1545) 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Associate Minister, 

are you saying that we will change the practice in the Assembly 

and be able to use special warrants when the House is in, if in 

fact these numbers are not accurate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — I'd like to correct that. The special 

warrant would be when the House is not in session. When the 

House is in session, if we haven't got a budget passed by the 

end of April, we'll obviously be back for another interim 

supply. 

 

But for this particular interim supply, that's the amount. Special 

warrants would only be used if the House were not in session. 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Associate Minister. Just 

to go back to my question on surveys, I was under the 

impression that yesterday the Minister of Finance did in fact 

comment that part of the interim supply requested would go to 

service bills from government advertising. And I'm just 

wondering if that is something significantly different from 

what I'm asking about. If you could clarify that for me, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, for the month of April, if 

there were bills submitted to the government for the month of 

April for advertising, they would be paid out of this interim 

supply. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Associate Minister, I 

guess in part what I'm wanting to do is to be able to understand 

more of what the government is doing, has been doing in order 

to carry out its planful actions on behalf of the Saskatchewan 

taxpayer. So it appears as though we're not going to get very far 

on this line of questioning regarding surveys. I'll wait until you 

are more than willing and quite able to provide me with those 

as they were done last year. 

 

Mr. Associate Minister, last year in the mid-term financial 

report the minister of Finance told everyone that the state of the 

economy was the reason why revenues from taxes fell short of 

expectations. Last year your government raised taxes to bring 

in an additional $340 million in new revenue. And before that 

budget, the Conference Board of Canada predicted a rate of 

growth in Saskatchewan by 2.2 per cent. 

 

By the time your mid-term financial report was released, the 

report indicated a revised rate of growth of a mere .5 per cent. 

While factors such as crop failure would indeed have a bearing 

on this, tax increases contributed to that downward revision of 

the province's projected economic growth. 

 

We of course happen to believe, as do many others in 

Saskatchewan, that your taxes in fact did have a significant 

impact on the economy which in turn had an influence on the 

way in which your revenue projections were unable to be met. 

 

Mr. Associate Minister, the money you're asking for today is 

going to be paid in part by a further $193 million in new taxes. 

And the Royal Bank projected a respectable rate of growth for 

our province in 1993 but it warned us that that might be 

harmed if indeed the government introduced significant new 

taxes. Many think that $193 million is a significant amount of 

new taxation. 

 

What guarantee do we have that you will be able to balance 

your revenues with your expenditures that you are asking for 

today when you're introducing more taxes that might in fact 

have the same result on the revenue picture and will in turn 

affect economic growth and job creation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, I think I answered this 

question when the members of the official opposition asked the 

same kind of question. And I'm 



April 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 783 

not able to answer that in interim supply. This is not properly 

placed here. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, I'm going to ask you for a ruling on this 

line of questioning, whether this can continue or whether it 

cannot. 

 

The Chair: — The Associate Minister of Finance has asked 

the Chair for the Chair's interpretation as to the purpose of 

interim supply. Since the fiscal year begins on April 1 and 

since the Appropriation Bill based on the Saskatchewan 

estimates, the budget, is adopted some months after the 

beginning of the fiscal year, the Crown will be without funds 

during that interim period. It is because of this that the Crown 

asks for an advance against the estimates to cover the period 

until the estimates are approved. This is known as interim 

supply. 

 

The manner by which this is accomplished is for the 

government to introduce financial resolutions in Committee of 

Finance where they are debated and their adoption reported to 

the House which must adopt them prior to the introduction of 

the Appropriation Bill. 

 

The detailed resolutions express the precise amount of monies 

required by the government in twelfths of the total estimates, 

usually one or two twelfths. 

 

The Minister of Finance appears before the committee to 

provide explanations and to respond to questions on the interim 

supply resolutions. The interim supply process allows members 

to ask questions and to focus debate on the need to grant, 

reduce, or refuse supply with respect to the interim supply 

resolutions before the Committee of Finance. 

 

Debate must therefore apply to the estimates as a whole and 

should not attempt to discuss policies and details of programs 

of particular departments. An opportunity for detailed 

discussion will be available to members when the committee 

debates the estimates of each department with the appropriate 

minister. 

 

Hence the Minister of Finance should not be expected, nor 

should he — or she — attempt to answer detailed questions on 

a particular department as this may generate continued detailed 

questioning on the specific department, and this is not the 

intent of the interim supply exercise. 

 

Members will recall that the Chair has reminded the committee 

of this practice on numerous occasions, notably July 30 and 

June 1, 1992; May 6, 1991; April 9 and May 10, 1990. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My comment 

is that what I'm simply doing is asking on behalf of taxpayers 

of Saskatchewan about their taxation dollars, and today you are 

asking for one-twelfth of their twelve-twelfths of all their 

taxation dollars. Now I am talking about the $193 million in 

new taxation is money that you've brought about in your 

budget. I don't think that it is asking 

about a specific department. I don't think it's requesting 

information that is so completely specific that it's 

unanswerable. And I think that people have a right to know 

where their other eleven-twelfths is going to be coming from. 

 

Mr. Associate Minister, if one accounts for the cost of 

servicing the debt to the figure you are asking for, one can 

make some very interesting observations with the numbers 

you've provided us. Using that figure and comparing it to the 

taxes you want to introduce, the province's spending only 

decreased by .6 per cent from the years previous . . . last year, 

.6 per cent in one year. At the same time your revenues went up 

6.1 per cent, due mostly to this $193 million in new taxes and 

other charges to which I referred. 

 

Mr. Associate Minister, how can you explain the fact the 

growth in revenues is 10 times greater than the reductions in 

expenditures? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, I thought you had just 

read a ruling, and I will repeat again, I don't think this 

questioning has anything to do with interim supply and 

therefore I cannot answer that question. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Associate Minister, I 

will try another one. Some of the monies you're asking for 

today are going to be raised through the increases in fuel and 

gas taxes . . . fuel and sales taxes. Now the city of Regina 

indicated that the increase of the fuel tax is going to add an 

additional $80,700 to their expenditures, a further $147,000 in 

sales tax, added to this another $477,000 the city no longer 

receives because of your cuts in transfer payments to them. 

 

Now the Minister of Finance has always stated that your 

government has a plan to reduce the debt. And I'm quite 

interested in having you talk to me today about your plan, 

which seems to be mostly founded on the very shaky planks of 

higher taxation, and making local governments and school 

boards and hospitals pay more through downloading. 

 

Now in part what you're asking for today is dealing directly 

with the money that you are going to raise by the proposals you 

have put forward. And I don't see how anyone can claim that 

these things are not connected, Mr. Associate Minister. They 

are directly . . . there's a direct impact on every single dollar of 

taxpayers' money that we are dealing with here today, because 

the sheet that you've provided me with, you have no money — 

it's only the taxpayers' money. So I would be most interested in 

hearing how it is you are going to reduce the debt when your 

plan is founded on higher taxation and downloading. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I find that the line 

of questioning here is pretty much similar to what it has been 

for the last few minutes. This is not a debate on taxation. This 

is not a debate on raising revenue. This is a debate today on 

interim supply which is one-twelfth of the amount to be voted. 

And it is an interim measure and it has nothing to do with the 

taxation, as far as the debate here today is concerned. 



784 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1993 

And it certainly hasn't got anything to do with the debate of the 

budget of the city of Regina. That's their concern, and we're not 

going to debate that in this House. 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, again I say, these questions do not deal with 

interim supply and I will not get into the debate on them. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Associate Minister, 

the interim supply Bill presented before us today includes a 

drastic reduction in spending in several departments, one in 

particular which was hit hardest last year, and of course one 

which similarly was hit this year. And much of that will 

inevitably affect a lot of the people in the province who live on 

farms. 

 

Although this is not the time to get into the merits or demerits 

of programs like GRIP (gross revenue insurance program), I'd 

like to ask the associate minister why the Department of 

Agriculture has taken such a significant cut, based on your 

projected expenditures of last year. And why did it take such a 

large cut when you know that rural people, whose incomes are 

going to drop half of what they were last year in fact, they can't 

afford such a heavy burden on themselves? 

 

And I want you to note, please, that the NDP always argue that 

they want to do everything on the basis of ability to pay. 

Farmers are about the least able to pay these days, next to the 

unemployed entirely. But this budget is facing the hardest cuts 

of all in Agriculture, of any major department. And I find it 

quite interesting to look down your numbers here. I think that 

Tommy Douglas wouldn't approve, since you're always 

commenting on him. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Well, Mr. Chairman, again the member 

from Greystone is asking us to get into a debate on the 

Department of Agriculture's budget. I'm not going to do that. 

I'm not going to get in here. And I'm just wondering, Mr. 

Chairman, whether we will continue with this line of 

questioning or whether we're going to get on to what interim 

supply is all about. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Associate Minister, I 

will try to get these questions answered some other place. I've 

found in experience, in my limited experience here, that they 

aren't answered in estimates either. So what I will do is try to 

find some people somewhere who can explain what it is your 

government's doing. 

 

Mr. Associate Minister, the money you are asking for here 

today is in part derived from the monies I alluded to earlier, the 

$193 million in tax increases. Last year your predecessor 

commissioned an opinion survey which told him that 82 per 

cent of the people of this province found an increase in the 

provincial sales tax unacceptable, completely unacceptable. 

That year your government raised the sales tax by one point to 

provide for its spending, and this year, to provide for the 

monies that you want today — whether you like to 

make the association or not — you not only raised the sales tax 

again, but you added it on to such things as adult clothing and 

yard goods for those people who couldn't afford to go in and 

buy clothes off the rack. 

 

Mr. Associate Minister, the spending you are proposing here 

today must be supported by a stable if not growing tax base. 

How will the Saskatchewan economy be able to afford this 

kind of government expenditure that you have here when you 

keep bringing forward tax increases even though people keep 

telling you that they can't afford them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, I'm getting a little weary 

of answering the question the same way, but it's the only way I 

can answer this question, is that these questions do not belong 

in interim supply. These questions belong in Committee of 

Finance, and we would be pleased to vote this off, we would be 

pleased to vote this off, and then we could get into other 

business of the House. So if that's what members opposite 

want, we would be happy to do that right now. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Deputy 

Minister, it seems to me that you've had a lot of trouble coming 

up with any new answers. I've heard the same one for every 

question for some time this afternoon, yet when you are 

approached with the potential to move on to the business of the 

House in a more productive manner, you bring in your 

colleagues to vote that attempt down. And that doesn't seem to 

me like a very productive way for a Finance person to be 

treating the parliamentary process of our province. 

 

(1600) 

 

I'm not going to lecture you any further. I think you know that 

you're off base in your approach. And I think that you know 

very well that the people of Saskatchewan expect you to 

answer the questions of all people in this Assembly, but more 

especially, people in the opposition in this forum. 

 

Now in this interim supply, Mr. Deputy Minister, there are a lot 

of things that aren't really obviously accounted for. And when 

you're talking about a couple of dollars out of my pocket or 10 

out of yours, that probably wouldn't affect either one of us too 

much. But we're talking about one-twelfth of $4.928 billion. 

That's a pretty hefty figure. A twelfth of that is a lot of money, 

$330.772 million. Now that should get somebody concerned 

about how it's going to be spent when it is money in a public 

trust. 

 

But I have a couple of specific questions that worry my 

constituents too in terms of what provisions you are making in 

this one-twelfth allocation. For example, down in my area the 

credit union system has fallen into some economic trouble. 

That's not new; it has happened occasionally in the past. But 

during the past administration when that happened and there 

was some threat perceived, I think more than real, that there 

might be financial difficulties, the previous administration had 

the premier go on television and 



April 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 785 

radio throughout this province to assure people that the 

government of this province would back the monetary 

soundness of those institutions. That stopped any run of money 

on the institutions, and I think you know what a run on money 

in a bank is. 

 

We've had one in fact, I think maybe even two, in Swift 

Current in recent months. It is a devastating thing for a 

financial institution to have to go through. And I suggest that 

being familiar with that area of the world you should have not 

only encouraged the Premier to make a public statement in 

support, but you should also now have provided some funds in 

the budget to back up the system in the event that it's required. 

 

There's every possibility that the entire credit union system in 

this province could collapse. And I'm sure, Mr. Deputy 

Minister, that with the experience that everyone knows that you 

have had in the credit union system that you would not want to 

see that happen. And I'm sure that you must realize that if you 

don't take appropriate steps to shore up not just the institution 

but the perception of its ability to function, you have to shore 

up in people's minds the reality that it can hang on, that it can 

survive, that they won't lose their funds. 

 

And so what we need to know, Mr. Deputy Minister, is: for the 

sake of those institutions in every one of our small towns in 

south-west Saskatchewan and I expect in most of the province, 

have you got any place in this one-twelfth allocation some 

funding or could you make some kind of a commitment or 

statement that there would be funding available to put some 

calmness into the countryside with regards to people leaving 

their money in the credit union system? Or should they just 

simply take that money and run? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, I'm not exactly sure what 

the member would want me to do on this issue, but I will say 

again that his reference to credit unions and how it relates to 

interim supply is just not on. It has nothing to do with the 

amount of money we're asking to vote here today to carry us 

through the month of April. 

 

Besides, I think it may be somewhat imprudent of their 

member to comment freely on the financial state of financial 

organizations and the run of money and trying to put a scare 

tactic into different individuals who may have money invested 

in those organizations. 

 

I'd also like to comment that we are not voting one-twelfth of 

4.9 billion; we're voting one-twelfth of 3.969,287 billion. And I 

think the member should note that — that they're not voting on 

the 4.9; it's the 3.9. 

 

And I am flattered by what the members called me — a deputy 

minister of Finance. I would be happy to take the deputy's 

salary but he said he's not giving it up. He's hanging in there. 

So as long as I'm not the deputy, I guess I don't get his salary 

either. 

 

And I was also flattered earlier by the member from 

Rosthern when he suggested that I was a facsimile of the 

Finance minister. That's flattering to me but I'm not so sure that 

it's all that flattering to her. So with that, Mr. Chairman, I will 

take my seat. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well certainly we 

don't want to put you in the wrong job today. 

 

We have to think, though, about your comment. I want to 

respond this way. The panic that's going on as a result of what's 

happening in the credit union system was not created by me 

and I'm not the one who's spreading the word. The Swift 

Current Sun, the Booster, the local newspapers throughout the 

south-west, have carried full-coverage stories of the events that 

are happening in the credit union system. 

 

There is no secret here that I'm bringing out to anyone. I'm only 

bringing to you what you know very well is public information 

all through the community. You know very well, Minister, that 

in fact there has been a run on money in the credit union in 

Swift Current on one day to the extent that the very doors of 

the institution had to be locked for an hour while trucks were 

sent across town to find more cash to deliver to the institution 

to serve the needs of the people who were panicking to take 

their money out of that institution. 

 

That's a crisis in a banking situation. And you have the power 

to put a stop to that by placing confidence in the system simply 

by standing here and saying that you have prepared in your 

Estimates, in your one-twelfth allocation, any place at all, you 

place assurance that the government is going to back those 

institutions, that they will not be allowed to go broke. If the 

province of Saskatchewan's government is not willing to back 

the only banking institution that we can really claim to be our 

own, then that tells me it probably will be going broke. 

 

If you are afraid to back it, then there is justification for that 

fear in the country. And what we were asking for you to do was 

to — through you process of interim supply . . . we were 

allowing you an opportunity to step in here to put that 

confidence into our banking system in this province. It may not 

necessarily have been the right time, but we provided you with 

that opportunity. That was an opportunity you should not have 

passed up on. It is crucial. 

 

And you will be held to measure by the voters for your 

decision to circumvent this issue. You are responsible — as a 

minister working in this Finance department — you are 

responsible to help to put stability in our province. 

 

Now I know very well that you won't answer the question so 

I'll just carry right on. I'm quite sure that if the people all take 

their money out of the credit unions, they will nicely blame you 

instead of me. 

 

When you've increased the tax rate from 7 to 9 per cent in order 

to get the revenue that you're going to spend here, I'm sure that 

many people told you how 



786 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1993 

much that effect was going to have on the numbers of dollars 

that would now leave the province, more over and above what 

was spent before. Is it fair to assume that you would know what 

those kind of projections would be, and if so, could you share 

them with us? 

 

We need to know whether or not the net effect of the increase 

in this tax is in fact going to help the overall balance of the 

provincial treasury. We strongly suspect that we've come to the 

saturation point in taxation where now we're at the breaking 

point where more people will shop elsewhere, and we'll in fact 

lose money. 

 

So perhaps you could go into that and give us those 

projections, again for the purpose of confidence, because 

people are living with the perception that in this province 

everything is more expensive. And now today your government 

announces an increase in liquor prices. While that is not a 

sweeping increase over all kinds of brew, the perception will be 

there once again by the general public that oh oh, the 

government has now circumvented the budgetary process. And 

instead of putting all of the tax increases into the budget, 

they're now dribbling them in after the budget, and the cost of 

purchasing in Saskatchewan is rising even some more. So we're 

going to find an even greater panic for people to cross-border 

shop. 

 

Minister, what are you doing in all of this process to cure these 

problems? What are we going to do if we don't have any tax 

base left, if nobody spends any money here any more? Where 

are you going to end up getting the money to be able to spend 

one-twelfth of a budget that you can no longer collect if you 

have no source of taxation left? If the people all leave you, 

where are you going to get this money from? Is there a place 

provided that you've got this money? Do you have it in the 

coffers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Well again, Mr. Chairman, we've heard 

this same line of questioning now I think the third or fourth 

time here this afternoon. And maybe the members are asking 

the questions because they didn't hear the answer the first time, 

so I will give the answer again; that the questions that were 

directed to me by the member from Maple Creek have nothing 

to do with interim supply. 

 

What we are asking for here, Mr. Chairman, is one-twelfth of 

the amount to be voted so that we can pay the expenses for the 

month of April. And the questions that he has asked will be 

answered fully and completely when we come to the 

Committee of Finance. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Well maybe we should approach it a little 

differently. What expenses are you expecting to pay? Maybe 

you can tell us that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, what we are planning to 

pay with the interim supply is one-twelfth of the pool of money 

that goes to each one of the departments, and the departments 

are listed on the sheet and I believe the member probably has 

that 

sheet. These are not dealing with specifics; it's one-twelfth of 

the pool of money, for instance, that goes to Agriculture and 

Food, one-twelfth of the pool of money that goes to Economic 

Development, Education, Training, and so forth, all the way 

down the line. That's what interim supply is all about. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Associate Minister. The 

paper you refer to I do have. I note the first item under 

Agriculture and Food is — presuming these are million — 

319.398 million. Social Services, 466.056 million. Is it normal 

for the Agriculture and Food department in our province to 

have less money spent in that department than in Social 

Services? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Well, Mr. Chairman, clearly for the year 

'93-94 that's what the numbers indicate and that is what this 

government plans to spend on Agriculture, 319.398 million for 

the total year and we're taking one 

_twelfth, asking for one-twelfth of that now. And Social 

Services clearly is 466 million and we're asking for 38.8 

million. So in this year's budget clearly that is correct. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — So how, Mr. Associate Minister, would that 

compare with last year or the year before or a couple of years 

so that we can get a bit of an idea of the change or the shift in 

pattern of spending? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Now, Mr. Chairman, the member now 

wants to go back in prior years. We do not have the 

information here from prior years. We're dealing here today 

with the interim supply for '93-94 and the numbers are clearly 

indicated on this sheet of paper. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Minister, surely your advisers must 

have some idea about what's been happening in the province. In 

order to qualify to have their jobs, they must know a little bit 

about what the past has been. But surely you must have some 

idea of where you're going to get this money from in order to 

be able to spend one-twelfth of a budget that you don't have the 

money for. How can you ask us to give you the money if we 

don't know if the money's in the pot? Have you collected the 

money? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, I appreciated your 

reading the notice on interim supply — or the meaning of 

interim supply — to the House here earlier. And the questions 

that the member from Maple Creek is asking have nothing to 

do with interim supply. What we're asking the legislature for is 

one-twelfth of the amount to be voted for so that we can pay 

the bills for April and we get on with this. We vote this off and 

we'll get on to Committee of Finance, and they'll be able to ask 

all the detailed questions at the Committee of Finance. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Mr. Minister, we already tried that 

earlier today and you voted that down. Now that's on record; 

it'll clearly show in Hansard tomorrow. So it's obvious that it 

would be futile for us to try to facilitate you with an 

opportunity to move on with the 



April 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 787 

business of this government because you refuse to do that. You 

refuse to answer questions; you refuse to move on. You 

absolutely are stonewalling the province of Saskatchewan's 

taxpayers. 

 

You refuse to tell us where you're going to spend the money; 

you refuse to tell us where you're going to get the money; and 

you refuse to move on to that part of the governmental process 

that would allow us to ask you the questions. And then you get 

up and say, let's move on. I don't see the rationale here at all. 

But anyway, I'm going to keep on trying to ask some questions. 

Who knows? Maybe you'll soften up and answer one some 

place. 

 

In this one-twelfth allocation, Minister, what is the total dollar 

amount spent paying off the legal bills of the Tetzlaff brothers? 

Is any of this money going towards this cause? Any of this 

one-twelfth going towards paying off that bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, first a comment and then 

I'll answer the question. The members opposite say we should 

get on with the business of government. Clearly the business of 

government now is to get an interim supply Bill passed so that 

we can pay the bills for the month of April and then we can get 

on with any kind of business that the members opposite want to 

get on with. 

 

The member asks a specific question. The legal bill will be 

paid for out of the Saskatchewan Water Corporation and the 

$514,000 that is being asked for in interim supply will be part 

. . . or the legal bill will be part of that $514,000. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 

don't know why the Finance minister decided to send the B 

team in today. But I can tell you that the frustration that you're 

hearing from members over here is because you aren't 

following the precedent of this House. 

 

I just took the opportunity to step out of the House and go back 

through Hansard over a number of years and the debate that 

took place in here. And if you want precedent, I can stand here 

and read them off for an hour. 

 

I went back and saw where members asked questions about the 

Regina city bus fleet. They talked about revenue sharing with 

every urban municipality in this province, and it was allowed at 

that time. And you know what, Mr. Minister, Mr. Associate 

Minister? The minister of Finance answered questions about 

the bus fleet in the city of Regina. 

 

Now if you want me to stand up and read the precedents, we'll 

do it, and we'll do it over and over and over again. There are 

some very legitimate questions to be asked here because you're 

saying to the taxpayers of this province, I'm coming here for 

$340 million, one-twelfth of the entire tax bill. Whether they 

pull it out of hip national or they get it at the pumps or they pay 

it in the clothing store, that's where they're paying those taxes, 

Mr. Minister, and 

they're paying one-twelfth to you. That's what you're asking. 

 

Now there's a lot of questions by them as to where the other 

eleven-twelfths of their tax money is going and how you justify 

doing it. You won't even justify the one-twelfth. You come in 

here and say, Mr. Taxpayer, give me one-twelfth of the taxes 

that you're going to pay me this year. And you don't want to 

answer any questions. 

 

Mr. Minister, yesterday in this committee the Minister of 

Finance said that the Saskatchewan Gaming Commission is 

getting a one-twelfth . . . I believe it amounts to $1.917 million. 

Now, Mr. Minister, your minister responsible for the Gaming 

Commission tells us that he's gone out and spent 20 million 

bucks of Saskatchewan taxpayers' money on gambling 

machines, that he's committed to spending that much, and you 

have allocated one million nine hundred-and-some thousand 

dollars to pay for those machines. 

 

Mr. Minister, let's get straight with the folks now. I would like 

you to tell me where that $1.917 million is going. Is it going to 

a part of those gaming machines or is it going to somewhere 

else? And the money that's going to be derived from that 

investment — I want you to show me because I can't find the 

revenue stream in your budget here — how taxpayers are 

getting a benefit for that $1.917 million that you're asking for 

in interim supply. 

 

So maybe we can get some answers on gaming out of you, Mr. 

Minister, that we can't get out of the minister responsible, 

because I think it falls right within the purview of interim 

supply. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — On page 128, Mr. Chairman, we have 

the Saskatchewan Gaming Commission. And it says, "Loans 

and Advances pursuant to The Saskatchewan Gaming 

Commission Act (Subvote . . .)" and it's given there, $23 

million. And we're asking for one-twelfth of that which is 

1.917. 

 

As far as the question was concerned regarding whether we're 

. . . regarding the taxation, we're not asking here for one-twelfth 

of the taxation. We're asking for one-twelfth of the expenditure 

amount and that's what interim supply deals with. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, that's not acceptable. There's 

only one place that you get money from and that's out of the 

hides of taxpayers. You get it in all sorts of places from them. 

You take it out of personal income tax; you take it out of sales 

tax; you take it all over the place. And along with the other 

revenue streams that you have a resource in another thing, 

that's where you get your money from. 

 

Now unless you want to divvy up that one-twelfth and tell me 

which portion isn't taxpayers' contribution and which part is oil 

companies or uranium mining or something like that, I mean 

you won't answer those questions. You won't tell us what 

portion is derived from taxation. So I'm giving you a simple 

question. 



788 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1993 

We would like to know on the Gaming Commission on this 

one-twelfth that we're going to vote you in here, what you're 

doing with that. We want to know. 

 

Is that . . . are you buying machines? What are you doing? Are 

you buying bingo halls? Are you reimbursing that money to 

third parties? What exactly are you doing with that? So we can 

start to begin to understand after you buy these $20 million 

worth of gambling machines and other things, how we're going 

to understand how the money's going to get back to the 

taxpayer and whether you're doing it appropriately, whether 

there's corruption involved. We've got to know those answers, 

Mr. Minister. Maybe you can start today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Well again, Mr. Chairman, the line of 

questioning is as far as your ruling was concerned earlier, and I 

think it still pertains, is out of line. The line of questioning that 

the Leader of the Opposition is asking is specific to the Gaming 

Commission, and we are not here today to talk about the 

specifics of the Gaming Commission. 

 

I answered his question earlier. We're asking for one-twelfth of 

the $23 million that is to be borrowed by the Gaming 

Commission to set up whatever the Gaming Commission is 

going to set up. And we're not talking here about the specifics 

of the activities of the Gaming Commission. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, this is totally applicable, 

because as the Department of Finance you are the one who 

disbursed funds to all other agencies of government. You are 

the only one with legal authority to collect monies in the 

province of Saskatchewan. You are going to be collecting 

funds from Saskatchewan taxpayers in all manner of methods, 

all manner of methods, and you in turn hand those out for 

disbursement to the various agencies and departments of 

government. 

 

Now I think it's appropriate when I look back over — and I just 

have had some of the record from Hansard delivered to me 

here, Mr. Minister, where we not only talk about the gas tax, 

and the transit system, and user fees, cost to consumers — I 

mean you went on and on, Mr. Minister, in this Assembly, and 

this was from August 14, of 1989, page 3872 of Hansard, 

where there were all sorts of detailed questions asked to the 

Minister of Finance that were far more detailed than what we're 

asking you. 

 

Now I think it would be far more appropriate and simple for 

you to stand up on some of these broader issues of taxation and 

show us the studies and the analysis that you've done. And if 

you would do that, as I know you can, as you could with liquor, 

as you could with cigarettes, as you could in other areas, then 

that would give the opposition some of the answers that people 

are asking us to ask of you. And then we would go to the 

individual estimates of various agencies and departments of 

government for those more detailed questions. 

 

And it's that lack of being forthcoming, Mr. Minister, 

that causes us some frustration because we know what went on 

in the past. We know what went on in the past. And our only 

conclusion can be is that the Minister of Finance has sent you 

in here today to stonewall because she has more important 

things to do. She doesn't think it's important that she's taken 

$340 million out of the taxpayers' pocket so she sends the 

associate minister in here to stonewall the opposition and not 

answer any questions. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, if she considers you the B team, you're the 

B team, but today we want answers from you. So maybe we 

can go back to square 1 and try again. You have analysis within 

your department that shows what Saskatchewan taxpayers will 

have to do in order to come up with this money in the way of 

sales taxes and the effects that they will have on Saskatchewan 

business people, on Saskatchewan consumers, relates to 

cross-border shopping. It relates to total growth in the economy 

of Saskatchewan. And why don't you just start there with a 

little bit of that analysis and then this committee can progress 

in the way that it should? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Well, Mr. Chairman, there is nothing I 

would love better than to progress on this committee, but the 

only way we're going to progress on this committee is if the 

questions are directed to interim supply. And I will answer the 

questions on interim supply. The questions pertaining to 

taxation do not apply to interim supply; therefore I will not 

answer those questions. But if they're on interim supply, Mr. 

Chairman, I'd be happy to answer them. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it appears that 

somehow this committee is going to have to move along till we 

can get the Minister of Finance back in here, because it appears 

that the member from Swift Current is incapable of handling 

that particular department. Now I don't know if this is the 

reason that the member from Riversdale was so down on 

having associate ministers in the past, but I guess we're getting 

a prime example here in the House today of why maybe 

governments shouldn't have associate ministers. Because we 

can't get anywhere without the Minister of Finance. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Chairman, I move, seconded by the member 

from Morse: 

 

 That we move to vote no. 1 of the estimates on Agriculture 

and Food. 

 

(1630) 

 

The division bells rang from 4:31 p.m. until 4:41 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Toth 

Muirhead Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen t 

— 8 



April 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 789 

Nays 

Thompson Lautermilch 

Simard Calvert 

Tchorzewski Trew 

Lingenfelter Draper 

Teichrob Serby 

Solomon Sonntag 

Atkinson Cline 

Carson Scott 

Mitchell McPherson 

Penner Kujawa 

Upshall Crofford 

Hagel Stanger 

Bradley Knezacek 

Lorje Kluz 

Pringle Renaud t 

— 30 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 

we don't need the officials for what I'm going to say to the 

minister. 

 

The minister, the member from Swift Current, has been in this 

legislature about a year and a half, been a member. I've been a 

member for 15 years and I have had 45 approximately, 45 . . . 

and we had 9 years over there, and we'd still be there if it hadn't 

been for you people misrepresenting everybody in the province 

of Saskatchewan. You totally misled everybody. You totally 

misled them all. 

 

Did you tell the people in the election, did you tell them that 

there'd be more money? Did you tell them? Mr. Chairman, my 

lungs aren't quite that good, I can't out-yell that. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I wonder if they told the people at election time 

that there'd be more money for Social Services, paid out in 

Social Services than the complete Department of Agriculture? 

Did you tell them that? Did you tell them that you were going 

to raise everything in taxes you could think of? Did you tell 

them? Did you tell them? Well the member from Elphinstone 

says, no we didn't. 

 

(1645) 

 

Well I'm going to tell you that at Outlook, Saskatchewan, in 

this last election campaign, the now Premier made a 

commitment we'll just talk about on SaskPower, and we'll talk 

about Energy, we'll talk about SGI (Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance), we'll talk about all these types of costs to all the 

people in the province of Saskatchewan, the whole works. 

 

He was asked the question after he made his speech, made all 

the promises to Saskatchewan, what about essential services 

. . . I can't say his name in here, of course, because he wasn't a 

Premier then. The member from Riversdale, was asked, the 

Tories got . . . they're charging too much for essential services. 

What will you do? And he stood up, and he's on record, and we 

have him on tape, saying that our promise is to hold or lower. 

 

Now why did you break all those promises? And then 

you come in here and you think you got no rights to answer 

questions. I've never heard of such arrogance that we've had 

from the member from Swift Current this afternoon. I can't 

believe it. Well what else do you call it but arrogance when 

you've never answered one question. 

 

The member from Saskatoon, the head of the Liberal Party, had 

45 minutes of questioning, and I was going to follow her. And 

she gave up after 10 minutes and left. I mean what do you think 

the people of Saskatchewan is going to say to you when you 

wouldn't answer any questions? What is wrong with answering 

a few questions with grievances before supply? What's wrong 

with it? 

 

It's always happened before. This is the first time in the history 

of my 45 interim supply that I haven't seen a lot of questions 

answered. And nobody got foolish about it. 

 

We could have been easily done by now. Yesterday afternoon 

and . . . Because that's been normal — a day or two; two or 

three hours for interim supply. Now we're going no place. So 

we've got to do with you exactly what we did . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . I'm going to take as much time as I want to ask 

questions. I'm going to just . . . To the member from 

Elphinstone, I'm just going to do a little telling before I ask. 

 

The Chair: — Order, order. The member for Arm River has 

the floor. He may proceed. We shouldn't interrupt him. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The member 

from Elphinstone said I haven't asked any questions. Well 

yesterday I came in here and I asked questions for half an hour 

and got zero for answers. And I watched the member from 

Estevan come in this afternoon and ask questions, and you 

frustrated him. He's never seen anything like it in his time. He 

never got an answer from you. 

 

The now leader of our party, the member from Thunder Creek, 

never got any answers. The member from Maple Creek never 

got any answers. Why wouldn't we be frustrated with you? 

Why wouldn't you save the taxpayers some time and some 

money and just answer a few of our questions? 

 

We're going to get into something after supper, just so you can 

have something to digest. And you're going to answer these 

questions because I have the precedent because this is last 

year's Hansard. And I want a page to deliver this to every 

government member, and put one onto the table of the Leader 

of the Liberal Party, please. 

 

And I want you to . . . and don't be as arrogant as the member 

from the games commission, responsible for games, as he was 

this afternoon, getting up there with a little piece of paper in his 

hand and saying that you can fill it out here and you put it here 

and I'll show you how to do it. 

 

We're just going to go through that as people after 



790 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1993 

supper talking about what this real deficit was in 1982. Because 

I'm fed up with you people saying that this whole problem, all 

the cut-backs, is the deficit that was left in 1982 by the . . . or 

that we left you in 1991. We're going to talk after you read this. 

We're going to talk about the deficit you left us in 1982. 

 

And you can't deny this because this is said by the then 

minister of Finance. We're going to go through that and we're 

going to figure it out in today's dollars. So the minister that's 

answering questions today might as well make up his mind that 

he's going to answer who is responsible for this big debt we've 

got in this province of Saskatchewan. Because I have a pretty 

good calculation right in my head, to tell you that $3.5 billion 

in today's dollars is a lot of bucks. And that's what we had to 

put up with. 

 

Just like a friend of mine the other day said, I don't just 

understand how this government says they're going to balance 

this budget, total 15 billion, in four years. Well I told him, that 

isn't what they're going to do. They have no intention. They're 

just going to balance the budget. The deficit will still be there 

and they'll be adding to it. And to explain to them, Mr. 

Chairman, to explain to this gentleman, I said it's like this, that 

on your farm or your business you've got $100,000 debt against 

it. In a year or two or three, you've got $125,000 debt. But all 

of a sudden you decide to manage and you're managing 

properly and things are going better for you. It rains on this 

guy's farm or whatever happens, he had a little luck, and he 

was able to balance. 

 

But he still had the $125,000 deficit. Because I know you 

members over there have gone out and misled the people in the 

province of Saskatchewan by saying the debt's going to be 

gone in four years. You're only talking about the budget, the 

same as you did in '82 when you hid all the debt in the Crowns 

and then come in with a balanced budget. It didn't even turn out 

to be a balanced budget. 

 

I mean you tell me why we can't have the people over there that 

are ministers tell the truth. The Minister of Social Services, 

every time she gets up in this House . . . And I've been sitting 

in a hospital bed and at home and watching television till I 

could pretty near walk without any legs when I heard that 

member talk. Every time she talks she says we left this great 

big . . . the Tories took over in 1982, we left this great big 

surplus of money for them. 

 

Well that's an absolute falsehood. And she's sitting there 

reading the truth right now . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

You're sitting there reading the truth right now, Madam 

Minister, and it's 3.5 billion, and that is your figure. Our figures 

say 4.9. 

 

Now we've had enough of this going around this province 

misleading. I'd like to use some stronger words than that but 

I'm not going to because I'm allowed to say mislead. And you 

did mislead. 

 

When you sit in this House . . . The Minister of Health the 

other day, every time 

you talk about it, every time you mention one little word about, 

oh these here hospital boards and closing down hospitals — oh, 

we're sorry, we got to do it. We just have to do it because these 

Tories left us in debt so bad. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Now if you people can't understand that 

paper I just give out to you and can't be truthful, can you not 

read what it says? And it says very carefully what the debt was 

in 1982, even though we didn't agree. But that's at least your 

admission. 

 

We've had enough of it. Absolutely enough of you people 

misleading. And when we come back after supper, Mr. 

Minister, my suggestion to my colleagues is this: that if you 

don't start answering some questions so we can get this interim 

supply Bill out of the way, then maybe you'll have to have a 

lesson taught to you, taught to you like we taught the minister 

last year: on the fourth day you begin to answer, because we 

control when you pass this Bill. 

 

Unless you want to start with your closures right now. Do you 

want to go closure on the interim supply Bill? What's wrong 

with just answering some questions? I know why the member 

from Swift Current can't answer the question. Because he 

doesn't know the answers. He doesn't know. 

 

We went through, Mr. Chairman, we went through about two 

and half hours yesterday — we'll soon have two and a half 

hours today — and I might as well stand here and give political 

speeches as long as I want and tell the people of the province 

the truth, the facts. Because they've wasted half the time getting 

up and saying, we don't have to answer that under the supply 

Bill, we don't have to. That's all we heard from the minister 

yesterday. 

 

But after, she got a little frustrated toward the end and I did get 

a few answers from her. But the minister today has been zero. 

You've never . . . You tell us what kind of questions we should 

ask in an interim supply Bill. 

 

Why don't you just take your dictatorship a little farther and 

just have this passed without having a Bill? You don't need a 

Bill to get this passed. What are you using it in here if we can't 

ask questions for? Why don't you just get your dictatorship 

going a little more? Why don't you just go roughshod and go 

all the way because you've dictated and broke every promise? 

You're nothing but a bunch of dictators. 

 

And I'll tell you, the member from Swift Current sits there with 

a smirk on his face, saying that he thinks he's smart. But I'll tell 

you, when the facts get out in Swift Current, you're not going 

to be around for as long as I'm going to be in this House. You'll 

never make it. If you think that the things that I say in this 

legislature, that I'm not saying the factual thing, if you think my 

people in Arm River don't appreciate it, then why did they elect 

me four times in a row? You try it. 

 

And the reason why is because I never misled them. I never 

misled them. When I was in government for 



April 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 791 

nine years, I never misled. I never would mislead anybody. 

Now I'd be misleading you, Mr. Chairman, I'd be misleading 

you very badly right now if I didn't get up and say what I'm 

saying. Because this is the most arrogant bunch of people I've 

ever come across in my 15 years. 

 

Now you said this afternoon, Mr. Minister, and the minister 

yesterday said the same thing and the minister last year in 

interim supply said the same thing, that we couldn't get any 

answers out of your government in 1991. Well I can remember 

last year asking 12 questions to the now Deputy Premier of this 

province, 12 questions in a row, and he wouldn't answer one of 

them. And they turned out to be the same questions that were 

answered by Lorne Hepworth that the member from Riversdale 

asked in '91. They were all asked by him about the GRIP 

program and they were all answered. 

 

Now what's so different about you guys? Why are you so 

arrogant that you can't give us a few answers? Our leader this 

afternoon has asked you several times for some reasonable 

answers. Now if we could get them, you wouldn't get us so 

irate. Just answer a few questions. 

 

Just think, you're saying, Mr. Minister, that you don't ask them 

here. You've got to ask them in estimates. Well if you're going 

to answer them some time, what's wrong with answering a 

couple of days of questions of our grievances before supply? 

Just tell us why you can't do it. 

 

You won't do it because you're arrogant. You've decided you're 

not going to let these 10 people over here do like they did last 

year. We came in here last year and you just thought well we 

can walk right over top of that 10 little old farmers over here. 

You found out that you got a licking in last year's session. You 

hurt bad. You hurt bad, and we were the ones that came out 

looking popular all over the province. We did a good job. 

 

And you know you did, so you've come in here now with your 

arrogance and says, we got to control these little fellows here. 

We got to make sure we're going to be the bosses. We're going 

to be the big boy that's not going to give any answers. Well I'll 

tell you, Mr. Minister, when we come back after supper, as I 

said before, you better have a good supper and you better . . . 

 

You're a reasonable man. Just think — and if you would just 

get up and do your own thinking, Mr. Minister, just answer for 

what you think is right and don't let that front row dictate what 

you do. Because that's what's happening. They're just taking 

your chain and they're jerking your head and you got to answer 

exactly how the front row says you got to answer. And the 

answer is say nothing, say nothing. There's about three or four 

in the front row that said to the Minister of Finance yesterday, 

say nothing, don't give one answer to them. Don't give any. 

 

Well I'll tell you, we're never going to get off of interim 

supply until you tell us, and you're going to tell us tonight or 

Friday or Monday or when exactly what $3.5 billion is going to 

be in '93 dollars, what the total deficit is that you left us. You're 

going to . . . And that's only your figures. That's only your 

figures, the 3.5. And they sit there and they laugh and they 

don't . . . but I think they're pretty worried because every paper 

I put on everybody's desk was an admission by the minister of 

Finance for 1992, was an admission that there was a 

Consolidated Fund and the departments and the Crown 

corporations was exactly $3.5 billion. Okay. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Let's stop the clock. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — The member from Elphinstone said, let's 

stop the clock. I know I have permission from the Speaker to 

speak from my seat, so I'll just sit here and we'll just keep right 

on a-going. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I'm going to reiterate what I was saying, I'm 

going to start all over again. I'm going to start all over again 

and say that our biggest trouble is . . . 

 

The Chair: — Order, order. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — I've got to stand up to say this, because our 

biggest problem we got is the member from Elphinstone . . . 

 

The Chair: — Order, order. There's far too much interruption 

of the member who had the floor. It's not conducive to the 

proper functioning of the committee, and therefore I ask all 

members to observe the rules. 

 

And it being near 5 o'clock, the committee stands recessed until 

7 o'clock p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 


