




















































Hansard: June 18, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2647 

 June 18, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, once 

again it's my pleasure to rise and present on behalf of the 

Saskatchewan citizens their names to this Legislative 

Assembly.  I'll read their prayer to the Assembly, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation 

introduced to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. 

corporate governance and financing arrangements. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, I have the pleasure of presenting the 

names of people from the communities of Assiniboia and 

Mazenod to the Assembly.  Obviously, Mr. Speaker, people all 

over the province take great issue with this subject matter. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have a petition 

to lay before the Assembly.  The prayer says: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation 

introduced to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. 

corporate governance and financing arrangements. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitioners today, Mr. Speaker, are from Regina, 

Montmartre, Pilot Butte, Maryfield, and Fairlight. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I continue to have 

requests from petitioners to present the following petition: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation 

introduced to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. 

corporate governance and financing arrangements. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from areas of the province around . . . from 

Admiral, Cadillac, and Swift Current areas, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have a 

petition . . . it is with pleasure to lay on the Table today.  And 

I'll just read the prayer. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that 

your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to defeat any 

legislation introduced to redefine the NewGrade Energy 

Inc. corporate governance and financing arrangements. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are from Swift Current and Admiral.  It's a 

pleasure to lay these on the Table.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have petitions 

here from people in Saskatchewan.  The prayer reads: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

From the communities of Hazenmore and Aneroid and 

Kamsack.  And I will be happy to table these now, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have 

petitions to present today.  The prayer reads: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

This petition, Mr. Speaker, comes from the Hazenmore and 

Meyronne areas.  I table it now. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I too 

have some petitions to lay on the Table and I'll read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions range all the way from Regina 

through to Milestone and on, and I'm pleased to lay them on the 

Table today. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I too have a petition to present to the 

Assembly, and I'd read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that 



2648 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1993 

your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation 

introduced to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate 

governance and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by individuals throughout Regina 

and Pilot Butte, and I present it to the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I as well 

have a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan residents with 

respect to the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance and 

financing arrangements.  Mr. Speaker, this petition is from 

folks in the Hazenmore and Kincaid areas of Saskatchewan.  I 

present it now. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'll table these 

petitions.  They're from across the city of the Regina, and the 

prayer is: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

 Of citizens of the province praying that the Assembly urge 

the provincial government to provide proper funding to 

continue the operation of Souris Valley Regional Care 

Centre. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my colleague, 

the member for Saskatoon Idylwyld, I should like to introduce 

to you two of his constituents who have come to Regina to visit 

family.  And when I call out their names -- they are Peter and 

Pauline Strelioff seated in the east gallery -- I wonder if they 

might rise and for the members to recognize them.  And also to 

recognize the family member who's come with them and who's 

no stranger to us and is always welcome in this Assembly, Mr. 

Wayne Strelioff.  I'd ask the members to join with me to 

welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a great 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to members of the 

Legislative Assembly a number of grade 4 and 5 students in the 

west gallery from St. 

Goretti School.  And along with the students are their teachers 

Sister Kathleen and Mr. Zerebecky.  I would like to on behalf 

of other members of the legislature welcome them to the 

legislature and I will meet with them at 11 o'clock for drinks 

and a photo. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm very pleased to 

introduce on behalf of my colleague, the Minister of Health, 25 

grade 5 students from St. Pius X School in Regina.  They are 

seated in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker.  And they are 

accompanied by their teachers Estelle d'Almeida and Carrie 

Lawson.  And I'm really looking forward to meeting them after 

question period, answering any questions they might have, and 

having a photograph taken with them. 

 

So I would ask all members here to join me in welcoming them 

to Regina. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's with great 

pleasure that I am able to introduce to you and through you to 

the members of the legislature a class of 14 students, grade 3 

students from Avonlea School.  They are seated in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Avonlea is a small town in my constituency.  It's a beautiful 

town, has a nice regional park close by, a golf course, and a 

great place to visit.  I'm especially pleased to say that this time 

when Avonlea school is visiting that they're seeing us at work 

and the bells are not ringing this year. 

 

Accompanied with the school group is their teacher, Evelyn 

Sillers, chaperon, Alynne Caswell, bus driver, Daryll Epp.  I 

look forward to meeting you after question period for photos 

and drinks and questions, and I ask all members to join me in a 

warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Two 

days in a row I truly have unexpected guests.  Today my guests 

though are seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker.  On behalf of 

the member from Regina Rosemont, I'd like to introduce them 

to you and through you to the rest of the members of the 

Assembly. 

 

They're from the St. Mary School here in Regina.  There's 49 of 

them.  And with them, Mr. Speaker, are their teachers, Robert 

Revet and Carol Molnar, and their chaperon, Joe Bukowski. 

 

I would like all members to join with me in welcoming them 

here today.  And I'm sure they'll enjoy the proceedings, and I 

understand I'll be meeting with them afterwards for pictures on 

behalf of my colleague, and drinks, to which he will be footing 

the bill, I'm sure. 

 

So if you'd join me in welcoming them. 



June 18, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2649 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

SaskPower Office Closures 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the minister responsible for SaskPower.  Mr. 

Minister, it has come to our attention that your government 

plans on causing more destruction in rural Saskatchewan.  I 

have been informed, Mr. Minister, that SaskPower is planning 

to eliminate customer services and staff in 50 rural 

communities.  Could you confirm that for us today, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- No, Mr. Speaker, I cannot confirm that. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Well, Mr. Minister, 

we have been instructed that you are going to do this.  Your 

government has, once again, Mr. Minister . . . you're trying to 

hide the pain that you're causing in rural Saskatchewan, in rural 

communities, just like you did with the hospital closure. 

 

Mr. Minister, why haven't you disclosed these cut-backs that 

are being announced . . . why haven't they been announced?  

Why haven't you disclosed them?  Will you be honest, Mr. 

Minister, and tell the people of Saskatchewan today, will you 

tell us which offices are being closed, how many jobs will be 

lost, and how many other closures you have in mind, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well I would ask the hon. member to 

check out the information he's received because the 

information is inaccurate, and you're presenting a hypothetical 

situation to which I do not have an answer for you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, we 

have had communications from more than one community, and 

they're telling us out of the 50 communities that are now losing 

their services . . . Will you tell us one more thing?  Out of those 

50 communities, which ones have lost their hospitals, which 

ones have lost their rural service centres, which ones have lost 

their bus routes, and how many jobs in total, Mr. Minister, has 

your government taken out of these communities under your 

farewell Saskatchewan program?  How many? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker, I might point out just a 

little bit of the process to the hon. member.  It's not the . . .  

You said, I think, 50 communities that have contacted you.  

Those 50 communities, I don't know that they make decisions 

about how SaskPower 

conducts their business. 

 

The management, the board of directors, in consultation with 

the two unions at SaskPower, would make that kind of a 

decision in consultation with each other.  And I don't think that 

those 50 communities you refer to are thinking about closing 

their SaskPower offices. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Well thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I 

did not say we have been in touch with 50 communities.  Are 

you denying that there will be any closure, Mr. Minister?  We 

have been in touch with more than one, is what I said. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I say to the minister: this is just another 

attack, not only on the rural communities, but on the seniors.  

It's another attack.  It's just like the hospital closures, just like 

the destruction of the drug plan, just like the destruction of the 

pension plan, just like the elimination of the seniors' heritage 

plan, just like the elimination of the 1 and 2 funding, just like 

the elimination of bus routes, just like tax increases and utility 

increases. 

 

Mr. Minister, at the same time that you are reducing the real 

income of seniors all over Saskatchewan, you are making life 

more difficult and more inconvenient for those seniors in rural 

communities. 

 

Mr. Minister, many seniors in rural communities use these 

offices to get their accounts in order, get their billing 

adjustments.  And I'm told, Mr. Minister, that while it will be 

more time-consuming to do it over the telephone, you're not 

going to save any money.  Mr. Minister, have you considered 

the effects on the senior citizens in these rural communities that 

you're destroying? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, this government has 

always considered the senior citizens of this province, unlike 

the former administration which virtually left the province 

decimated by your incompetent management over the years.  

And I guess the answer to your question is yes, we give very 

careful consideration to the seniors that built this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Minister, 

the people that we have spoken to about this plan say it isn't 

going to save any money because the jobs that are eliminated in 

smaller communities will simply have to be replaced 

somewhere else.  In other words, Mr. Minister, you are 

centralizing jobs from the small communities into the cities.  

Why is your government so intent on destroying rural 

Saskatchewan? 

 

You've closed out hospitals and eliminated jobs.  You've closed 

down rural service centres; that 



2650 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1993 

eliminated jobs.  You've eliminated teaching positions; you've 

eliminated bus lines; and farm income are at record low, thanks 

to your destruction of the GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) program.  Your taxing along the borders is driving 

people out of the border towns. 

 

Mr. Minister, we know what your government is doing to 

create pain in Saskatchewan.  Will you tell us what you're 

doing to create hope in rural Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well the first thing, Mr. Speaker, this 

government did was to get rid of the Tory administration in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- The second thing we did is looked at the 

financial situation in the province and set into place a plan to 

get our debt and our annual deficit under control. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- The third thing we did, unlike the 

former government, was to have extensive consultation with 

Saskatchewan people, to have a process of inclusion, not 

exclusion like your government had. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- And I don't want to dominate question 

period by listing the long list of things that this government can 

do that your government was totally incompetent at trying to 

do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Well thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. 

Minister, the question I believe for you to answer or deny:  are 

you closing any of the SaskPower services?  That's all we ask . 

. . the service centres.  Now, Mr. Minister, you talk about 

restructuring.  We're all for that.  But at the cost of rural 

Saskatchewan? At the cost of rural Saskatchewan?  That's a 

price we're not prepared to pay, Mr. Minister. 

 

What your government is doing is not restructuring; it's 

destruction in rural Saskatchewan.  Mr. Minister, the word 

restructuring means that when you eliminate hospital jobs, 

teaching jobs, rural service centres, SaskPower jobs, that there 

will be something to replace them.  That's what restructuring 

means. 

 

Mr. Minister, it's simply not happening.  You're taking people's 

jobs and you're taking their hope for the future out of the 

communities and you're putting nothing back.  Can't you 

understand, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Minister, the destruction and 

the hurt that you're doing out in rural Saskatchewan?  When are 

you going to do something to replace the hope for those people 

in rural small towns? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well this government is replacing hope 

in Saskatchewan.  I think people have confidence in what the 

government is doing.  I think the problem with the members 

opposite is that they don't like seeing a province run properly 

when they are used to the mismanagement that they conducted 

in the province. 

 

And specific to your question, to the hon. member, SaskPower 

will improve the service to the people in Saskatchewan unlike 

the policy of the government where you built dams and power 

stations where there's no water to run them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, the 

question is: do you deny that your closing SaskPower jobs in 

rural Saskatchewan?  You haven't answered that question to my 

satisfaction. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Currently there are not any closures of 

jobs or offices in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Minister, do you have any plans to close 

jobs in rural Saskatchewan, SaskPower jobs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I think the thing that lost jobs in 

Saskatchewan, particularly rural Saskatchewan, was the $15 

billion debt that your government created.  The member from 

Estevan and Senator Berntson putting together some kind of a 

plan where hundreds of millions of dollars were spent in a 

place where you can't generate electricity properly, that's . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I want to ask the 

members in the opposition to please allow the minister to 

answer and not just simply yell from their desks constantly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- So SaskPower is continually looking at 

the options that we have to give better service to the people of 

this province. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- When are you going to announce that?  

Till the House closes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- The member from Estevan chirping 

from his seat -- he should know very well.  I don't know why 

he doesn't have more shame when he comes into this House 

about padding his own area of the province with projects that 

make no sense, hundreds of millions of dollars spent to the 

detriment of Saskatchewan people, not to the benefit of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

With the resources we have available to us, unlike the member 

from Estevan, Mr. Speaker, we're building Saskatchewan.  

We're making sure these communities have a survival plan.  

And the member from Wilkie, who's asking these questions, I 

think you should check out your sources of information. 



June 18, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2651 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, from 

the answers I'm getting, I then have to assume you are going to 

close jobs in rural Saskatchewan.  I have to assume that. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I want to tell you, will you remember the 

previous Fair Share program?  Now one of the concerns that 

you people claimed to have was the disruption that it would 

cause in Regina.  You wanted to know how we would replace a 

thousand jobs in Regina.  And as you remember, we did have a 

plan to replace those jobs -- that was Crown Life and FCC 

(Farm Credit Corporation).  Right.  And they came. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, Fair Share would have taken less than 1 per 

cent of the jobs out of Regina -- less than 1 per cent.  And in 

the past few . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Now I have to ask the government 

members to allow the member to ask his question.  Order . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well if the Premier has a question 

to ask, I'm sure he'll get an opportunity some day. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I will 

wind this up. 

 

Mr. Minister, in the past few months your government has 

taken 10 and 15 and 20 per cent of the jobs out of communities 

like Arborfield, Vanguard, and Cabri and dozens of other 

communities.  My question is: what have you done to replace 

them?  In your restructuring plan, what is your plan to replace 

the jobs you are taking out of the small communities in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well you see the difference between our 

government and yours, I'd say to the member from Wilkie, is 

that you wanted to transfer things around the province with 

smoke and mirrors and not create any wealth within the 

province. 

 

What this government does is it creates wealth in the province 

and therefore provides jobs in developing rural Saskatchewan.  

I'm going to be leaving after question period, I would tell the 

hon. member, to go to Weyburn.  And we're announcing at 

Weyburn today a $40.6 million contract from SaskPower to 

Alcatel Canadian Wire to provide services and to provide the 

product in which we provide jobs in the rural underground 

distribution system in Saskatchewan -- $40.6 million. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- That's what we're doing for the people 

of Saskatchewan.  We are bound and determined to create 

wealth in Saskatchewan, not transfer from here to there and 

devastate the people of 

this province like the member from Estevan under his guidance 

performed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Implications of Bill 38 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, last 

evening we were discussing a number of issues with the 

Premier of the province and again the Premier of the province 

showed his inconsistency, his unwillingness to really answer 

questions that really mean something to the people. 

 

In fact on one hand the Premier had no problem in being 

wide-ranging in his discussion of NewGrade and the proposal 

of Bill 90, where the government wants to redo the deal.  On 

the other hand, on Bill 38 the Premier stood here and said that 

his opinions regarding Bill 38 were adequately expressed by 

his colleague, the member who introduced the legislation. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are not 

interested . . . They're interested, yes, in hearing what the 

Minister of Justice has to say but they're more interested in 

knowing where the Premier really stands on the issues.  Mr. 

Premier, do you really believe and do you really support the 

fact and are you going to stand up in this House today and let 

the people of Saskatchewan know that you are against the 

extended benefits that may come due to Bill 38 in spousal 

benefits and marital status and adoptions of Bill 38.  Will you 

stand and let the people of Saskatchewan know where you 

stand on that issue, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I want to warn the 

member from Arm River that those kinds of words are simply 

not acceptable in this House.  And if he continues I'll ask him 

to withdraw it.  Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I heard the exchange last 

night that occurred in this House that the member has referred 

to and I hear the member's question again today.  And I don't 

know what theory of parliamentary democracy the member is 

adhering to when he puts forward those questions.  I just have 

no idea. 

 

But government has presented Bill 38.  Bill 38 has been 

debated in principle and voted on.  The government voted in 

favour of Bill 38.  That includes all of the ministers and all of 

the members.  And I don't know what theory of parliamentary 

democracy the member has in mind when he starts asking 

individual members of the Executive Council what their 

individual opinion is with respect to that Bill or any other Bill. 

 

The Premier and all of the ministers speak on behalf of the 

government.  I spoke on behalf of the government with respect 

to Bill 38.  The Premier was here and voted on that question.  

And I would think that's the end of it. 



2652 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1993 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, again we see the fact that when in 

doubt the Premier disappears underneath the bench.  Doesn't 

show. 

 

In fact, in fact the Minister of Justice has just told us that the 

Premier has a view.  Well you know, why will the Premier not 

stand in this Assembly, stand up and let the people of 

Saskatchewan know what his view really is. 

 

The Minister of Justice talked about a free vote and he talked 

about all of his members getting involved in the vote.  I would 

ask the Premier to look back in Hansard and see how many 

people actually stood in this Assembly and expressed their 

opinion on the vote.  Was the Premier here to express his 

opinion? 

 

Mr. Premier, the people of Saskatchewan want to know where 

you stand on these issues.  Where do you stand?  Will you let 

the people of Saskatchewan know where you stand today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, the record speaks for itself.  

In the Votes and Proceedings No. 68 for June 3, 1993 there is 

recorded the division of the House on the second reading of 

Bill No. 38. 

 

On the yea side there were 22 members present, and the 

Premier was one of them.  And the first name . . .  And the first 

name . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'll recognize the minister again.  

I'm just going to call out time for a bit until the opposition will 

allow the members . . . the ministers to answer. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- We're just calculating, Mr. Speaker, here 

-- 22 out of 55.  That's a lot of ducking. 

 

The Speaker: -- That's all right.  The time is running.  That's 

fine.  If it's over, we'll call end of question period. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, the first name on the list of 

members who voted in favour of Bill 38 on second reading was 

the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- There were five members of the House 

that voted no. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Five. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Five.  Five members of the House that 

voted no.  None of them -- none of them -- were in the 

government caucus.  And that list did not include the member 

from Saskatoon Greystone. 

 

How do they feel about the Bill?  Where were they? 

 Should we ask them how they would have voted if they were 

here? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's interesting 

arithmetic.  I trust that the people of . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Will the government members please 

come to order.  Order. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, again we see the inconsistency.  The 

Premier has talked about giving his members the ability to 

speak out openly, allowing for more accountability in this 

Assembly.  And, Mr. Speaker, I just want the people of 

Saskatchewan to know that every one of the opposition 

members spoke on Bill 38 and will continue to speak on Bill 38 

and represent the people. 

 

And the fact is, Mr. Speaker, as well, when the Minister of 

Justice stands here and says, 22 government members voted on 

the Bill, where were the other 30-some members out of 56?  

Where were they? 

 

What you've done, Mr. Premier, you forced them to hide rather 

than standing up and expressing their convictions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Premier, why do you continue, as you stated 

last night, to maintain party solidarity rather than opening up 

this Assembly to allow members to represent their 

constituents?  As you mentioned last night, why will you not 

allow the free vote?  Why will you not have the strength and 

the courage of your convictions to stand in this House and let 

people know where you really stand on the issue? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Here we go again, Mr. Speaker.  That 

bird didn't fly when the member tried it 10 days ago, and that 

bird isn't going to fly again today, for the very simple reason 

that the vote on Bill 38 has already been held.  It was held on 

June 3, 1993.  It was held 15 days ago, Mr. Member. 

 

No matter what kind of retroactive legislation we might 

provide, it will not allow us to do a rerun of the second-reading 

vote on Bill 38. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Construction Tendering Policy 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the Premier.  Mr. Premier, I have a news release 

from the Saskatchewan Construction Association.  That's one 

of the groups that you said didn't represent anyone -- 

remember? 

 

At the recent general meeting, they put forward a resolution 

calling for the government to end its 



June 18, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2653 

discriminatory union-preference tendering policy.  Mr. 

Premier, this resolution received unanimous support of the 

association which includes both union and non-union members.  

Mr. Premier, do you intend to act on the resolution or is it still 

your position that the construction association doesn't speak for 

anyone?  Will you do as the Saskatchewan Construction 

Association has asked and end your union-preference tendering 

policy that is opposed by union and non-union companies 

both? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, it is not easy to end the 

policy which doesn't exist.  Mr. Speaker, the government has 

discussions ongoing with the construction association and with 

the building trades, union and non-union.  We clearly would 

like a measure of agreement as to how these matters are 

handled.  We don't have that now.  We do not however, have a 

policy, notwithstanding the fact that some, including the 

member from Kindersley apparently, would impute a policy to 

us.  The discussions are still ongoing and will continue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, it's 

interesting to see that even the Premier of Saskatchewan is 

getting caught up in the big dinosaur craze that's sweeping 

North America.  First he goes out and digs up a bunch of old 

fossils like Jack Messer and David Dombowsky, then he uses 

their DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) to create the same old 

prehistoric policies that didn't work in the 1970s, like the 

government take-overs and union-only tendering.  And there 

you have it, Mr. Premier, Jurassic Park; they call it economics.  

And the dinosaurs opposite, and the dinosaurs opposite I 

predict, Mr. Speaker, will become extinct just as they became 

extinct, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Well there's only one minute 

left.  Order.  Will members please come to order?  Order.  Will 

the member please put his question? 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- The same policies that have happened in the past, 

Mr. Speaker, that's the kind of policies that this government is 

bringing forward, old policies, government take-overs and 

union-only tendering.  The Saskatchewan Construction 

Association is telling you those policies didn't work in the 

1970s and they won't work now, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, 

will you end your union-only preference tendering policy as the 

Saskatchewan Construction Association has asked? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- It's noteworthy, Mr. Speaker, that the 

teachers, I think wisely, hustled the school children out of the 

Assembly.  I see more are leaving.  That seems to be a . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- I think the Minister of Labour knows 

full well that he's out of order, and since he doesn't want to 

answer the question, it's the end of question period. 

 

Does the member from Arm River have leave to introduce 

guests? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Will the Government House 

Leader please come to order. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is a pleasure to 

introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and to members of this 

Assembly 13 grade 4 students.  They are sitting in the east 

gallery and they're from Imperial School.  It is a pleasure to 

have Imperial with us this morning and I'm . . . it's just as well 

they weren't here for question period; they just came in now so 

they don't know what all this noise was about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have to apologize to these students that I won't 

be able to visit with them, that I have to leave immediately for 

a funeral in Davidson, and my colleague from Maple Creek 

will be visiting with them, I believe it's at 11:15 in room 255 

for photos and drinks and questions.  And I know that my 

colleague will do the best to answer all your questions and I 

now ask all the people of the Assembly to welcome my guests 

and students from Imperial and hope they have a good day.  

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 38 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Human 

Rights Code 

 

Clause 1 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

. . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  Order.  Order. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you again, Mr. Chairperson.  I'd like 

to begin my remarks to this committee on Bill 38 with a brief 

chronology outlining my concern and involvement with this 

Bill. 

 

Since the introduction of Bill 38 by the Minister of Justice on 

March 17, I've had an opportunity to study the contents of the 

Bill, consult with my constituents, and indeed meet with the 

Minister of Justice. 

 

At the outset I knew that I had little issue with removing sexual 

orientation as a grounds for discrimination in our society.  But I 

undertook the extra investigation because of the number of 

calls and 



2654 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1993 

letters that I received on this issue and my commitment to 

ensuring I understood the implications of the legislation. 

 

As elected representatives, as politicians, there are certain 

signals to which we must respond, and one of those of course is 

the intensity of public reaction.  When people react mildly or 

not at all to an issue, one can safely conclude that the majority 

are comfortable.  Comfortable with what is being proposed 

with their MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 

representing them according to the point of view we expressed 

on the issue during a campaign or in this particular Assembly. 

 

When there is an intense reaction to an issue, I feel that we 

have an obligation, an obligation to gauge the opinion 

whenever possible.  And sometimes this can be done through 

focus groups or through meeting with groups and individuals 

and associations who are particularly concerned with an issue 

and responding as best we can to individuals when they come 

forward and have questions. 

 

I found that the majority of my constituents, the constituents of 

Saskatoon Greystone, have a very supportive attitude toward 

preventing discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation.  

However, there were some concerns raised with me about the 

actual implications of this legislation and whether it would 

extend beyond the application implied by the Minister of 

Justice in the second reading on this Bill. 

 

I also undertook to consult legal experts on this Bill, as I do 

with all others.  As part of my responsibility as an elected 

member, I did write to the Premier on May 11, making my 

comments and those of my constituents a matter of public 

record, with a copy to the Minister of Justice. 

 

(1045) 

 

And in the best interests of the people that I represent I felt 

obligated to question the Premier and the Minister of Justice 

about specific precedents, precedents in law which had been set 

in other jurisdictions, to get a sense of how those challenges 

would in fact affect this piece of legislation.  The most 

consistent concerns raised by me and raised with me, and 

which in turn I raised in my discussions with the Minister of 

Justice, centred around the possibility of the implications 

because of law cases elsewhere.  The recognition of same-sex 

marriages; extended rights as far as adoption of children by 

homosexuals; affirmative action programs; educational 

initiatives; and inclusion of spousal benefits -- particularly in 

terms of the costs of existing programs.  And apparently I had 

constituents who were not alone in their concerns. 

 

I certainly had the opportunity to say nothing; to vote for or 

against this Bill.  Or as at least one member has chosen, to 

deliberately abstain.  But because I view human rights 

legislation as extremely important, I wanted to ensure that 

when it passes it has been subject to subjective and intelligent 

scrutiny to address the concerns of my constituents and the 

people throughout the province.  I take no responsibility for 

representing the constituents of others on this issue because it 

is one of moral consequence and I believe that there are some 

variations in acceptance of this around Saskatchewan.  That is 

why I have been supportive of the concept of free-standing 

votes which I believe serves democracy best on issues such as 

this. 

 

As I said, I raised my concerns with the Premier in writing and 

the Minister of Justice in writing, and on different discussions, 

in face-to-face discussion, asking them to examine the 

dissenting legal viewpoints which were brought to my attention 

and to please discuss them with me.  Further to that and 

subsequent to many hours of discussions with constituents and 

members of the gay and lesbian community, I met again with 

legal counsel and with the Minister of Justice. 

 

I want to say that I have tremendous respect for the Minister of 

Justice.  And I have learned a great deal about this legislation 

as a result of his patience and his willingness to extricate 

partisan politics from this issue.  I believe that given any 

unclear wording . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  Order, order. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I believe that given any unclear wording, 

any room for misinterpretation of a piece of legislation, that 

legislation must be held up to the light and examined.  It is 

incumbent upon us to do so. 

 

Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Justice Minister, I have made the best 

effort that I could make on behalf of my constituents, on behalf 

of those to be protected from discrimination by this very 

legislation, to understand what its implications will be.  I did 

not draft this legislation and I do not have a great deal of 

experience at amending legislation.  I am not a lawyer and I do 

not have extensive resources at my disposal. 

 

There are some in this House who oppose this particular Bill on 

moral grounds.  I personally do not have an issue of morality 

with this Bill because I consider discrimination against any 

human being to be one of the most immoral acts we can 

impinge upon any member of our society. 

 

On May 18 I had the opportunity to speak to this Assembly 

about my concerns and the concerns that have been eloquently 

expressed by members of my constituency.  Unfortunately the 

views I expressed at that time have been misinterpreted by 

members on both sides of this House, both inside and outside 

of this Chamber.  And I've listened with interest to the logic 

expressed by various members of this Assembly in support of 

or in opposition to this Bill. 

 

Frankly, there are arguments on both sides which I find 

unconscionable.  For government members to support the 

legislation because it provides homosexuals protection from 

discrimination, and I quote -- until such time as we have more 

suitable means of treatment for these unfortunates -- end of 

quote, from the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, 



June 18, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2655 

truly gives me cause to wonder about the collective 

understanding of the issue on that side of the House. 

 

Equally disturbing are comments made from the opposition 

benches, which clearly show the need for the protection aspect 

of this legislation. 

 

At the end of the day I have come to the conclusion that there 

are certain changes which should be made to bring the actual 

legislation and the results it will produce in line with the 

promises made by the minister in his second-reading speech.  

And obviously he and his colleagues in the Department of 

Justice concur, as is evidenced by the amendments that the 

minister is proposing. 

 

I too have amendments which I will propose and will speak to 

at the appropriate time. 

 

Now this has been a most challenging experience as a 

legislator.  It has underlined and reinforced for me the value 

and the delicate nature of our democracy.  With each human 

rights issue comes a flood of human reaction far different from 

that expressed on fiscal legislation or economic policy.  Those 

reactions are to be handled respectfully by each of us because 

they are the foundation of our freedom. 

 

I have concluded that above all, the primary responsibility of 

each of us as legislators and as constituents is to protect all 

members of our society from discrimination.  I have concluded 

that while there must be changes made to ensure that the intent 

and the application of this Bill by those agencies responding 

for upholding its intent are clear, the ultimate purpose of the 

legislation to protect welfare recipients and single parents and 

gay and lesbian people from discrimination is effectively 

served by this legislation. 

 

I believe and am still completely convinced that if people are to 

trust that government says what it means and means what it 

says, the role of opposition must be to anticipate the questions 

that will one day, one day be tested by the legislation and 

attempt to see if the legislation answers those questions.  I 

would be interested to know what consultative process 

individual members of the New Democratic Party underwent 

with their constituents on this particular piece of legislation. 

 

In retrospect, I think the most unfortunate parts of this debate 

have been twofold: first, that the minister and his officials did 

not more clearly define the objectives of Bill 38 so that we 

could far more easily determine whether constituents could 

support its implications; secondly, that the government, by not 

allowing each member a free-standing vote on this issue, has 

created some extremely interesting contradiction on the 

government side as to why individual members have 

rationalized supporting this Bill and why they support some 

members who oppose it and yet criticize me for trying to give it 

as thoughtful and constructive evaluation as I can on behalf of 

my constituents. 

 

The Minister of Justice wrote to me on May 31 in 

response to the concerns that I raised about this Bill.  To bring 

to a close my chronology and my introductory comments, I'd 

like to now quickly restate those concerns that I raised and 

have the minister respond. 

 

Mr. Minister, I asked you at that time, on behalf of the 

constituents of Saskatoon Greystone, will the amendments that 

are proposed by this Bill extend rights not already available to 

homosexuals with respect to family status?  And, Mr. Minister, 

will the amendments that are proposed by Bill 38 extend rights 

not already available to gays and lesbians with respect to 

spousal benefits?  Mr. Minister, will the amendments that are 

proposed by Bill 38 extend rights not already available to 

homosexuals and lesbians with respect to the eligibility to 

adopt children? 

 

Mr. Minister, will these amendments as proposed by Bill 38 

give the Human Rights Commission the authority to start 

affirmative action programs based on sexual orientation?  And, 

Mr. Minister, will the amendments that are proposed by this 

Bill give the Human Rights Commission, school boards, or any 

other body the authority to introduce education programs on 

sexual orientation in our schools? 

 

I would appreciate so much if you would respond.  Thank you, 

Mr. Chair. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, and to the member, I want to 

address all of the points, Mr. Chair, that was raised by the 

member.  I can't tell the member precisely the consultative 

process that each member of our caucus went through except to 

tell her that each and every member was involved in these 

issues.  They had no choice and they quickly understood that 

many of their constituents were concerned, so they were 

involved in the debate at the level of their constituency. 

 

I don't know of . . . I know, for example, that the hon. member 

conducted a poll in her constituency, and I don't know of any 

polls that were conducted by any of our members.  I wouldn't 

be surprised if there had been some testing in one way or 

another, but I don't know the answer to that. 

 

But I can tell the member and the Assembly that every one of 

our members had extensive consultations with people in their 

constituency, and they couldn't avoid it and knew that so they 

reached out and dealt with the issue in an active, proactive way 

as the term is used. 

 

I have answered in this House and outside this House a number 

of times on the question of a free vote on this question.  And I 

want to say again that our caucus gave long and careful 

consideration to this issue.  We have in the past debated the 

principles underlying the idea of various kinds of votes -- the 

three-line whip, the two-line whip, and in effect, no whip at all, 

which I think is what a free-standing vote is. 

 

So when this question arose in the context of Bill 38, it arose 

against a background of a good deal of 



2656 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1993 

discussion in our caucus as to in what circumstances we would 

order . . . or we would allow, permit, whatever the appropriate 

verb is, in any event, a free-standing vote would result.  And 

frankly, we did not think Bill 38 was such a Bill.  We did not 

think that it raised the kinds of questions that we believe should 

go with a free-standing vote, or should allow a free-standing 

vote. 

 

And that leads me to the question of the intent of the Bill and 

the member's suggestion that I could have, or the government 

could have more clearly defined the objective of the Bill.  And 

I want to say to the member that I don't know how I could have 

been more clear about the principles underlying Bill 38 than I 

was.  I took every single opportunity to discuss the subject in 

public.  I didn't turn down an interview.  I didn't turn down a 

hot-line show.  I didn't turn down a telephone call from a media 

person. 

 

(1100) 

 

I met with every organization that wanted to meet with me.  I 

talked to hundreds of people.  My staff talked to thousands of 

people.  And I answered every letter and read every letter.  I 

lie.  I mean, I don't lie but I overstate it.  I didn't read every 

letter, but I read samples of letters because there was a lot of 

duplication.  There was obviously a campaign because a lot of 

letters were practically word for word.  So there would 

representative letters that may . . . One letter that was drawn to 

my attention may include 5,000 letters or 300 letters or 

whatever to the same effect.  And in each case I wrote back and 

I stated very clearly what the legislation was and what it was 

not. 

 

And from our point of view, and I say this with total sincerity, 

what Bill 38 is about is to prevent discrimination in respect of 

employment and housing and access to public services, and 

that's what it is, and that's all it is.  It isn't anything more.  It 

isn't anything less.  As a piece of legislation prohibiting 

discrimination in respect of those matters, it is not the kind of 

moral or morally related question that would call for a free 

vote.  It does not raise questions of fundamental conscience.  

Because whatever your views of the Scriptures or whatever 

your views about homosexuality, the fact of the matter is that 

discrimination is wrong.  And discrimination ought not to be 

tolerated. And I'm on safe ground here when I'm speaking 

through you, Mr. Chair, to the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone because I know that is her view.  She said it again 

today. 

 

And that is what Bill 38 is all about, and that is the 

government's firm conviction, and that does not call for a 

free-standing vote.  So we have said after careful consideration 

in our caucus that that is our position.  It's a position arrived at 

by our caucus and maintained by our caucus.  So we dealt with 

it in that way, and we've been entirely consistent. 

 

I know that when I talk about the kind of attention that our 

members, who've given to this issue, I recognize that the hon. 

member has gone through the same kind of process in her 

situation as have the members of the 

official opposition -- a lot of interest and a lot of debate and a 

lot of correspondence and telephone calls and that sort of thing.  

And I had expected throughout, if I may be so bold, to have the 

hon. member's support with respect to Bill 38.  And I believe 

that when everything is all said and done, we have that support.  

I remember the consternation I felt when the member and I had 

a debate out in the rotunda here, and it appeared that the hon. 

member had changed her position.  At least certainly that was 

the impression I got as I went through this debate.  And my 

impression, rightly or wrongly, is that the member's thinking 

had been swayed by opponents of the Bill who are reading 

things into the Bill that just aren't there or are raising concerns 

that just logically, legally ought not to be there.  And I was 

distressed by that because it seemed to me that the hon. 

member had flip-flopped on the question of support for the 

Bill. 

 

If that's a correct characterization, I think I hear her saying 

today that she is ready to flip-flop back and support the Bill.  

And I would appreciate that because I think that no matter how 

you look at this Bill, no matter how you cut or slice it, the fact 

of the matter is that it is purely and simply a question of 

prohibiting discrimination.  And surely she supports that.  And 

surely these other red herrings that are dragged across the path 

of this Bill -- what if, how about, might be -- the other 

possibilities that aren't addressed in this Bill and have nothing 

to do with this Bill and questions which this Bill cannot affect, 

ought not to affect our sober judgement in this Chamber as 

legislators. 

 

Now I want to address -- and I'll do this quickly because I don't 

want to take the time of the committee -- the specific questions 

that she raised.  The answer to the specific questions are no, 

and let me state them as I jotted them down when she was 

speaking. 

 

The question of . . . and she used the term family status.  I think 

she meant marriage between homosexual people, and if she's 

not she can ask the question again.  The Bill does not address 

the question of the capacity of same-sex people to marry each 

other.  That is a question that under our constitutional 

arrangements is set by the federal government. 

 

The provincial government legislates in respect of marriage 

only for the solemnization of marriage.  Do you need a licence; 

how much does the licence cost; who can marry you, and those 

sorts of questions.  The federal government determines who 

can get married.  So we can't address that question in this Bill.  

It's not within the jurisdiction of the provincial government and 

there's nothing we can do about it. 

 

Right now the law of this country is that same-sex people can't 

get married.  I don't see anything coming from Ottawa that's 

going to change that law.  But if it does, I know one thing and 

that is we in this legislature cannot vote, cannot pass laws with 

respect to that question. 

 

On the question of benefits, spousal benefits, first of all the Bill 

does not touch on the question.  Secondly, you have two kinds 

of situations: either the benefit 



June 18, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2657 

plan lays out who's entitled, in which case it is not a legislative 

matter but a matter of employer policy or employer-trade union 

negotiation; the plan is self-contained on the question and 

prescribes who may receive the benefit.  The alternative 

situation is where nothing is provided and the question then 

becomes a question of entitlement and the argument is based 

upon the charter. 

 

And those are the cases that are rattling around in the system -- 

most of them coming from Ontario but there are others as well 

-- and we're getting judgements from the courts that some go 

one way and some go another.  But at the end of the day, the 

Supreme Court of Canada is going to have to pronounce upon 

the relationship between the Canadian Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms and the question of entitlement to spousal benefits 

under public benefit plans. 

 

On the matter of adoption, this Bill does not touch in any way 

the question of the entitlement of homosexual persons to adopt 

children.  That matter is addressed in other legislation of this 

Assembly.  The legislation that was passed in this House in 

1989 clearly permits anyone to adopt children if they receive 

the approval of the court.  That's been the situation in 

Saskatchewan for many, many years and it was confirmed in 

1989.  If we wanted to change the adoption rules, we would 

have to go back to that Act and change that Act; we wouldn't 

seek to do it in this Act.  That policy question is not in front of 

the House; we can have that argument some other day. 

 

The final thing that the member -- and this may not . . . I may 

have missed one -- but the final note that I have concerns the 

Human Rights Commission's role in educational programs.  

This is described in section 25 of the Act.  And this is an 

interesting section to read because it has been so widely 

misinterpreted and I believe, with respect, that the member is 

looking at it from the wrong angle, from the wrong perspective.  

Twenty-five says: 

 

 The commission shall: 

 

 (a) forward the principle that every person is free and equal 

in dignity and rights without regard to . . . race, creed, 

religion, colour, . . . 

 

The principle that every person is free and equal. 

 

Secondly, the commission is mandated to: 

 

 (b) promote an understanding and acceptance of, and 

compliance with, . . . (the) Act; 

 

Thirdly, the commission is mandated to: 

 

 (c) develop and conduct educational programs designed to 

eliminate discriminatory practices related to the race, creed, 

religion, colour . . . 

 

So on and so forth.  To those listings are added the three 

grounds that are included in this Bill -- sexual orientation, 

family status, and the receipt of public assistance. 

This educational program idea, the member will note, is 

directed towards eliminating discriminatory practices.  

Discriminatory practices is a defined term in the Act.  Sorry.  It 

is not a defined term; it's the heading for the practices that are 

prohibited, the discriminatory practices that are prohibited by 

this Act. 

 

I just had to get the section number from my official.  But if the 

member will look at Part II of the existing Act, section 9, the 

heading is "Prohibition of Certain Discriminatory Practices." 

And it states as a general principle that: 

 

 Every person and every class of person shall enjoy the right 

to engage in and carry on any occupation, business or 

enterprise under the law without discrimination because of 

his or their race, creed, religion, colour (etc., etc.) . . . 

 

And 10 says that: 

 

 No person shall: 

 

 deny to any person or class of persons the opportunity to 

purchase any commercial unit or any place of dwelling . . . 

 

And to deny the opportunity to purchase and to discriminate in 

the: 

 

 . . . acquisition of any commercial unit or any place of 

dwelling, land or any interest in land . . . 

 

And section 11 talks about the rental accommodation, housing 

accommodation, commercial units, that sort of thing. 

 

So those are the discriminatory practices that are defined in the 

Act, and this is the question in respect of which the Human 

Rights Commission has the mandate to develop and conduct 

educational programs.  So it's educational programs designed to 

eliminate those discriminatory practices -- employment, 

accommodation, access to public services. 

 

It's not some untrammelled right to go into the schools, change 

all the curriculum, and in that way somehow promote a 

homosexual lifestyle, which is the point that is made ad 

nauseam by people who are opposed to this Bill.  So at the end 

of the day I shrug my shoulders and say, what's the problem?  I 

frankly don't see the problem.  This is a limited mandate.  I 

think it's an appropriate mandate, and it is appropriate with 

respect to these new grounds to the same extent, to the same 

full extent that it is appropriate with respect to the old grounds 

of prohibition of discrimination. 

 

Sorry to take so long on that answer, but it was a long question. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, well I 

appreciate your comments.  I have some comments, 



2658 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1993 

and then there was one question actually that I had posed that 

you did not respond to which I'll raise again. 

 

I just want to point out a few things.  I guess one of the things 

I'm disappointed in is that your comment on my flip-flopping 

does disappoint me considerably because what you've done is 

to bring forward nothing but your government's strategy to 

undermine my positions in this House.  And I don't think that it 

depicts what I've been discussing on this topic whatsoever. 

 

If you would care to read my comments to your second reading 

on Bill 38, you will see at no time did I say I would not support 

this Bill or that I would support it.  I indicated that I had 

concerns, that these were legitimate concerns raised by me on 

behalf of other people.  It's incumbent upon me to be a 

responsible public servant and it's incumbent upon you to 

respond to their concerns. 

 

What I indicated is that I felt that this legislation could have 

been stated more specifically, that people could in fact have 

their fears alleviated if indeed it were amended, and you, sir, 

are going to be proposing amendments.  So I guess I was right. 

 

As well, I think that it's important to note just exactly what I 

did do with my constituents.  I went to my constituents at 

budget time in anticipation of some of the other pieces of 

legislation that were forthcoming, and what I did was to talk in 

this -- and it was professionally done -- about the budget.  It 

contained other kinds of information as well.  It pointed out 

certain things -- asking people do you in fact believe that there 

should be freedom from discrimination for everyone. 

 

(1115) 

 

And I want to let you know that my constituents, a massive 

majority, support freedom from discrimination for gay and 

lesbian people in accommodation and in the workplace and in 

employment.  They also went beyond that and said that they 

believed that people who have been in gay and lesbian 

relationships for years indeed deserve to have support as far as 

bereavement leave is concerned. 

 

What happened, Mr. Minister, was the more specific the 

questions became, the greater the concern, and that people were 

saying, if you're going to begin to . . . It wasn't even so much a 

question of do we not support spousal benefits for same-sex 

couples; it was if you're in fact going to begin to deal with this 

kind of thing, then what are we really doing in our society for 

home-makers who are at home all the time, in terms of their 

real benefits?  And what are we going to do about siblings who 

have lived together for 30 and 35 years? 

 

It wasn't a question of, I'm now going to, as a constituent, 

become discriminatory.  It was that it opened up a wealth of 

new questions to them.  And I think it's the responsibility of 

your administration, when you're bringing forward a piece of 

legislation, to 

in fact ensure people who have concerns that they don't have 

any reason for concern. 

 

I raised the questions as clearly and fairly as I believe that I 

could in this legislature.  I think that some of the responses 

from your members were absolutely unconscionable in 

response to my speech.  But that's just my humble opinion and 

the opinion of many, many people who have subsequently read 

it or heard it. 

 

Now my question that you did not raise, and I just wish to 

confirm with you . . . You began in response to my five 

questions by stating that the answers to all of these questions is 

no.  My first question being: will the amendments that are 

proposed by this Bill extend the rights not already available to 

homosexuals with regards to family status?  And your answer 

was no. 

 

I asked you: will the amendments that are proposed by this Bill 

extend rights not already available to homosexuals with respect 

to spousal benefits, and your answer was no.  I asked you: will 

the amendments that are proposed by this Bill extend rights not 

already available to homosexuals with respect to the eligibility 

of the adoption of children, and you said no. 

 

I then asked the next question, to which I will re-pose and have 

you respond, but the last question that I'd asked you was: will 

the amendments that are proposed by this legislation give the 

Human Rights Commission, school boards, or any other body 

the authority to introduce educational programs on sexual 

orientation in schools, and your answer was no. 

 

I appreciate those responses because that's what my 

constituents wanted to hear, and they wanted to have it on the 

record after, in fact, there had been legal counsel that came up 

with different interpretations.  And I'm pleased that you would 

see a way of improving this Bill in bringing forward 

amendments.  I applaud you for that. 

 

My question then that I would prefer some response to as well, 

and you can answer just yes or no for expediency's sake, is: 

will the amendments that are proposed by this Bill give the 

Human Rights Commission the authority to start affirmative 

action programs based on sexual orientation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- No, and we are going to ensure that by 

introducing an amendment to section 47 of the Act.  The Act 

certainly isn't going to solve all of the problems, and it's such a 

limited idea as I've stated repeatedly.  And the member has 

mentioned other problems, other social problems that are out 

there that need attention, and in the fullness of time we'll have 

to attend to it. 

 

I was interested to hear the member's reaction to my analysis of 

her position over time.  I think the member's attention was 

distracted when I used the term flip-flop, and she ought not to 

have been as defensive about it I think as she was because I 

was 



June 18, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2659 

describing -- I think fairly -- the member's thinking as it went 

along here and my reaction to it. 

 

And the member knows and I think all members of the House 

knows that we have consulted closely and extensively about 

this and discussed concerns and ideas, and we have made a 

great deal of progress.  And I'm hoping that when the dust all 

settles here and you have . . . the committee has completed it's 

work that the Bill 38 will enjoy your support. 

 

Ms. Murray: -- May I have leave to introduce guests, Mr. 

Chairman? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and my thanks to 

the minister and the member from Saskatoon Greystone.  Mr. 

Chairman, to you and through you to my colleagues in the 

legislature, I am just so pleased to introduce 25 grade 4 and 5 

students from Pilot Butte School which is a school where I 

taught for many, many years.  Accompanying these students is 

Loretta Dick, a colleague of mine for 15 years, and their bus 

driver, Ruth Beteridge. 

 

I had the privilege of teaching these children in kindergarten, 

and I'm delighted to see them here again so grown up.  I'm 

looking forward to meeting with them right away for 

photographs and questions.  And I'd ask all members here to 

join me in welcoming them to the Legislative Assembly.  

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 38 

(continued) 

 

Clause 1 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just have a further 

clarification, and I'm sure that we don't want to bore or take up 

time in this Assembly.  But, Mr. Minister, our conversations 

and my particular point of view on issues are things that I 

shared with you prior to ever seeing the legislation.  And I'm 

not here simply to represent my particular points of view.  I'm 

here to represent the points of view of thousands upon 

thousands upon thousands of people in my constituency.  And I 

did make my own personal point of view known to you, and 

once I saw the legislation, I brought the concerns of people to 

this Assembly and expressed them to you. 

 

Now if you call that a flip-flop, I don't know whether or not 

anyone should express mere opinion that represents their own 

point of view and then completely ignore the wishes and 

concerns of their own constituents.  I believe that I am a 

responsible person here, and I guess I really resent the 

implication that somehow I should not represent the points of 

view of my constituents; that I should merely bring 

into this Assembly my opinion and my opinion only. 

 

I made a commitment to people.  Prior to the campaign, when 

we had 65 other people that were running for the Saskatchewan 

Liberal Party, we made a commitment to one another that on 

issues that would be deemed sensitive and moral, that we in 

fact would not simply represent our own points of view; that 

we would ensure that we would bring forward the concerns of 

our constituents. 

 

And that's one of the reasons why people in this province and 

elsewhere feel betrayed by their elected officials.  They feel 

that they are not listened to, and I made a promise that in fact I 

would listen to people. 

 

So there are times when I bring issues into this Legislative 

Assembly that are not my issues.  They're issues of other 

people.  And that's my job. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well fair enough, Mr. Chair, and to the 

member, and I think if the member reviews Hansard, she will 

see that there is no cause to be defensive about the remarks that 

I made in my speech.  But as I say, fair enough. 

 

One of the things that I said was that the discussion that the 

member and I had in the rotunda, in the presence of the media, 

raised the concern in my mind that she was responding to the 

agenda of the very vocal opposition to this Bill.  And I think 

that, as I said earlier, that's turned out not to be the case, 

because after some discussion I think we were able to achieve a 

common understanding and consensus on at least many of the 

issues.  I'm not saying all of them, but many of them. 

 

And I am, as I said earlier, looking forward to the member's 

support by the time the committee is finished its work and her 

concerns have been addressed. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, and to 

the minister.  Mr. Minister, you're well aware of the prolonged 

debate that has taken place and the debate out in the country, 

and certainly from the involvement and the input that we're still 

getting from people and concerned citizens across the province 

of Saskatchewan, it's a debate that hasn't ceased simply because 

Bill 38 hasn't been an ongoing debate that's been taking place 

in the House, with the whole format of how the House works 

and the House proceeds. 

 

But there are a number of areas that we would like to bring 

forward, we would like to discuss.  I believe you were into 

some discussion just a few minutes ago.  Some of the concerns 

that have been brought forward . . . and I'm going to raise them 

again because of their importance and because of the letters 

that I've just received recently from individuals who, again, 

have taken the time, not only to write yourself . . . An 

individual from Regina here who has written and says: I think 

you're kidding yourself and the people of Saskatchewan when 

you say it will not affect any other phase of our lives, example: 

education, family, 



2660 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1993 

adoption, homosexual marriages and legal rights, etc. 

 

And another letter that again brought out the fact that people in 

general across this province and across this continent certainly 

have no problem with the reaffirming the fact that the 

homosexual community should not be discriminated against 

based on their sexual preference in regards to employment and 

housing. 

 

But the one issue that, regardless of how it is put and how it is 

set . . . and as your colleague, the Premier, indicated last night 

that he was putting his faith and trust in you, and I think that's 

really going a little . . . extending himself almost a little far.  

I'm not sure, but he's putting . . . said he's . . . that your 

statements basically relay his or reiterate his belief and his 

opinion on Bill 38. 

 

However, Mr. Minister, as I've indicated before, and I'm going 

to reiterate on the floor of this Assembly . . . because I believe 

it's important that we raise these concerns, that we bring the 

issues before the floor, that we get a sound, firm commitment, I 

guess if you will. 

 

And I'm not exactly sure that just even a commitment in the 

debate that takes place in this Assembly and recorded in 

Hansard is something that will, in the future, be looked upon as 

a solid argument in the judiciary, in the courts, regarding the 

availability or the discussion that will take place as individuals 

take Bill 38 and then begin to use it to seek . . . or greater 

access to the demands that they are putting forward. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I guess there are three, four areas, four 

particular areas that people are very concerned about.  And 

people are concerned about the fact that the homosexual 

community wants to and would like to be more greatly 

recognized in their ability to adopt children.  And basically 

arguing the fact that they do have a sound father or mothering 

characters and instincts and that they could raise children 

appropriately.  And that may be true.  No one's taking away the 

argument that they couldn't provide the housing that's needed, 

that they couldn't provide the shelter, or the clothing.  Or 

provide for the basic needs of a child.  But one has to wonder, 

what about the moral, the social, and the emotional needs of 

that child.  Would they be properly addressed in view of our 

society and the fact that our nation has established itself. 

 

And I believe even if we went back to the social gospel 

presented by Mr. Douglas back in the '40s, where he would 

have reiterated the issue that there are some moral guidelines 

that we as people need to live by and we need to agree to and 

recognize.  Now that's one of the issues.  The adoption issue is 

a major concern. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, we're suggesting that we put an amendment 

into this Bill that specifically raises the concern and addresses 

the issue by suggesting that this Bill will not go beyond what it 

is meant to do, the housing and employment issue, and be 

allowed to be used later on to allow for homosexual . . . or 

adoptions by homosexual couples. 

I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if you can give us a commitment 

and indicate that you'd be willing to look at that amendment 

and put it into the Bill.  Even though at the end of the day, I'm 

not exactly sure by introducing the amendment that it is going 

to alleviate the concerns out there in light of the overall impact 

of the Bill and the desire of the Bill to outlaw discrimination, 

period.  I wonder if the minister would comment on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, Mr. Chair.  This is not the place, or 

this is not the Bill within which to resolve the question of the 

adoption of children by homosexuals or homosexual partners. 

 

It has been the law of Saskatchewan for a long time that there 

is no prohibition in the legislation respecting the adoption of 

children.  And that if you look at The Adoption Act -- and I 

remind the member that it was . . . that the current Act was 

passed in 1989 -- it does not prohibit homosexuals from 

applying for adoption, from adopting children. 

 

(1130) 

 

There has never been a situation that I'm aware of in 

Saskatchewan where the issue has arisen, that where the courts 

who are the ultimate decision-makers with respect to adoption 

have decided the point.  So it's still out there. 

 

If it is the wish of this Assembly to deal with the question of 

adoption raised by the member, then we should do that within 

The Adoption Act which is where that law applies.  There is 

nothing in this Bill one way or the other to affect the question 

of adoption.  There is simply no value, no moral value 

addressed in this Bill, and those questions would have to be, I 

submit, addressed in the appropriate piece of legislation. 

 

If the member feels this strongly about it, then I suggest that he 

or his caucus raise the question in the context of The Adoption 

Act in an appropriate way.  But it would be most extraordinary, 

probably out of order to try and raise it in this Act.  Perhaps not 

out of order, I shouldn't say that, I'm not pronouncing on that 

question.  But if we're going to address this question, then let's 

go to The Adoption Act in the appropriate manner and consider 

whether that Act should be amended.  Let's not use this Bill as 

the vehicle for addressing that particular question. 

 

As I say, there is nothing in this Bill that speaks one way or the 

other to the question of adoption of children. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  Unfortunately the 

issue that you've raised, and I guess a couple of points that you 

raised here in response to that . . . And as you've indicated, to 

your knowledge there really hasn't been any demands in 

Saskatchewan to date.  I would take though that that doesn't 

necessarily mean that the requests or the demands may not 

come in the future regarding 



June 18, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2661 

adoption of children by same-sex couples.  It's taking place in 

other areas of our society.  It's taking place in other areas of our 

country.  The demand is out there in other areas of the world. 

 

The fact is that if this is not the Bill, then it would seem to me 

another argument that could come out of this issue then is why 

change Bill 38 if the only thing that we're talking about is 

housing and employment.  If the adoption question is 

something that would take place, it could be addressed through 

the adoption legislation. 

 

Now there again this argument that did we . . . we really didn't 

need Bill 38 to address discrimination based on housing and 

employment.  Another avenue could have been looked at, 

certainly looked at very closely and very directly, and address 

that question. 

 

So you and I may disagree and we probably will on some of 

these issues and how they're addressed and how they're viewed.  

You have a legal background; I've got a farming background, 

but I don't think it takes away from the fact that we do have 

some views.  You may tend to look at issues a little more on 

the basis of your learnedness regarding judicial questions 

versus my background in the area that isn't really dealing with 

Justice or a lot of judicial matters, even though I've been given 

the responsibility of being Justice critic, and sometimes I 

wonder . . . But I think sometimes on the outside you can get a 

broader perspective because you're not encumbered by the 

knowledge you have received regarding how the judicial 

system works. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Minister, I think in light of the views, even 

though we could address that question in the adoption Bill, 

what would be wrong in bringing forward or just putting an 

amendment in.  And I'm going to call the pages and just send 

over some of these suggestions we've made for amendments so 

you can review them.  But what would really be wrong in 

making a statement or amendment that addresses that concern 

that the people across Saskatchewan have? 

 

And, Mr. Minister, we're well aware of the fact that this 

concern is not a concern of 20 or 30 or 40 per cent of the 

people in Saskatchewan.  In fact as we've raised the issue, it 

crosses all political lines, it crosses all party lines, it crosses all 

denominational lines.  People who even do not profess to 

acknowledge that there is the existence of a God have some 

strong feelings on this issue.  And I would suggest to you that 

over 90 per cent of the population of Saskatchewan -- maybe 

95, 98 per cent -- are opposed and have spoken out and 

expressed their views on this question.  Why not allow that 

form of an amendment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I wonder if the Assembly would 

give leave to introduce guests? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to 

introduce two special friends who are seated in the west 

gallery, Eddie and Emmy Gross, from down in Glenbain.  Ed is 

a well-known farmer down in the south-west area of the 

province and Emmy as well works in many social groups in the 

Glenbain area.  I know that all members will want to welcome 

Ed and Emmy Gross to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Renaud: -- To ask leave to introduce guests, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you.  In the Speaker's gallery, Mr. 

Chairman, are two guests, Mrs. Ccile Small, who is my aunt 

and a teacher in Saskatoon, and her friend, Mrs. Donna Senior.  

They're here today to attend the Bazaart craft show.  Ccile is a 

teacher, as mentioned earlier.  She has written some books and 

she loves Saskatchewan heritage, the culture and the arts. 

 

And I'd like the Assembly to join with me in extending a warm 

welcome to my guests here today and wish them a safe trip 

home. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 38 

(continued) 

 

Clause 1 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The simple answer to the member's 

question is that the matter of the adoption of children just has 

no place in a Human Rights Code.  Our Human Rights Code, 

as is the case right across the country, is concerned with 

prohibiting discrimination in respect of employment and 

accommodation and access to public services. 

 

Questions like the one raised by the member are, of course, 

serious questions and deserve to be considered by our 

respective caucuses.  And the policy issues are researched and 

positions taken in the context of those issues, not in the context 

of an anti-discrimination Bill. 

 

One of the problems that we've had that, just have cursed all of 

us in the discussion of Bill 38, are the side issues that intrude 

themself upon what is really a very simple, straightforward 

piece of legislation.  And that's something that we've had to 

bear.  We can't make it go away.  We can't wish it away.  We 

have to cope with these representations that are made to us. 

 

But I think what we have to remember is that this business of 

law making on which we are now engaged has to have some 

structure and order to it and some basic integrity, if I can use 

that term. 



2662 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1993 

When we're dealing with a particular piece of legislation like 

the Human Rights Code, let's talk about the issues that that 

raises and deal with the issues that are raised by that and not try 

to reform all of the laws in Saskatchewan that might 

incidentally be touched upon by other aspects of arguments that 

are raised by the amendments that are proposed. 

 

So my answer to the member is that we respect his concern 

about the issue.  We know that there is a level of public 

concern that he is expressing when he raises his point, but let's 

do it in the context of the appropriate Bill . . . or the appropriate 

piece of legislation, I should say. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, another 

question that comes up is regarding marital status and the 

concern that there will be the demand for the recognition of 

same-sex marriages.  And it's an area that certainly the people 

of Saskatchewan, the people across Saskatchewan, and across 

Canada for that matter . . . And the member from Regina 

Rosemont says it's not on the Bill.  Well then fine.  Strengthen 

the Bill to say it will never be part of the Bill.  That's all people 

are asking.  People are asking for the fact that the Bill be 

strengthened so the Bill cannot be used down the road to 

demand that. 

 

And if the member from Regina Rosemont wants to ask some 

questions, the member from Regina Rosemont can jolly well 

stand to his feet -- he'll have the opportunity -- and ask some of 

the questions that his constituents are raising as well. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, when we get into this debate the whole 

question of marital status is something that is out there.  And 

people are asking it.  And there's no reason why we should just 

slough it to the side because of a broad statement that says no, 

this Bill does not deal with that particular issue.  No, this Bill 

will not allow that to take place.  We've all seen how legislation 

through the years has been utilized by interest groups to 

demand and to raise particular concerns and raise issues of 

concern to them. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I'm wondering if here again if you would 

make a commitment to at least allow an amendment that would 

strengthen the Bill to address the question of marital status, of 

same-sex marriages.  Would the minister be willing to do that, 

sir? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The question raised by the member is in 

a different category than the previous point about adoption.  It 

is a question of constitutional jurisdiction. 

 

We in this Assembly cannot legislate in respect of the capacity 

of people to marry each other.  That's done in Ottawa by the 

federal government.  We have a jurisdiction, as the member 

from Wilkie will no doubt know, we have a jurisdiction in the 

provinces to talk about the . . . to talk about the solemnization 

of marriage, which is to say the ceremony, how marriages are 

conducted.  So we can pass laws about what kind of a licence 

you need, and what would be the cost of the licence, and who 

can marry you, and 

on what days of the week you can marry, and all those sort of 

formalities or technicalities about the ceremony and about the . 

. . you know how, what sorts of licences you need. 

 

But it is the federal government that provides who can get 

married to each other.  And so there are laws respecting 

marrying your sisters and your brothers, and your aunts and 

uncles, and that sort of thing, that are dealt with in federal 

legislation.  So when you're talking about the question of 

same-sex marriages, that is a matter that falls entirely within 

the jurisdiction of the federal government, and we couldn't do 

anything in this House about that question even if we wanted 

to. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, 

Mr. Minister.  I guess the thing that I would suggest though, 

Mr. Minister, even if technically and legally it's beyond our 

control, I think the province can still give some leadership in 

indicating to the population that certainly we're going to lay out 

the guidelines or at least take a stand on the guidelines or 

through our lives exhibit the type of guidelines that the people 

of Saskatchewan really believe in. 

 

And unfortunately you're right, the way our marriage laws are 

now and the way our divorce laws are in this nation of ours -- 

and whether that's, I'm not exactly sure if that's provincial or 

federal jurisdiction -- but certainly we face a situation where 

the greater openness and the greater frivolous . . . I guess 

marriage is treated very frivolously these days.  There isn't that 

commitment.  There isn't that commitment amongst people to 

really make a commitment to partners, to each other.  And as a 

result we see a lot of the offshoot and the problems that arise 

from it.  And certainly the issue of same-sex marriages just 

increases that feeling of uncertainty and not knowing where to 

turn. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, it would seem to me that there'd be nothing 

wrong in -- as you've stated, you've made a firm and solid 

commitment in your second-reading speech on some of these 

issues -- it would appear to me that there would be nothing 

wrong in even putting an amendment or putting forward 

something in the Bill that reaffirms those commitments that 

you've made in writing through answer.  And I think that would 

be only fair.  Even though I can see just from the motions and 

from the body language that that's not really going to fit in and 

you're not quite prepared to do that. 

 

But I think, Mr. Minister, it's fair, because the public are 

watching and the public have raised the concern.  It's a concern 

that is broad and it's wide-ranging.  And what I would suggest 

is there's nothing wrong -- at least I don't believe there's 

anything wrong -- in making that commitment through an 

amendment to indicate that this Bill doesn't go beyond the 

issues that you have described.  And why won't the minister at 

least today reaffirm that commitment by making some kind of 

a statement in the Bill to reaffirm your commitment to 

specifically housing and employment? 



June 18, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2663 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The reality of the situation is that I'm 

not only the minister responsible for the Human Rights 

Commission but I'm also the Minister of Justice.  And that 

means that part of the function of that office is to . . . part of my 

responsibility is to ensure the legislation that is brought to this 

House is constitutional and within the constitutional 

jurisdiction of the province.  And I have a department that has a 

very significant and professional capacity to just ensure or to 

help ensure that that's done. 

 

(1145) 

 

And so it is my responsibility with respect to all legislation, to 

sign off on it in the sense that it is within the competence of 

this legislature to pass the law that's being passed.  And I could 

not . . . I mean it would be . . . No minister of Justice could sign 

off on a piece of legislation that was clearly not within the 

jurisdiction of this House.  In other words, what I'm saying is 

that we can't do something like the member suggests just for 

the cosmetic value of doing it or just to try and reassure people 

who are concerned about this matter. 

 

I draw to your attention the . . . I draw to the member's 

attention, Mr. Chairman, that in the federal legislation which 

was in parliament . . . It didn't get passed before the session 

ended, but it's there.  It was legislation that was put forward by 

the Prime Minister designate, so one would expect that it would 

come back on the legislative agenda if she's successful in the 

next election.  And part of that legislation defined very clearly 

who could get married in Canada. 

 

So the member's concern is being addressed in the appropriate 

place, namely parliament.  And I don't think we need 

over-concern ourself.  I know we've had a lot of concern 

expressed by our constituents about that very question, but 

there's a limit to what we can do in this House to satisfy those 

things.  And one thing we cannot do is to try and do something 

that's outside our jurisdiction in order to satisfy some of those 

concerns.  I hope the member can accept that. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I can 

appreciate your comments and appreciate the role as Justice 

minister in trying to follow through and make sure that your 

legislation certainly falls within the guidelines of our Charter of 

Rights and Freedoms.  Because as chairman for the regulations 

and review committee, it's my job to see to it that certainly the 

legislation meets those needs.  And I'm just going to be totally 

disappointed if I can't find any fault with your piece of 

legislation. 

 

Mr. Minister, another area of concern is spousal benefits.  And 

certainly I believe there have been some cases that have 

already been before the Supreme Court. 

 

And how do we address those concerns?  There again we've 

suggested an amendment that would specifically bring out the 

fact that this Bill will not allow or extend or give the 

homosexual community the leverage to utilize the Bill to 

demand the spousal 

benefits that couples, man-wife relationships, are . . . 

heterosexual couples can expect because of their relationships 

and because of their commitment to each other.  And, Mr. 

Minister, here again is another concern that people have.  And 

they want, not just a statement from yourself, but a major 

commitment through the Bill or through legislation that would 

say that this Bill does not go beyond and allow that. 

 

Now I realize that, as we've already seen taking place, that this 

is an area that is already coming forward and a greater demand 

is going to be placed on our society for those benefits and the 

recognition by same-sex partners.  And I don't think it's going 

to be all that long before Saskatchewan sees the requests are 

coming out of provinces as well as changes take place in other 

jurisdictions.  And I'm wondering if the minister would care to 

respond to that concern. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, and to the member, I believe 

that we in my office and in the department have probably spent 

more time on this issue, this aspect to Bill 38, than any other.  

And the reason why that's been the case is that the situation is 

so complex. 

 

There are a lot of cases working their way through the courts 

which raise the question of spousal benefits.  And the situation 

is unsettled.  There are conflicting decisions, and we don't 

know how they're going to come out. 

 

There are a number of things that are clear however.  Some of 

them I have already said this morning in this committee in 

answer to the questions raised by the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Let me just restate it very briefly.  If a benefit plan prescribes 

who is entitled, then those are the people who are entitled.  And 

if that includes same-sex partners, that's the end of the matter.  

That's a matter of the employer has laid that down in the plan 

or else the plan has been negotiated between the employer and 

the trade union, and that's up to them.  I think the member 

would accept that.  It's not our business in this legislature as 

lawmakers to interfere in those kind of private arrangements 

that are out there. 

 

The question is more complex if it is a . . . if there is no such 

definition, if there's no such prescription about who is entitled.  

And you then fall on the general law.  And those cases are the 

ones that are working their way through the courts.  And they 

all involve the rights of people under the charter, under the 

Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  And they are so being argued 

and they are so being decided in the courts, including in the 

Supreme Court of Canada. 

 

Ontario tried to include a definition of marital status in their 

code for the purposes of the benefit plans.  It would apply to 

that, probably apply to other things too, but I know it applied to 

benefit plans.  And the board of inquiry -- this is in the Lechner 

case -- and the board of inquiry in that case held that the 

attempt to define marital status as restricted to opposite-sex 

couples did not comply with the charter. 



2664 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1993 

So there you are right back in the charter again.  And of course 

we in this Assembly cannot change the charter.  The charter's 

embedded in the constitution and, as the member knows, there's 

a very, very complex process for amending the Constitution of 

Canada, and especially of the charter. 

 

So at the end of day we arrive at this conclusion, Mr. Chair, 

and to the member: there just isn't anything we can do to 

advance that situation one way or the other.  This question of 

benefit plans and the entitlement of same-sex spouses or 

same-sex partners is going to be played out in the context of 

the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 

 

There's nothing in this Bill.  And countless cases can be almost, 

you know . . . I've got almost two pages of cases here.  They're 

not played out in the context of provincial Human Rights Bills.  

So it didn't matter what we prescribe here.  That's not going to 

decide the question of entitlement to same sex spouses, or same 

sex partners under benefit plans. 

 

And we see the efforts that have been made to effect the 

question which were unsuccessful, and we see the way in 

which these questions are being played out in the courts all the 

way up to the Supreme Court of Canada.  And we just arrive at 

the conclusion that there really isn't anything this legislature 

can do. 

 

My fundamental point is that the question of entitlement under 

benefit plans of whatever kind is not addressed in Bill 38.  It's 

not addressed directly and it's not addressed indirectly. 

 

And so there is when you get right down to it, there is nothing 

to which we have to respond.  It is an issue that simply doesn't 

arise under Bill 38.  It is another kind of an issue, an issue 

where the provincial legislators are not major actors at all, 

where the charter is the major actor, and we're just going to 

have to see how that comes out. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I guess that the 

indirectness is the main problem that people have with the 

whole Bill before us and whether the Bill deals directly or 

indirectly with any of the particular issues, whether it's same 

sex marriages, whether it's spousal benefits, whether it's 

adoption. 

 

And that's why the public in general are asking for a statement 

or a commitment that this Bill doesn't go beyond that.  And 

you've mentioned this morning that we've got an adoption Act 

that addresses the adoption question, and the spousal benefits is 

something that is up for discussion.  It's certainly before the 

courts today. 

 

And because of . . . you suggested, or brought to mind, the 

Charter of Rights and Freedoms that has been enshrined in our 

constitution . . . and I would believe and I would suggest, Mr. 

Minister, that one of the major problems that we have in our 

society and we have in our country today is the fact that we've 

enshrined a charter that has basically said, people have rights 

and they have freedoms, and they can 

demand their rights.  But I don't know -- and I'm not that 

knowledgeable -- but it seems to me that we haven't added the 

key phrase and component, and that is, with rights and 

freedoms comes responsibility. 

 

And there is a major debate taking place.  We can all demand 

our rights.  We can demand . . . I can demand a right that you 

would disagree with.  But as a citizen of the province of 

Saskatchewan, as a citizen of Canada, I have a right to speed 

down the highway if I would like, but I also have a 

responsibility to heed the rules and the regulations and the 

speed limits. 

 

And if I happen to exceed the speed limits and I'm caught, I'm 

guilty.  I might say: yes, but I have a right; the road was clear, 

there wasn't anyone in my way and I could exceed the speed 

limit because I had to get from point A to point B at a certain 

period of time.  That is not the question.  It's my responsibility 

to abide by the guidelines that have been laid down, the traffic 

laws of this province. 

 

I could demand it's my right just to walk onto some other 

person's property.  That person could say, well it's my right to 

say that you don't have that responsibility unless you're invited 

-- or that right.  You have a responsibility to respect my 

property. 

 

You've raised the question of the federal Bill.  The fact that the 

federal Bill is basically sitting on the Table and it's probably 

going to die on the order paper is the same thing that could 

happen with Bill 38 -- it could die on the order paper.  You 

could save us all the concern and the questions that are being 

raised out there. 

 

And unfortunately, I see the minister shaking his head the 

wrong way.  I think the people of Saskatchewan, if they could 

view and see the body motion, would be wishing that the 

motion would be in the other affirmative . . . would be 

affirmatively moving, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But see, what we have is . . . And on the federal Bill I believe, 

and having talked to some of the federal MPs (Members of 

Parliament), the former minister . . . And it's also interesting to 

note when you look at the debate that took place and the Bill 

that was before the House of Commons, yes, the minister who 

introduced that Bill is now the current Leader of the 

Conservative Party.  But it's interesting to note that the Bill 

died when the debate started to heat up.  And basically 

members of that party spoke out and said, if you want our 

support on any issues, you're going to have to start addressing 

the concerns we've got. 

 

And the Prime Minister finally realized that his party wasn't in 

agreement with that piece of legislation.  And the interesting 

part is to note how quickly Ms. Campbell moved from Justice 

over to responsible for defence, moved her right out of the 

portfolio.  And so the Bill is just sitting there. 

 

Now whether or not she's Prime Minister, she is going to have 

to listen to the wishes of the people who are elected to serve 

with her in the next federal election 



June 18, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2665 

and as the next Government of Canada. 

 

Now what I'd like to see is the fact that there were people 

allowed that ability, even in this Assembly, to stand by their 

convictions, to voice the concerns of their constituents, because 

I think that took place on the federal level. 

 

(1200) 

 

And I think, Mr. Minister, as well, when we look at this we can 

always argue, well it's a federal responsibility, or it's federal 

laws that control, like, I think The Marriage Act and the 

specifics in The Marriage Act.  There are some areas where 

we're involved regarding the process.  There are federal laws or 

will be federal laws or it's an issue that's on debate regarding 

spousal benefits. 

 

I think that here in Saskatchewan we still have the ability to 

express our views and our opinions.  And regardless of whether 

the federal laws override -- we see a greater transfer of some of 

the responsibilities at the federal level to the provincial level -- 

it would be appropriate, and we could show some leadership in 

this country by standing and saying: no, we're not going to go 

beyond that.  Yes, we realize that federal laws have some 

jurisdiction here, but we're going to make that statement and 

even show it through our piece of legislation that we may 

disagree . . . or we disagree. 

 

And we want our people to know that we believe in what the 

people are standing for.  We believe in these issues and we're 

going to make a solid statement on that.  And therefore, Mr. 

Minister, even though it would be a federal jurisdiction that 

would cover some of these areas, I don't see any problem or 

any reason why we can't have a solid statement in our Human 

Rights Code that addresses these issues of spousal and adoption 

and marriage. 

 

And going on to another amendment we've brought forward, 

regarding the educational process, too, of bringing in a addition 

to our human sexuality, or whatever -- I'm not exactly sure 

what they call the curriculum dealing with human sexuality in 

the health area -- but adding another component where we've 

heard individuals in support of this piece of legislation, 

individuals who want to bring forward greater public 

awareness, who are suggesting that we need to adopt 

educational programs that alleviate the fears of the general 

public towards homophobic ideas and principles; that basically 

are saying that there's no reason why people should fear the 

homosexual lifestyle because it's a normal lifestyle.  And I 

disagree with that. 

 

I've talked to doctors and I've talked to people who have been 

in the homosexual community and been able to work their way 

out of it who will tell you . . . And if they were here today, they 

would stand in their place, having been there, and tell you that 

it is not a normal lifestyle, and it is not the type of lifestyle we 

should promote. 

And there again, I don't believe the Bill is specific enough to 

eliminate that fact or to protect our educational . . . the demand 

by the homosexual community to allow for a portion in the 

educational curriculum that deals with the homosexual desires 

and demands. 

 

And there again, Mr. Minister, would you be willing to look in 

and add an amendment that lays out the fact that we do not 

allow the extension of homosexual lifestyle to be promoted 

through educational courses or curriculums in our province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I want to answer a number of the points 

that the member raises, and I'm glad that he raises them 

because we're getting right down now to the nub of the debate. 

 

The member knows that there is a great deal of support for this 

Bill in the community as a piece of legislation that prohibits 

discrimination in employment and accommodation and public 

services.  And I say that with confidence because my sense of 

this debate, listening to the members of the opposition caucus 

speak to the Bill, is that they've said that.  They have said that.  

The member himself has said it, and others there have said 

clearly that if that's how far Bill 38 was going, they would 

support it.  And that really gets us right down to the point that I 

have made earlier, and I want to make again. 

 

What we have had happen to us, you and I and all the rest of 

us, with respect to Bill 38 is that red herrings have been 

dragged across the path of this Bill, if I may use that metaphor.  

Red herrings have been dragged across our path and have 

diverted us from our course.  We started out to do a very 

simple thing, and that was prohibit discrimination, just as we 

prohibit discrimination in exactly the same way on a number of 

other grounds.  What we are trying to do is to protect our 

citizens from the ravages of discrimination.  And almost to a 

woman and to a man in this House, we support that idea with 

respect to sexual orientation.  And similarly in the community, 

there is broad support for that. 

 

The problem is that the red herrings, the outside issues, have 

contaminated this debate, and we've lost our compass on it; at 

least some of us have because we get seized with the question 

about how do we feel about same-sex partners getting married.  

That's not the question raised by the Bill.  We all know that.  

We all know that.  But yet we get dragged away from our 

knowledge and from our certainty by the prospect of two men 

living together in a sexual union or two women living together 

in a sexual union, and we allow that mental picture to divert us 

from what we're about here.  And similarly with respect to the 

question of spousal benefits; we get that little red herring 

dragged across our path.  Even though this Bill has got nothing 

to do with spousal benefits, or the entitlement to benefits, we 

get our attention and our purpose diverted from Bill 38 to that 

other question of who is entitled under a dental plan, or who is 

entitled under a bereavement leave provision, or who is entitled 

under a medical plan.  And we pay serious attention to that as 



2666 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1993 

though it were important to us, Mr. Chair, and Mr. Member, as 

though it were important to us sitting here as to whether a 

person living in Moose Jaw is or is not entitled to be repaid the 

cost of their dental services and whether that person happens to 

be living in a homosexual union or not living in a homosexual 

union. 

 

We get all pulled away from our purpose here and get diverted 

by that ominous-sounding word, spousal benefits for same-sex 

partners, as though that were a big deal.  Well it must be a big 

deal.  I mean so many people are worried about it that I must 

say that we should accept that it is important to society whether 

some person living in Prince Albert is entitled to have their 

dental bill paid by an insurance company or not paid by an 

insurance company.  Let's accept that it's important.  The point 

is that it's a side issue and a red herring.  And it's diverted us 

from our main intention. 

 

And finally the question of the adoption of children.  We all 

know that the adoption of children is governed by a particular 

piece of legislation.  We all know it because the party that 

forms this government has dealt with that Act in this legislature 

in the past as government.  The members of the official 

opposition, when they were government, dealt with that Act as 

recently as four years ago.  We know that that's where these 

questions should be addressed. 

 

We know that Bill 38 has got nothing to do with the question of 

adoption.  But we allow these outside issues, these red herrings, 

to divert us from our purpose in Bill 38.  And suddenly we look 

at the question and say: great Scott! a homosexual adopting 

children; we'd better change this law to cover that.  Well my 

answer to the member on that point I've already given.  If that's 

the view, if that's what this legislature wants to do, then we 

should do it in the context of the Act that has . . . that deals 

with adoption, that prescribes the right to adopt, and the 

procedure for adopting, and how it's done, and not get diverted 

from our plan, from our policy, with respect to Bill 38 by that 

somewhat emotive question. 

 

And I use the word emotive because that is the nature of these 

red herrings.  That is the nature of these outside issues; they are 

emotion-laden issues.  They conjure up in our mind images 

which are not pleasant to all of us and so we have a tendency to 

react.  All of our citizens have a tendency to react to these 

emotional issues. 

 

To hear the public debate on Bill 38 from some of the people 

most actively involved in it, you would think that Bill 38 was 

addressing the whole way in which our society functions, the 

whole question of human sexuality.  It has nothing to do with 

human sexuality.  It has to do with the ravages of 

discrimination and protecting our citizens from the ravages of 

discrimination, and that we all agree is something we should do 

and we must do. 

 

Now the member gave us a fascinating glimpse of the way in 

which the federal Tory caucus works, and I take it that he 

speaks with some authority on the 

question of how this particular issue was handled in the federal 

Tory caucus.  I have no idea whether that's the whole story or 

part of the story.  Perhaps he can enlighten us further on it. 

 

But the point does remain, the point does remain that at least, at 

least at one point the federal government must have decided as 

a cabinet and as a caucus to introduce that Bill because it was 

introduced -- it was introduced.  And they decided at that same 

time to address the question of who can marry each other 

because that provision was contained in the Bill.  Now time 

will tell whether the federal government seek to move on this 

or not. 

 

But I would remind the member -- and after this I'll sit down, 

Mr. Chair -- I'll remind the member that the federal government 

is under court order practically -- that's the practical effect of it 

-- a court order to change its Human Rights Code because the 

charter requires that the Human Rights Code extend the 

protections of the code to people regardless of their sexual 

orientation. 

 

That's not a question of members putting up their hands or 

deciding to pass a Bill or not pass a Bill.  It is a requirement of 

the Constitution of Canada that that protection be extended.  

And there's nothing we can do about that and there's nothing 

parliament can do about that.  It is what it is.  And in the 

meantime, the federal Human Rights Code must be applied and 

interpreted as though that prohibition were specifically spelled 

out in the code.  So while it's fascinating to get a glimpse of the 

to-ing and fro-ing in the federal caucus in this election year, the 

fact of the matter is that when they come back after the 

election, no matter which party is in power, they're going to 

have to face this question and they're going to have to include 

that prohibition in their Human Rights Code.  Similarly we in 

Saskatchewan, in the final analysis, have no alternative but to 

include a prohibition against discrimination on the ground of 

sexual orientation in our law. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, we've heard a number of members speak on this 

issue, particularly on this side, and all the members have said 

that they were opposed to discrimination.  We heard the 

member from Greystone say exactly the same thing this 

morning; we've heard you say the same thing. 

 

But perhaps, Mr. Minister, there's a misunderstanding on the 

definition of the term "discrimination", both in this House and 

in the public.  So I wonder if you would mind explaining your 

definition of the term "discrimination." 

 

(1215) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, and to the member, the best 

definition I think I could offer is one that comes to us from the 

Supreme Court of Canada; and we don't have the case with us, 

but here is the definition that according to our collective 

memory was given to the term "discrimination" by the court: a 



June 18, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2667 

burden imposed or benefit denied on the basis of an irrelevant, 

personal characteristic.  I'll just repeat that: a burden imposed 

or benefit denied on the basis of an irrelevant, personal 

characteristic. 

 

When you come right down to it though, we all know what it 

means.  It means treating different people differently, treating 

different people differently, failing to treat all of us as equal.  

And so when when our societies in North America and 

elsewhere in the world discriminated on the basis of race, it 

was a burden imposed or benefit denied on the basis of a 

personal characteristic which was not relevant. 

 

And gradually we came to see that and changed our laws.  It 

was common at one time to discriminate on the basis of sex, 

gender that is, male or female.  We came, as a society, to 

understand that was wrong, that that was a burden imposed or 

benefit denied on the basis of an irrelevant personal 

characteristic, and we moved to change it. 

 

And I think that's probably a workable definition.  It's not the 

only one and not necessarily the best one, but it's one that has 

been accepted by the courts. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Well we see 

about us, and including in this House, discrimination.  In this 

very Assembly there is discrimination, Mr. Minister.  If you 

look at the traditions and practices of this House, in our little 

members' handbook it describes proper attire for males in this 

House.  Proper attire for males in this House is a jacket and tie, 

and yet that same standard is not applied to the female 

members of this House.  We have seen female members in this 

House in blouses and slacks.  We have seen them with shorts, 

and yet the male members of this House must wear jackets and 

ties. 

 

That is, Mr. Minister, a burden imposed based on a person's 

gender.  And yet it seems to be acceptable in this House.  I see 

a number of members across the aisle find that somewhat 

interesting that I would bring this up in this discussion.  

Because, Mr. Minister, it is a form of discrimination, and it is 

an acceptance of discrimination in this very Assembly. 

 

The member from Greystone this morning was saying that 

discrimination in any form should be eliminated, and yet I have 

before me a newspaper clipping and I'd like to quote from it.  

The member from Greystone is saying: 

 

 People who would attack her on a personal basis are the same 

ones who would end up driving gay people underground. 

 

So she's saying that if a person is to attack her, that they are 

those that would discriminate against other people, others.  An 

earlier quote in that same paper, she says: 

 

 She counters by saying, the Tories preach family values 

while promoting intolerance towards homosexuals. 

A case where now she is throwing the mud, Mr. Speaker, but if 

anybody throws it back at her then they're intolerant.  Another 

case, Mr. Minister, where we're seeing the double standards 

that are being applied in this very Bill. 

 

Mr. Minister, how can you present a piece of legislation to this 

Assembly in an attempt to eliminate discrimination where you 

build discrimination into the very Bill, where you accept 

discrimination in this very Assembly? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I point out to the member that not every 

difference amounts to discrimination, and that this Bill, Bill 38, 

and the Human Rights Code, the base statute, is a very limited 

idea.  It's a very limited idea.  It prohibits discrimination on a 

limited number of grounds in respect of a limited number of 

matters and doesn't seek to solve all of the problems of the 

world. 

 

We live in a world with huge social problems, many of them 

based on the fact that we don't treat each other with the dignity 

and respect that becomes free and equal people.  We can't 

address all those questions in one piece of legislation.  Human 

rights legislation has focused in this province and elsewhere on 

just some of the basics -- your job, your home, and your access 

to public services. 

 

Now perhaps it should include more things.  We'll be interested 

to have that discussion.  But so far, up to 1993 in this country, 

the protection of human rights, the protection of people from 

the ravages of discrimination, have been limited to those 

grounds. 

 

So I freely admit there are all kinds of other problems out there 

that can be characterized as differential treatment or 

discrimination.  But we just can't solve all the problems of the 

world with one Bill. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, one of the things 

that you have outlined in this Bill is an attempt to eliminate 

discrimination in the case of employment.  Is that protection to 

be extended in all cases or just in selected cases? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well the Act is quite clear with respect 

to the protection in employment.  It's in section 9, and I'll read 

it.  It's a simple section: 

 

 Every person and every class of persons shall enjoy the right 

to engage in and carry on any occupation, business or 

enterprise under the law without discrimination because of 

his or their race, creed, religion, colour . . . (etc., etc., plus the 

grounds that we have in the Bill today). 

 

And I then refer the member to section 16 of the Human Rights 

Code which says that: 

 

 No employer shall refuse to employ or continue to employ or 

otherwise discriminate against any person or class of persons 

with respect to employment, or any term or 



2668 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1993 

condition of employment, because of his or their race, creed, 

religion, colour . . . (etc., etc., including the three new 

grounds included in Bill 38). 

 

No employment agency shall discriminate on the same ground.  

"No employer shall use, in the hiring or recruitment of persons 

. . . an employment agency that discriminates . . ." on any of 

those grounds. 

 

And I think that those are the collection of employment-related 

matters that are covered by the Bill. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister.  I have 

here a magazine called Union Matters, April 26, 1993.  And 

they have a little paragraph here on this legislation.  I'd just like 

to read it: 

 

 Labour supports Human Rights Code changes.  The 

province's largest labour organization has endorsed the 

proposed amendments to the Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Code currently before the legislature as Bill 38.  The 

26-member executive council of the Saskatchewan 

Federation of Labour voted unanimously this week to express 

public support for Bill 38.  The proposed changes to the code 

would provide protection from discrimination in 

employment, accommodation, and basic public services for 

homosexuals, recipients of social assistance, and families 

with children. 

 

Would you accept, Mr. Minister, that this is a reasonable 

explanation of what the Bill is and what it proposes to do? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes I think that that's certainly in very, 

very summary form but I think that's accurate. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, I'd like to read 

you another quote then.  This is from Maclean's magazine 

December 9, 1991, a quote from Mr. Daryl Bean: 

 

 No man has a right to scab as long as there is a pool of water 

to drown his carcass in . . . 

 

Mr. Minister, we now have a situation where the unions are out 

discriminating against people's employment because of the 

actions that the union did not agree with.  In the same 

magazine, the Union Matters that I quoted from earlier, above 

the part where it talks about labour supporting the Human 

Rights Code is a list.  It's called, "Scabs suspended." 

 

This is an example, Mr. Minister, of how these people support 

the Human Rights Code and discrimination.  In one breath 

they're saying no, no, you should not be allowed to 

discriminate.  It says here: ". . . employment, accommodations 

and basic public services for homosexuals, recipients of social 

assistance and families with children." 

 

Now I'm sure that this list of names that they have here of 

people they're calling scabs that should be, 

according to Mr. Bean, drowned in a pool of water, includes 

people with families, with children.  How do you respond to 

that, Mr. Minister, how do you allow this kind of 

discrimination to occur? 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the minister on her feet? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- By leave, Mr. Chairman, to introduce 

guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 

Chairman, today I'm delighted to introduce to you and to the 

Assembly, 40 grade 4, 5, and 6 students in the west gallery 

from the Pleasantdale Elementary School.  They are 

accompanied by their teachers Marg Carlson and John 

McPherson and their chaperons Mary Scott and Connie Fredin 

and bus driver Don Kager and Frank Kager.  And I would like 

to welcome them. 

 

I hope they've had a pleasant tour of the legislature this 

morning and that they'll have a very enjoyable and exciting 

tour of Regina and some of the sights in Regina this afternoon.  

I'll be meeting with them shortly for pictures on the stair, and I 

would ask all members of the Assembly to join with me in 

welcoming them to Regina and to the legislature this morning. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 38 

(continued) 

 

Clause 1 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, and to the member, the 

concept of a scab as that term is used in the quote from Mr. 

Bean, which I'm told is actually a quote from Jack London 

initially, is a term that trade unionists use to describe people 

who cross picket lines to work at a struck plant.  These may be 

people who were employed there previously or they may be 

people who are brought in to do the work of striking 

employees. 

 

And the member from Rosthern raises the question of whether 

this is a complimentary term.  And the answer is no.  It is an 

extremely uncomplimentary term.  Again a very emotional 

issue surrounding labour disputes. 

 

Such laws as there are which relate to labour disputes are 

contained in labour relations statutes.  In Saskatchewan ours is 

The Trade Union Act.  And it goes by different names in 

different jurisdictions.  But the regimes, the network of laws 

that apply to striking employees are addressed in those statutes.  

So the Human Rights Code would not have any application to 

people who were working behind picket lines or working in 

struck plants. 



June 18, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2669 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I think again it's an 

example of the double standard.  We just had a ruling come 

down from the Human Rights Commission in the province of 

Saskatchewan stating that human rights legislation was 

paramount to all other legislation in this province unless 

explicitly stating otherwise. 

 

(1230) 

 

I'd like to read a little more from this column, this article in 

Maclean's magazine of December 9, 1991: 

 

 On October 10, Daryl Bean, president of the 170,000 strong 

Public Service Alliance of Canada (PSAC), wrote the same 

letter to three women -- all grandmothers -- in which he 

called them "SCABS". 

 

 The three women are public servants who chose to exercise 

their freedom to earn a living during the recent nation-wide 

strike by the PSAC.  Bean's letter quoted this passage: 

 

 "After God had finished the rattlesnake, the toad and the 

vampire he had some awful stuff left with which he made a 

scab.  A scab is a two-legged animal with a corkscrew soul, a 

waterlogged brain, and a . . . backbone of jelly and glue.  

Where others have hearts, he carries a tumour of rotten 

principles . . .  No man has a right to scab as long as there is a 

pool of water to drown his carcass in, or a rope long enough 

to hang his body with." 

 

 The three women are Helen Fraser, Dianna Haight, and 

Jackie Nezezon, who work as civilian employees at Canadian 

Forces Base, Trenton.  Why did Bean write this frightful 

letter to them? 

 

 Because Bean was responding to letters each of the three had 

written to him to express their concern over the intimidation 

and threats that took place during the strike. 

 

 During the recent nation-wide strikes by PSAC and the 

Canadian Union of Postal Workers, Canadians saw, heard or 

read almost daily about scenes of sickening violence and 

lawlessness on the picket lines. 

 

 A surgeon in Ottawa on his way to perform an operation was 

knocked off of his bicycle and suffered a concussion. 

 

 A mob rampaged through a post office in Montreal, 

overturning tables and smashing furniture. 

 

 Again and again, law-abiding citizens trying to exercise their 

freedom to earn a living, were assaulted and harassed.  These 

citizens were sometimes made to run gauntlets of screaming, 

cursing, threatening picketers to simply get to 

their places of work to earn a living. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, if this very same thing were to happen to 

someone who claimed to be a homosexual, would or would that 

not be acceptable in this society? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The member raises a number of 

questions.  First of all, with respect to the issue of 

paramountcy.  The paramountcy of the code is not something 

that happens because of the ruling of the Human Rights 

Commission or a decision of the Human Rights Commission.  

It arises because of section 44 of the Human Rights Code 

which was enacted by this legislature 14 years ago. 

 

Section 44 says, and I quote: 

 

 Every law of Saskatchewan is inoperative to the extent that it 

authorizes or requires the doing of anything prohibited by 

this Act unless it falls within an exemption provided by this 

Act or unless it is expressly declared by an Act of the 

Legislature to operate notwithstanding this Act. 

 

And that is the principle of the paramountcy of the code and 

that is what the Human Rights Commission refers to when it 

talks about paramountcy.  It is a matter of law. 

 

The same principle is incorporated in the legislation of all of 

the other provinces and all of the other jurisdictions.  This is 

not something unique in Saskatchewan; it's there right across 

the country. 

 

Now with respect to the . . . I see why the member's raising the 

question of scabs and the treatment of scabs and then makes the 

analogy to what is commonly referred to as gay bashing.  And 

gay bashing is an issue -- no question about that -- of great 

concern to everyone because it is violent and it is such an 

assault upon people who are not deserving of that kind of 

treatment. 

 

The Human Rights Code is a very limited provision with 

respect to those kind of situations that might be included in the 

idea of what is referred to as gay bashing.  Section 14(1), 

which has been there since 1979, talks about publishing or 

displaying on land, on your property or premises, or in a 

newspaper or television or radio or in any printed matter, any 

representation or statement or symbol . . . 

 

 tending . . . to deprive, abridge or otherwise restrict the 

enjoyment by any person . . . of any right to which he is or 

they are entitled under law; or 

 

 which exposes, or tends to expose, to hatred, ridicules, 

belittles or otherwise affronts the dignity of any person, any 

class of persons or a group of persons; 

 

 because of his or their race, creed, religion, colour, (so on and 

so forth). 

 

I say that's a limited provision because it has, you see, 



2670 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1993 

I think very limited application.  The more substantial 

provision is in the Criminal Code, the federal Criminal Code.  

So that I don't know where that leaves us in connection with 

the member's question with the reaction of Mr. Bean to people 

who'd crossed the picket line, comparing that to what I have 

sort of loosely termed gay bashing.  I don't know where that 

leaves us, except to say that's of course not what Bill 38 is all 

about. 

 

And to that I can add nothing to assist the member with respect 

to that very interesting question. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you indeed add 

nothing to the question or to the answer because my question 

was directly:  is it acceptable for this kind of behaviour to 

happen in this society?  And is there any other difference in 

this behaviour if you change the word scab to homosexual to 

gay or lesbian? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- It's hard to answer the member's 

question because in one situation you have the collective 

bargaining that hasn't worked and a strike that's going on and 

economic struggle between the employer and the trade union 

and all of the emotions that that situation causes.  You have, 

with respect to the people who cross the picket lines, the 

question of them taking the job of people who are lawfully on 

strike, who are in effect obeying the law, exercising a right they 

have.  So that's in relation to this . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Said all long-term employees.  

Grandmothers.  Grandmothers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I can only answer one question at a 

time, Mr. Speaker.  So that's a particular kind of economic 

struggle as it's often called, involving a strike, and I know that 

the members opposite are strong supporters of the right of 

individuals to strike in connection with the collective 

bargaining process.  And that creates emotional difficult . . . or 

emotional issues, very, very important issues if people cross 

picket lines to take the jobs of striking workers. 

 

It's hard to draw a parallel between that and what I have termed 

gay bashing, this kind of letters or publications, I think, 

because the analogy the member's drawing aimed at people 

whose only difference, whose only distinctiveness is that they 

have a different sexual orientation.  That's obviously a much 

different question than an industrial dispute, so it's hard to 

answer the member's question in that context. 

 

If you're asking me if I think it's fair game to commit assaults 

upon gay or lesbian people in our society, my answer is a most 

emphatic no; it is not permissible.  It is not acceptable 

behaviour and it should not be accepted by any of us, if that's 

what you're asking.  But I repeat, it is hard to deal with these 

two as being analogous situations because of course they're not. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you're doing a . . . 

trying to do a good job of skirting the issue and dodging.  I find 

it rather convoluted that you 

would use the argument that it's an economic struggle if a 

union member bashes, harms, destroys property, curses out 

another person.  That's okay in the sense that it's an economic 

struggle. 

 

Mr. Minister, prior to 1939 in Germany there were a number of 

people who felt they had an economic grievance and they were 

dealing with an economic struggle, and in that situation 6 

million Jews were hauled off to the concentration camps and 

gassed.  Mr. Minister. was that an economic struggle that you 

would have found acceptable, and you would not classify that 

as discrimination? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well of course not, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Then why is it acceptable that it's an 

economic struggle if in a labour dispute some individuals do 

exactly those things that were described in this article?  That's 

acceptable. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want to read that quote to you again and change 

one word in it and find out whether or not it would be 

acceptable under your definition of discrimination and your 

operation of the Human Rights Code: 

 

 "After God had finished the rattlesnake, the toad and the 

vampire he had some awful stuff left with which he made a 

(homosexual) . . . A (homosexual) . . . is a two-legged animal 

with a corkscrew soul, a water-logged brain, and a . . . 

backbone of jelly and glue.  When others have hearts, he 

carries a tumour of rotten principles . . . No man has a right to 

(be a homosexual) . . . as long as there is a pool of water to 

drown his carcass in, or a rope long enough to hang his body 

with." 

 

Is that acceptable then, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I speak on behalf of all of society in 

saying no, of course not. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well then, Mr. Minister, when you 

change that word to scab, why is it acceptable? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, Mr. Chair, I never said it was.  I 

was . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Come on, guys, settle 

down.  I was simply putting the idea of a scab in its context in 

attempting to deal with the member's analogy as between scabs 

and homosexual people.  And I said that the analogy was an 

awkward one, and it was awkward because the contexts are 

entirely different. 

 

I'm not here to stand and express on behalf of the government 

or myself the question of attacks upon scabs.  We can have that 

debate in another context at another time.  And I do not 

appreciate the member's attempts to suggest that I say one is 

okay or not okay or anything like that. 

 

I am simply here to say in response to the member's substantial 

question that I speak on behalf of all 



June 18, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2671 

society when I would condemn, absolutely, the characterization 

of homosexual people that his transposition of the nouns in that 

quotation gave effect to.  And he knows that.  He knows that. 

 

I mean, it is going to be tough reading in Hansard when one 

reviews what the member has said.  Now I know that the 

member was just doing it for the purpose of asking a particular 

question, but we ought not to even utter words like that.  

They're so terribly, terribly inappropriate. 

 

But I'm not lecturing the member.  I'm just saying that the 

analogy that he draws is far-fetched and not useful and really 

off-the-wall. 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  The Chair requests leave to introduce 

guests.  Is leave granted? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Chair: -- With thanks to the members of the Assembly, I'd 

like to introduce to you some visitors to Saskatchewan from 

our sister province to the east, from Manitoba. 

 

In the Speaker's gallery right now are 38 grade 6 students from 

Major Pratt School in Russell, Manitoba, who are here as part 

of the school tour, and we're pleased to see stopping to see the 

proceedings of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 

 

These students are accompanied by teachers Wayne Dunham, 

Jan Shauer; chaperons Mrs. Hickman and Mrs. Russell; and 

their bus driver Brian Clunas. 

 

In a few minutes they will be leaving the galleries and will be 

taking a tour of our Legislative Assembly buildings which they 

will recognize as being nearly as beautiful, from their point of 

view, as their Assembly buildings in their own capital of their 

province in Winnipeg. 

 

Members of the Assembly, would you please show a warm 

Saskatchewan welcome to our visitors from our sister province, 

Manitoba. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1245) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 38 

(continued) 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, you condemned those words in relationship to 

homosexuals.  And we do the same.  They are totally 

inappropriate and should not be used.  But will you also 

condemn those same words being used in the case of scabs, as 

were directed towards these three grandmothers? 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I'm not about to stand in this 

House and defend the words of Jack London, which I think 

were written in about 1917.  It is not part of my function to 

stand here and defend any statement by Daryl Bean in which he 

quotes Jack London.  And frankly, Mr. Chair, this has 

absolutely nothing to do with Bill 38.  Can we focus on the 

subject? 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, we see -- Mr. 

Chairman, sorry, I've given you a promotion -- we're seeing a 

clear example of the priorities and the concerns of this 

government.  It's perfectly acceptable to call these people 

worse than rattlesnakes, vampires, and that they should be 

hung. 

 

You described earlier what discrimination should not allow: 

hate, intolerance, support . . . This quote supports and promotes 

violence against a group of people.  And you are supporting it.  

You will not come out and say that it is not right, that it is 

wrong.  You stand here and say, I condemn this when it comes 

in the terms of homosexuals, but you will not say that when it 

comes in the terms of a labour dispute.  It's very plain where 

your support comes from and what you're trying to hide and 

protect behind here, Mr. Minister. 

 

Now will you come out and condemn this action and these 

words in relationship to, as Daryl Bean described it in 1991, 

scabs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Oh dear.  I don't know what in the world 

the member's point is here.  It is not part of my function to 

comment upon words written by Jack London in 1917.  It is not 

part of my function to comment upon statements that Daryl 

Bean may have made, which includes quotes from Jack 

London, in 1991.  What I did do is respond to the member's 

characterization, to the member's characterization of 

homosexual people, which I think to be entirely inappropriate.  

Now if the member wants to -- if I could interrupt the member 

from Rosthern -- if the member wants to quote something that 

Jack London or somebody wrote about homosexual people, I'm 

not going to defend them either. 

 

But I will comment on a statement put across the floor of this 

House with respect to a concept that is included in Bill 38 

which the member makes.  And I did that.  As to Jack London, 

I couldn't care less what he said. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- I don't care what Jack London said 

either, Mr. Minister.  What I am concerned about is the attitude 

of Daryl Bean, as a union representative, when he made this 

particular quote.  What if I was to say in this Assembly that: 

 

 After God had finished the rattlesnake, (and) the toad and the 

vampire, he had some awful stuff left with which he made a 

scab.  A scab is a two-legged animal with a corkscrew soul 

(and) a waterlogged brain . . . (A) man has no right to scab as 

long as there is a pool of water to drown his carcass in and a 

rope long enough to hang his body with. 



2672 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1993 

Would that be an acceptable statement, Mr. Minister, under 

your Human Rights Code? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well the answer to the member's 

question is that the Human Rights Code does not, according to 

my interpretation of it, deal with any aspect of the question 

raised by the member.  Now that is the long and the short of it. 

 

The other thing I would say to the member is that I am here, I 

am here, I am here in this Assembly today to consider in 

committee the contents of Bill 38.  And I want to do that.  I 

want to do it today.  I'm looking forward to doing it Monday 

and Tuesday and Wednesday, and however long it takes. 

 

But I am not going to get into an argument about whether or 

not Daryl Bean's characterization of anybody was correct or not 

correct, except as it may relate to Bill 38. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it seems you're 

prepared to protect -- or under your terms protect -- some 

people under a Human Rights Code while you're prepared to 

discriminate and allow the continuation of discrimination 

against others.  What's so special about some of these people 

that other people should be discriminated against? 

 

You accepted the union's explanation that I read out to you 

earlier and that part of that being families with children.  Why 

are you going to allow discrimination against families with 

children, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, for I don't know how many 

repetitions of the same answer, I am not called upon in my role 

in this committee to accept or not accept something that Jack 

London wrote in 1917 that Daryl Bean quoted in 1991 . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Total regret. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- No, it's nothing of the sort.  What it is, 

we are dealing with a Human Rights Code passed in 1979.  It 

does not address the right of people who are on strike.  It does 

not address the question of -- to use Daryl Bean's and Jack 

London's phrase -- scabs.  It is simply not within the purview of 

this Act. 

 

I believe that members are going to have an opportunity to 

discuss this concept in the appropriate context, which would be 

amendments to The Trade Union Act, all in due time.  But we 

can't deal with all the problems of the world within Bill 38.  

We can only deal with the subject of Bill 38, and scabs is not 

included, Mr. Member. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it's very interesting 

that you have very selective criteria for who you will protect 

from discrimination and who you won't.  Just because you 

happen to have been a labour lawyer in your past history, that 

you supported those groups or they supported you financially 

through salary, that you are prepared to allow discrimination in 

those particular cases. 

Mr. Minister, as you yourself said earlier, discrimination in any 

form is wrong.  Now all of a sudden discrimination in this 

particular form is acceptable.  Sorry, Mr. Member, but I'm not 

dealing with that today.  Well, Mr. Minister, that is 

discrimination and you are discriminating against these people 

and you're not prepared to stand in your place today and say 

that it's wrong.  You're prepared to accept that as 

discrimination. 

 

Mr. Minister, I find it appalling that you're not prepared to 

stand up and state in the case of scabs that that statement is 

wrong, but you're prepared to stand up and say it is wrong and 

totally condemn it when you stick a different word in there.  

Mr. Minister, no matter what the word used, these are people 

and you're discriminating against them and I find it totally 

appalling. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I guess just in the ordinary to-ing 

and fro-ing in the House it's my turn to speak.  If the member 

wants to seriously suggest to this Assembly that we should 

amend Bill 38 to protect from discrimination workers who are 

on strike, then let's have it.  Let's have a look at the 

amendment.  I don't know what point he's driving at. 

 

The analogy between replacement workers or people working 

behind picket lines and homosexual people is just too far, too 

far, too impossible to even deal with.  I mean, it's . . . Talk 

about an off-the-wall analogy, that is it.  One of my colleagues 

has provided me a quote from the Grainews which in 

Saskatchewan is at least on an equal standing with Maclean's 

magazine.  It's not a quote from Daryl Bean, but its a quote 

from Cynthia Heimel, and she says the following: All men are 

not slimy warthogs.  Some men are silly giraffes, some 

woebegone puppies, some insecure frogs.  But if one is not 

careful, those slimy warthogs will ruin it for all the others. 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  I want to bring to the attention of 

all members of the committee the expectations of proper 

decorum in debate in the committee.  I also want to specifically 

caution members, having listened for the last few minutes here, 

of a ruling in Beauchesne's Parliamentary Rules & Forms, 6th 

edition, on the content of speeches, item number 481(e): 

 

Besides the prohibitions contained in Standing Order 18, it 

has been sanctioned by usage that a Member, while 

speaking, must not: 

 

(e) impute bad motives or motives different from those 

acknowledged by a Member. 

 

And I would simply like to point out to the committee that 

we're coming dangerously close to violating that rule for proper 

conduct of debate in the Assembly, and ask all members to 

respect that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I want to say it once, Mr. Chair, that my 

point was not that any of these characterizations applied to the 

hon. member, and far 



June 18, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2673 

from it.  My point was simply talk about irrelevant quotations 

-- he had one; I have one.  That was the principle on which I 

was introducing the quotation. 

 

The Chair: -- And the Chair simply wishes to clarify that the 

comment was directed to both sides of the House. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, could I have leave to introduce 

some guests? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Seated in the 

Speaker's gallery is a constituent of mine from Cabri.  His 

name is Ross Korven.  And together with him he has a group of 

people from, I believe, China.  And I think that we'd like to 

welcome him here and them.  I know that he's done a lot of 

work coordinating things with the Chinese people both here 

and in China, and I think we need to welcome them here to the 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 38 

(continued) 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, after 

listening to that little quote from the minister, I take it . . . and 

I'm glad the minister did speak up and not really qualify it as 

being his statement because I'm sure he really wouldn't want to 

put himself into that, nor would we all. 

 

But, Mr. Chairman, we've been debating Bill 38, and we've 

attempted this morning to raise a number of concerns, a 

number of questions -- and not only just this morning but over 

the past number of weeks and months as we've entered into the 

debate here.  We've been raising the issues, the concerns that 

the general population have across this province. 

 

And as we draw near to 1 o'clock, it would seem to me that we 

haven't arrived or even drawn a lot closer to some of the . . . 

alleviating those concerns and alleviating those fears.  And 

there are a number of things that I would like to get into, but I 

think the time period for the day has basically . . . as we're 

winding down it just doesn't give me the appropriate time to 

really get into.  So I would think it would be appropriate to call 

it 1 o'clock. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 

 


