




















































Hansard: March 22, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 487 

 March 22, 1993 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that the Assembly resolve 

itself into the Committee of Finance. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I knew, Mr. 

Speaker, that the comments I made before supper would get the 

attention of the members opposite.  And I'm glad to see that 

they appreciated the comments that I made because indeed, Mr. 

Speaker, the member from Bengough-Milestone, in my 

opinion, is lacking in her duties to her constituents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was also interested to hear the member from 

Melfort's remarks when she said that the 10 members of the 

official opposition, that we are wolverines.  The 10 wolverines 

was the phrase the minister of the Crown responsible for 

municipal government and threat said.  Well, Mr. Speaker, it is 

quite an honour to receive that characteristic from that 

particular member.  She should know, Mr. Speaker, that 

wolverines are very efficient at digging down rat holes and 

dragging rats out of their holes to deliver them to the daylight 

and their just rewards.  So, Mr. Speaker, if the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) members want to call the 10 members of the 

opposition wolverines, I say yes; we will drag out the rats and 

deliver them to the daylight to ensure they receive their just 

rewards. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it seems like I've been waiting weeks for this 

debate, and I waited, Mr. Speaker, to speak, unlike all but two 

of the government cabinet ministers.  The other 16 would not 

even speak to their own throne speech.  It was hard to sit 

through the Minister of Finance delivering the second NDP 

budget, let alone wait my turn to get up and address the long 

litany of betrayal.  And a betrayal it was, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no amount of fluffy talk of hope and rebuilding 

given by the members opposite will fool the people into 

believing anything but the truth.  And the truth is that the NDP 

government bloated the deficit, betrayed every promise they 

made to the public, hacked and slashed important programs 

when they had a choice.  It is as simple as that, Mr. Speaker.  

They had a choice. 

 

And nobody is being fooled when the Minister of Finance and 

the Premier and all of the ministers get up and point their 

fingers of blame in every direction but at the NDP.  Maybe the 

NDP should remember a little lesson parents use to teach their 

children not to point.  They say, when you point your finger at 

someone, you have three fingers pointing back at you.  A 

simple lesson, Mr. Speaker, but one the NDP should take to 

heart. 

 

My constituency office and our caucus office receive phone 

calls every day from people.  People who worked to get the 

government elected.  And people who have vowed never to 

vote NDP again.  One senior wrote a letter that even went into 

graphic detail about what he would like to do to the Premier 

and the Premier's ministers.  Never again they say.  Never 

again will they vote NDP. 

 

Most of them talk about how they have ripped up their NDP 

membership cards and either burned it or mailed it back to the 

party.  These are long-time NDP supporters, Mr. Speaker.  And 

the members know that, as Connie from Morse says, they are 

leaving the NDP in droves.  Leaving in droves, Mr. Speaker, 

for good reason. 

 

One young mother phoned from Bengough-Milestone 

constituency last week.  She said she remembers the NDP 

candidate visiting her home before the election.  The woman 

said the NDP candidate was telling her of all the wonderful 

things she would do for the Bengough-Milestone constituency 

if elected, that farmers would be taken care of.  Hospitals 

would get more money.  Teachers would get raises and much 

more. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the woman who phoned said not only has she left 

the NDP Party for ever; she said she feels betrayed, and she 

will never, never trust the NDP again.  She had other 

interesting comments the members opposite should hear about 

as well.  The woman said that she is sick and tired of the NDP 

blaming the old government for every move the NDP make.  

She is sick and tired of it.  She said she believed the members 

opposite when they made promises.  And that because they had 

gone against every one of these promises, she cannot trust a 

word that comes out of their mouth -- not a word.  She said she 

will never trust the members opposite with her vote again. 

 

This is not an isolated case, Mr. Speaker.  It is not just NDP 

Party faithful who have been left out in the cold, so has every 

senior citizen, every family, every small-business owner -- 

everyone.  The NDP over there will try to disregard this fact, 

but they know that it is true.  You can bet your bottom dollar if 

I am receiving letters and phone calls and the rest of my 

colleagues are also that the NDP back-benchers and the 

ministers' offices are being flooded by the same. 

 

The reasons may differ from person to person, Mr. Speaker, but 

the bottom line is the same.  The members opposite better 

enjoy their offices right now because, when the people get the 

chance to go the polls and to force the members opposite to 

listen, it will be much too late for this NDP administration. 

 

The NDP will be history in this province, Mr. Speaker.  A 

footnote in history, to boot.  Because they have earned it. 

 

The NDP can talk all they want about economic 



488 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1993 

development, but the truth is that they are hanging onto the 

coat-tails of the former administration and the benefits that 

have resulted.  The NDP can talk all they want about the 

deficit, but the people know the members opposite have 

bloated it terribly and continue to misrepresent the facts. 

 

We know that the NDP started the debt by borrowing in New 

York for holes in the ground and to buy expensive farm land at 

inflated prices from their friends to lease back to their friends 

in the infamous land bank.  They borrowed $450 million at 

sixteen and two-thirds per cent from New York bankers to 

create SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining Development 

Corporation).  Sixteen and two-thirds per cent for 16 years, Mr. 

Speaker, with an option to buy out in the last year of the 

contract -- sixteen point two-thirds per cent interest for 16 

years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it isn't just the official opposition that recognizes 

what the NDP are up to; economists, professors, even union 

members agree.  In fact, the most recent issue of Union 

Matters has plenty to say about the NDP administration.  It 

says, and I quote: 

 

 No one likes to be in debt.  Roy Romanow and his cabinet 

know this better than anyone.  They spent the first 18 months 

in office frightening the public with debt.  They're doing it 

again over the approaching budget.  Premier Roy Romanow 

and Finance minister Janice MacKinnon are telling us to 

expect more cuts -- cuts in public sector jobs, cuts in public 

sector services, and cuts in our standard of living.  There's no 

talk of improving local services, only cuts to local 

municipalities.  There's no commitment to educating young 

people, just cuts to school boards and universities.  There's no 

action to improve the lives of Saskatchewan's poor. 

 

 Rather the government continues to deduct federal family 

allowance payments from social assistance, something the 

NDP denounced the Devine government for doing.  There are 

17 ministers in the Romanow cabinet, but it seems only one 

government department has the power to make decisions: the 

Finance Department.  And every decision it has made, it 

determines by . . . the debt.  It's all part of the NDP strategy 

to dampen our enthusiasm for change, to lower our 

expectations for quality public service jobs and services, and 

destroy our hope for a better future. 

 

And it goes on and on, Mr. Speaker.  Again, I quote: 

 

 Saskatchewan does have a debt problem.  But it simply isn't 

the case that it's crippling us, or that we must postpone every 

other problem --  poverty, the farm crisis, unemployment, the 

environment -- until we deal with the debt. 

 

 Several economists have examined the debt figures used by 

the NDP government and concluded our financial problems 

are 

exaggerated.  During the election, the debt was pegged at 5.5 

billion. 

 

Again I repeat that -- during the election the debt was pegged at 

5.5 billion. 

 

 Once the NDP assumed office, the government adopted a 

new system of accounting principles, not used anywhere else 

in Canada, and recalculated the debt at . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'd ask for leave to introduce some 

guests if the member can forgive me for interrupting. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much.  I won't 

interrupt the member for long.  I know members of the 

Assembly will want to join me in welcoming, I'm told, six 

members of the Highlander Cubs who are here with their 

leader, Bert Rieger.  And I'm told as well Bill Wilson and Mike 

Foti are also in the gallery. 

 

I hope the members of the Cubs find the proceedings 

interesting and I hope they learn a little bit about how 

parliamentary democracy works.  I know all members will 

want to join me in welcoming them here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

(continued) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

also extend my welcome to the Cubs in the Speaker's gallery.  I 

was a Queen Scout at one time and I know the enjoyments of 

being in the Scouting movement and I'm sure that you will find 

this evening's procedures very interesting. 

 

Mr. Speaker, once the NDP were elected to government they 

recalculated the debt at $15 billion.  The new accounting 

system included unfunded pension liabilities and Crown 

corporation debt in the total, distorting the real picture.  It's 

akin to including your mortgage as part of your personal debt 

without considering your house assets.  The province's portion 

of the debt is 6.5 billion.  Our annual operating deficit is 

around . . . about 500 million.  On a per capita basis, that's not 

out of line with other provinces. 

 

Economist Jim Sentance says the Romanow government's 

attempt to balance the budget now while the country just is 

beginning to emerge from a recession could be a foolish 

manoeuvre.  That there's 



March 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 489 

no great call for slashing ruthlessly, he recently told the 

Leader-Post.  University of Saskatchewan economist, Isabel 

Anderson, agrees.  She believes the government should focus 

its attention on wealth generation and forget about deficit 

mania for a while.  And I quote her: 

 

 Just cutting back spending for the sake of cutting back isn't 

going to solve the deficit problem, she commented in the 

Leader-Post. 

 

The newsletter goes on to tell more details of the NDP 

administration's untruths to the people of the province.  And at 

one point it says, and I quote again: 

 

 When the NDP was elected to office, Roy Romanow 

promised to build a better future for the people of this 

province.  This isn't it.  This isn't it. 

 

So when the members across the way get up and talk about 

how this budget proves they are acting courageously and 

responsibly and how it is going to improve the lives of 

Saskatchewan people, nobody believes them.  And if the NDP 

haven't clued in yet that that is a fact, maybe it's about time.  

Maybe it's time to start listening to the people -- these decisions 

are hurting. 

 

Maybe the member from Riversdale and his colleagues should 

rethink the direction they are taking and come up with an 

economic development plan that will create jobs -- not a 

hack-and-slash budget that will eliminate jobs and force many 

young people to move away from this province.  The members 

should stop their gouge on the taxpayers before there are no 

taxpayers left here to pay. 

 

You don't have to be an economist to know that when a big 

project like a fertilizer plant or an oil upgrader comes to your 

community, that along with it comes jobs, and lots of them.  

Lots of jobs for the Moose Jaw area with the Saferco plant.  

Along with direct jobs come jobs through catering and other 

services local businesses can provide, and that all the workers 

will be spending money in the local area.  That's not hard to 

understand, Mr. Speaker, except by the members opposite. 

 

(1915) 

 

Mr. Speaker, small business is one of the main economic 

engines of this province.  The choices of the Minister of 

Finance will create havoc amongst the small businesses of this 

province, in particular amongst the small businesses close to 

one of Saskatchewan's borders.  That seems to be consistent 

with one of the aspects of the NDP's long-range political 

agenda, the agenda to destroy businesses, communities, 

families, outside of the major urban areas.  The decrease in 

rural population will make it easier to gerrymander 

constituency boundaries and to eliminate rural seats.  Mr. 

Speaker, this budget goes a long ways in accomplishing this. 

 

This goal was accomplished with the 12 per cent 

increase in the PST, the provincial sales tax -- a total of 28.6 

per cent since April 1992; the 2 cent a litre increase in fuel tax, 

a total of 5 cents a litre more since the 1992 budget.  Mr. 

Speaker, the people of Regina and Saskatchewan remember 

gasoline at 39.9 cents a litre before the presentation of the 

member for Regina Dewdney's budget last year.  What are the 

pumps today, Mr. Speaker?  Gas, to those who can still afford 

to drive, went to 56.9 cents a litre after the budget.  That, Mr. 

Speaker, is a 42.6 per cent increase in less than a year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I used the term PST (provincial sales tax) instead 

of E&H (education and health) tax for good reason.  The E&H 

tax stands for education and health tax.  If this continued to be 

the use for this tax, people would be a bit comforted at least 

that the increase was providing them with some support.  

Instead, we see education cut by 5.5 per cent this year and by 2 

per cent last year.  Health was cut by 3 per cent this year.  This 

tax is now simply another method used to provide funds for the 

Minister of Finance and has nothing to do with education or 

health.  The name should be changed to reflect the priorities of 

this government.  Call it what it really is: a provincial sales tax. 

 

I started to talk about how this budget would destroy rural 

Saskatchewan, and it will do so by driving people out of 

Saskatchewan to make their purchases.  Everyone in 

Saskatchewan knows there is no PST in Alberta.  Those within 

reasonable driving distance will take advantage of this fact in 

ever greater numbers. 

 

It was not by mistake that Medicine Hat's largest mall is built 

on the east side of that Alberta city.  It is built there to provide 

better access for Saskatchewan shoppers from Maple Creek, 

Leader, and even Swift Current.  The main beneficiary of this 

budget will not be the people east of the Alberta border but 

rather those west in Alberta.  And I am sure Premier Ralph 

sends his thank you's for supporting his province's economy 

and increasing his tax base.  This budget increases his business 

tax base and also his income tax base as people leave this 

province to live and work in Alberta. 

 

It is not just the young that are leaving to look for work but 

also our seniors.  Seniors are leaving because it's cheaper to 

live in Alberta even if you have to pay a hospitalization fee.  

The youth that leave may eventually return, but the seniors that 

leave are gone for good.  When they leave, they take with them 

their income tax payments, their property tax payments, and 

their money for investment.  When grandma and grandpa leave, 

there is no reason for the kids to come back.  When grandma 

and grandpa pass on to greener pastures, their life savings will 

be disbursed within this province and will not be reinvested by 

the kids in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The problem of cross-border shopping is not isolated to the 

Alberta side of our province.  We have two other long borders 

which will also be affected.  The problem along the U.S. 

(United States) border is endemic.  The attractions have been 

cheaper fuel, cheaper booze, 



490 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1993 

tobacco, and the ability to avoid the PST. 

 

This budget makes those temptations even greater.  While the 

province may be able to collect the PST on alcohol and tobacco 

imported into Saskatchewan, I do not believe it will have a 

major impact on the amount of beer imported from North 

Dakota or Montana; in fact, shoppers will simply return to the 

province by way of Manitoba and Alberta. 

 

Because of the tax increases, the breweries will be forced to 

increase their base price.  Their input cost will be higher 

because of increased fuel prices, increased PST on their 

business costs, increased costs for corporate medical protection 

for employees which are no longer protected under the drug 

plan, and significant increases in property taxes.  These 

property tax increases will be there to offset the cuts last year 

and again this year to municipal grants, also to make up for the 

provincial government's offloading in the form of decreased 

grants to school boards and hospitals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we should not forget this government will not 

relinquish its hold on the hospital revenue tax Act.  This Act 

will be its vehicle to tax property and provide funds it cut out 

of the budget to the new, super health boards.  When this 

hospital tax is used, who knows how high it will go.  Perhaps 

the government might even start a lottery and collect more 

money on just how high the tax rate will be set.  This rate has 

been set at 2 mills for those areas outside of a union hospital 

district.  The problem is this rate is set by order in council and 

does not even come before this Assembly. 

 

The third border which will be a problem to border-town 

Saskatchewan is that with Manitoba.  Manitoba, unlike Alberta, 

does have a provincial sales tax -- I believe it's set at 7 per cent.  

So even in Manitoba there can be a significant savings if you're 

purchasing major consumer items. 

 

The clothing merchants of Flin Flon, Manitoba, will be happy 

that adult clothing will now be taxed in Saskatchewan.  I'm not 

quite so sure the merchants of Creighton will be as enthusiastic. 

 

Most people in Saskatchewan know you are supposed to 

inform the Finance department of any out-of-province 

purchases and that you are suppose to remit the proper amount 

of tax.  I would wonder, however, just how much money the 

government gets this way.  Very little, I would suspect, Mr. 

Speaker.  The reason I mention this is because goods shipped 

into the province arrive free of PST.  If you shop in Alberta or 

Manitoba and have the goods shipped to you here in 

Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan sales tax does not apply. 

 

Even more interesting is the fact, if you shop in Manitoba and 

have the merchants ship or deliver the goods into 

Saskatchewan, there is no Saskatchewan sales tax and no 

Manitoba sales tax.  By cross-border shopping in Manitoba and 

having the goods shipped or delivered, you can avoid paying 

all provincial sales 

tax. 

 

Since the Minister of Finance and the Premier are from 

Saskatoon, they may not even be aware of this.  Perhaps they 

should consult with some of their back-benchers.  The 

members from Yorkton, Pelly, Saltcoats, or Kelsey-Tisdale 

should also be aware of these loopholes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, perhaps my expectations of the Premier and 

cabinet are too high when I expect them to discuss such matters 

with back-benchers.  But, Mr. Speaker, the Premier and the 

Minister of Finance either did not talk to their back-benchers or 

completely ignored them.  The voters of Kelsey-Tisdale, Pelly, 

Saltcoats and Yorkton constituencies, and, I can only hope, the 

back-benchers from these constituencies, were concerned 

enough about the people and merchants of these areas to bring 

this matter to the attention of the Premier and Minister of 

Finance. 

 

If they did, then the fault lies with the Premier and his cabinet.  

If they did not, then the fault lies with those MLAs (Members 

of the Legislative Assembly).  If they did not bring the perils of 

cross-border shopping to the attention of the Minister of 

Finance, they should explain their lack of concern to the 

merchants in their areas.  Their constituents should be asking -- 

no demanding -- an explanation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while this government and its socialists might 

wish to build a wall around Saskatchewan, it cannot be done.  

We cannot live in splendid isolation.  We must deal with, 

indeed be part of, the world around us.  We must accept the 

challenges from outside of our borders.  We must allow our 

entrepreneurs to compete from a level playing-field.  Given the 

opportunities, they will create the jobs and the tax base we 

need. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we do not want, we cannot afford, to subscribe to 

the protectionist theories of the U.S. Democrats.  The Minister 

of Finance may invoke the name of Bill Clinton, alias slick 

Willy, President to the United States, but the people of 

Saskatchewan pray she does not invoke the traditional 

anti-trade, protectionist policies of the Democrats.  In fact the 

minister herself should be praying that Bill Clinton does not 

head in that direction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP's protectionist bent does not serve us 

well. 

 

The member from Saskatoon Greystone spoke earlier today.  

That member is demanding that the government cut $6 million 

from the Board of Internal Economy.  This, Mr. Speaker, is 

after she herself has received extra money.  The member from 

Saskatoon Greystone demanded, she demanded, Mr. Speaker, 

$52,000 to fund her office.  No other MLA in this Chamber, 

Mr. Speaker, gets an extra 52,000 for their office, but the 

member from Saskatoon Greystone does. 

 

If she were serious about cutting government 



March 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 491 

spending there is one place she could make a personal 

contribution: her office.  When she is complaining about the 

spending of MLAs and the Board of Internal Economy but 

offers nothing from her own staff and office, does this mean, 

Mr. Speaker, that it's okay for her to gouge the public but it's 

not okay for the NDP to do so?  Mr. Speaker, this does not 

even speak to any funds that she may be receiving from the 

Liberal Party as leader. 

 

The member from Saskatoon Greystone demands to be placed 

on various legislative committees and then she doesn't even 

bother to show up to work. 

 

The government, with this budget, is acting like the Liberal 

Party and being selective as to who receives its largesse.  The 

NDP fired many people then hires back its political hacks.  Mr. 

Speaker, with the Liberals they just appoint their friends to run 

for office.  It does not matter what the people and the party 

members in Saskatoon-Humboldt want.  What is important is 

what Mr. Chrétien and the party elitists want.  I ask:  does the 

member from Greystone support this type of action?  If she's 

still the leader of the provincial party will she use similar 

undemocratic, autocratic measures to ensure candidates meet 

her personal agenda?  Reform, democratic reform in the 

Liberal Party is only a word between re-election and rejection.  

The member from Greystone mouths the word reform to try 

and gain re-election, but her actions demonstrate a rejection of 

the people's democratic desires. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I return to my comments on the Democrats both 

old and new protectionist policies.  Mr. Speaker, this 

government's protectionist attitude will not attract businesses or 

people to this province.  When the NDP government is not 

putting anything into building the infrastructure of 

communities, what is going to be appealing to outside investors 

or businesses?  Nothing, Mr. Speaker.  Nothing will attract new 

businesses, and the NDP track record for the past 18 months 

proves that. 

 

What does Saskatchewan have to show for a year and a half of 

an NDP plan?  Ten thousand less people working than before 

they took office, the highest unemployment rate in about 20 

years, massive erosion of the health care system, closing of 

rural health facilities, and massive cut-backs to vital facilities 

like the Wascana Rehabilitation Centre, closure of rural 

schools, and the biggest tax grab in the history of this province.  

Businesses and people are leaving Saskatchewan in droves; the 

buses and moving vans are hauling people and students out of 

this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that's what the NDP have to show for their 

year and a half of betraying the Saskatchewan people.  That's 

what the members opposite are doing for this province.  The 

same man who said to the Star-Phoenix a month before 

forming government that he would cut -- not increase -- taxes, 

is the same member from Riversdale who has handed the 

public a sales tax increase of 16 per cent last year and almost 

12 per cent hike in sales tax in this last budget, along, Mr. 

Speaker, with expanding the tax base. 

(1930) 

 

Another 2 cents per litre in fuel taxes, the elimination of both 

the prescription drug plan and the children's dental plan, further 

reductions to rural and urban municipalities, reductions to 

hospitals and school boards and universities as well -- all of 

these things, Mr. Speaker, and the NDP said they would not do 

so.  The members opposite, even after knowing full well the 

deficit situation, trotted all over this province promising more, 

more, and more.  But I say to the members opposite that the 

only more, more, and more coming from the NDP government 

is more taxes to families. 

 

Promise after promise, Mr. Speaker, has been cast aside by the 

members opposite.  And I'm not sure one of them . . . and I'm 

sure one of them will stand up and waive the little bubble gum 

card talking about opening the books and being responsible. 

 

Well first off, Mr. Donald Gass said the books were already 

open to anyone who wanted to look.  Second, Mr. Speaker, 

since the bubble gum card that the member from Riversdale 

likes to quote from so often doesn't include all the promises he 

and his colleagues made, I would like to remind them of just a 

few.  If I went through all of them, there wouldn't be enough 

time to sit in the day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let's see.  The member from Riversdale, during the writ period 

in 1991, said to CKCK television, and I quote:  we, the NDP, 

think $4.5 billion expenditure in the province of Saskatchewan 

is enough.  Well apparently it's not enough, Mr. Speaker, and 

the actions of the NDP prove it. 

 

That's not all, Mr. Speaker.  The same member said on 

September 6, 1991, that, and I quote:  no new taxes would be 

imposed.  If he were given the chance to be Premier, no new 

taxes. 

 

The Star-Phoenix on October 12 says, and I quote:  creating 

more jobs will also stimulate revenue without raising taxes, 

Romanow said.  Another quote from the member from 

Riversdale and the list from that member alone goes on and on. 

 

And has the member from Riversdale kept any of those 

promises?  No, Mr. Speaker, he has not kept one.  And he 

knows it, Mr. Speaker, and that's why he gets up and starts to 

rant and rave and wave his little bubble gum card.  But facts 

are facts.  And unless the member from Riversdale was 

misquoted on about 30 occasions, he made promises he knew 

he couldn't keep.  He did not just promise to raise taxes, he had 

a whole litany of other promises that he should be reminded of. 

 

In January of 1991, the member from Riversdale said, and I 

quote:  doesn't believe health care costs in the province are 

sky-rocketing.  The cost of medicare is well within the budget. 

 

Not only did he think that health care was affordable 



492 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1993 

without tax increases, he promised to spend more on health 

care and education.  A far cry from what the second NDP 

budget has done. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, another quote from the Moose Jaw Times-

Herald, February 27, 1989:  Romanow said the Devine 

government caused considerable harm to the finest health care 

system in Canada by destroying the prescription drug plan and 

the dental care program and not providing hospitals with 

adequate funds. 

 

What a joke, Mr. Speaker.  The deductible on that was changed 

to $125.  Last year the Minister of Finance changed that to 

$380 a year, and this year there is no drug plan. 

 

The Premier was talking at the time of an almost 3 per cent 

increase in funding to hospitals when he made those 

statements.  And the member from Riversdale didn't think it 

was enough -- 3 per cent was not enough, Mr. Speaker.  How 

do they like a 3 per cent cut? 

 

Instead, what do we see in this budget, Mr. Speaker?  After 

already slashing the operating budgets of hospitals and schools, 

the NDP budget introduced another reduction to both.  Another 

broken promise, Mr. Speaker, another betrayal by the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Riversdale is not alone in that 

category.  He is not the only NDP member who told untruths to 

the people of this province.  His colleagues did the same.  The 

member from Regina Hillsdale, while in opposition said, and I 

quote: 

 

 The opposition is going to fight these health care cut-backs 

and these changes to medicare.  It's going to fight the erosion 

of the principles of medicare . . . I feel rather certain we'll be 

having a change in government next time around and then the 

public isn't going to have to worry about these problems. 

 

Well not only did they get fooled, Mr. Speaker, they got ripped 

off. 

 

A quote from Hansard of August 21, 1989.  That quote was 

from Hansard of August 21, 1989, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

the Leader-Post has a quote the member from Riversdale might 

remember.  It says, and I quote: the NDP Health critic, Louise 

Simard, immediately accused the government of eroding the 

health system by starving it of money.  End of quote. 

 

Starving the health care system, Mr. Speaker, by increasing the 

funding by 3 per cent -- increasing it by 3 per cent, not cutting 

as this Minister of Finance has done. 

 

And what do we see from the Minister of Health now?  We see 

wings in facilities closing, rural communities struggling to keep 

their hospitals, and the scrapping of the prescription drug plan 

unless you're on social assistance, and another reduction to the 

operating grants to hospitals -- all of these things because of 

NDP choices.  In other words, add the member from 

Regina Hillsdale to the list of those NDP who were willing to 

promise anything to get elected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we got another bubble gum card in this budget.  It 

seems that the Minister of Finance felt left out about not having 

her own bubble gum card while the Premier was waving his 

around.  So she presented us with this bubble gum card in her 

budget address, and it's entitled Securing Our Future, Mr. 

Speaker.  And it talks about sacrifices, but the only sacrifices 

being made in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, are by the people 

and the children of this province, not by the government. 

 

The bubble gum card talks about, "Jobs are our first priority."  

We've lost about 10,000 jobs since this government was 

elected, and if you totalled up all their promises for jobs and 

included in the jobs that were lost, we're looking at a shortfall 

of approximately 34,000 jobs, Mr. Speaker.  Now if 

eliminating jobs is a priority, well then this government is 

doing a good job. 

 

It also says on here that the government is reducing the small 

business corporate income tax rate by 20 per cent.  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, that's a very laudable thing to do and I'm sure all the 

small corporate businesses are appreciating this because a 20 

per cent tax reduction, you would think, would be significant.  

But when you look at the numbers, Mr. Speaker, that's a drop 

from 2.4 per cent to 2 per cent.  It is indeed 20 per cent, but it 

doesn't add up to a lot, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We also have some other numbers that you can throw around in 

a similar fashion.  How about a 20 per cent increase in the 

corporate capital tax resource surcharge?  That's a 20 per cent 

increase also, Mr. Speaker.  It goes from 3 per cent to 3.6 per 

cent; that's a 20 per cent increase.  Or the 12 per cent increase 

in the PST, from 8 to 9 per cent.  Or the 28.6 per cent increase 

in the provincial sales tax in the last year from 7 to 9 per cent.  

So, Mr. Speaker, while indeed 20 per cent reduction in this tax 

is the truth, it's playing with numbers and trying to hide what 

you're actually doing. 

 

The government fought the election against harmonization.  

Harmonization was a terrible thing according to them.  But it 

was a good thing for Sears and it's a good thing to . . . 

introducing a temporary manufacturing processing tax credit 

for Saskatchewan co-ops and small business.  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, this is harmonization with a different name, that's all.  

This is a temporary harmonization to year end for these 

businesses. 

 

And it's interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, how in the Minister of 

Finance's little bubble gum card she often refers to the co-ops.  

You'd almost think she was trying to butter up to the co-ops or 

sneak in beside them again.  Because after the comments that 

were made dealing with the oil upgrader plant, I think this 

government needs to regain its friendship with the co-op 

system because they suffered a major capital loss in friendship 

from the co-op systems. 



March 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 493 

The Minister of Finance talks here of investing $51 million in 

research and development, high-tech export, tourism, and 

industrial development.  Well, Mr. Speaker, $51 million is a lot 

of money, but unfortunately in this budget it's less than what 

was there last year. 

 

They talk about $62 million in capital projects.  Well last year 

Education received $68 million in capital projects; this year it's 

getting 44 million.  Health last year received almost 34 million; 

this year 27 million.  Highways.  Now Highways is one of the 

areas where the government has indeed added some extra 

money. 

 

Rural and urban municipal capital grants -- almost 24 million 

last year, down to just a little better than 18 this year.  New 

Careers.  Last year there was no capital funding for New 

Careers but this year there's 8 million.  And I would be 

interested to find out exactly what that 8 million is going to be 

spent on. 

 

Sask Water.  Their capital grants last year were almost 7 

million; this year, just over 4. 

 

And the environment.  This year Environment has a $990,000 

capital program.  We realize that there was quite a bit of 

interest in the environment, and so you would think, well this 

has got to be something good, but unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, 

when you look at the numbers and what it is, it's simply 

$990,000 that was in the budget also last year but is dedicated 

to Natural Resources and not to the Environment department. 

 

While I'm mentioning the Environment department, one would 

think that the government opposite, from all their rhetoric, 

would be friendly to the environment, and yet we have seen a 

major program in this province, the use of ethanol . . . the 

program being cut.  What was there currently was a 40 cent a 

litre existing subsidy rate.  They aided the production of 

ethanol used in gasolines in this province.  So what's happening 

to it now?  Ethanol's a very environmentally friendly product.  

It also uses Saskatchewan commodities, namely grain, to 

produce it.  So what's happening to it?  Well in two years this 

program is eliminated. No new ethanol plants will receive any 

funding, so we can't increase our production other than at these 

two particular plants. 

 

Now that's very good for the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool 

because they happen to own one of the plants.  And the other 

plant is at Kerrobert, but their program ends at the end of July, 

and the government has given them a renewed subsidy rate but 

lower, a 25 per cent decrease in that rate for the next four years.  

And the principals involved in that situation say that that 

subsidy rate is not enough to keep them in business. 

 

The government talks, and the Minister of Finance talks in her 

bubble gum card, of a $320 million support for agriculture.  

Well that's a significant amount of money, Mr. Speaker, but it 

was $360 million last year. So again, rather than bragging 

about what they're doing, they should be commenting on why 

they are cutting funds to these programs. 

Mr. Speaker, the card talks about "eliminating more than 

one-quarter of government boards, agencies and commissions."  

Well, Mr. Speaker, from the evidence we have seen from the 

government operations opposite, they might as well eliminate 

these boards and commissions because they don't listen to what 

they have to say anyways. 

 

They're talking about cutting . . . creating new health boards.  

The Minister of Finance says it's not for financial matters, but 

whenever the health boards receive their funding numbers, all 

of a sudden there's a lot less money there. 

 

The CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) phoned out to 

one of my hospitals the other day to do an interview with some 

of the people working there.  And they wanted to talk to the 

people, how the budget was going to affect them.  But right at 

that particular time, the hospital had an emergency case and the 

people responsible for the hospital could not talk because there 

was a heart attack victim there in the hospital at that particular 

time. 

 

(1945) 

 

Now without rural hospitals in place -- which is what the 

Minister of Health envisions, is the elimination of rural 

hospitals -- where are this type of person going to go to?  

Where are they going to receive the health care that they need 

on an emergency basis? 

 

If you have voluntary surgery, you can drive in to the larger 

major centres and receive your care.  But in emergency 

situations, Mr. Speaker, such as this one where the person had 

a heart attack, it's a matter of life and death to have a health 

care facility close. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government talks about getting all their ducks 

in a row and balancing the budget.  Well, Mr. Speaker, with a 

lot of luck they might be able to.  If they get an increase in oil 

prices, in potash, in uranium, and grain, they just may be able 

to balance the budget.  But if they do not get those lucky 

breaks, Mr. Speaker, they will not balance the budget because 

in four years there will be no one left in Saskatchewan to pay 

the taxes necessary. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have a right to feel 

betrayed by the Premier and the Minister of Finance and their 

bubble gum cards, because of what they have outlined in their 

speech.  Because, Mr. Speaker, it's the truth that they have been 

betrayed. 

 

If this budget is supposed to outline the direction the NDP 

government is taking, then it looks like the whole province will 

be down the toilet before a real plan can be put into place.  In 

fact the budget address talks about blazing a trail for 

Saskatchewan.  The only trail blazing that is going to take 

place under the NDP administration is the trail that is left as 

people leave this province. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



494 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1993 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a pleasure for me 

to get up in this budget speech debate after hearing a number of 

members of the opposition, the doom-and-gloomers, the 

negative people, people who aren't willing, who aren't willing 

to participate, the people who aren't willing to participate in the 

recovery this province so desperately needs.  Although over the 

next few months as we sit in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, I 

think possibly some of those lost sheep will come onside 

because once they see the tide that's stemming in Saskatchewan 

to rebuild this province, I don't think they'll have a choice. 

 

As I start, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about the 

Humboldt constituency.  Times are tough.  We've had 

cut-backs.  We've had to alternate . . . make changes in 

management plans.  But because all of that . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You've got Fair Share. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- The past premier says we got Fair Share.  Well 

I'll tell you, the people from Humboldt, Mr. Speaker, the 

people from Humboldt sent the message last October about 

Fair Share very, very plainly.  He ran his campaign in 

Humboldt on Fair Share and got his butt kicked severely.  So 

he can talk about Fair Share. 

 

In fact this is, Mr. Speaker, is symbolic of what's happening in 

the tired opposition.  They have absolutely no new themes, no 

new stories to tell.  So what do they do?  They talk about the 

past.  Well it's okay to talk about the past a little bit, which I 

will do tonight, but it's more important to talk about the future. 

 

The opposition members put on a brave face, Mr. Speaker, but 

I will go back to the Humboldt constituency even in these 

tough times.  I'm very pleased that we now have one of the two 

pilot projects for waste management control.  This is a co-op . . 

. (inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

There's one thing about the members chirping from their seat, 

Mr. Speaker.  They don't make any more sense sitting down 

than they do standing up. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- I'm very pleased that we have announced the 

waste management pilot project in the Humboldt-Watson areas.  

I think that's a leading edge in controlling waste.  Waste 

management is one of the problems that rural municipalities 

have always had, and hopefully that we can, through these pilot 

projects, start to formulate some new measures in order to 

control wastes in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

I'm also very pleased to see, Mr. Speaker, that in this budget 

that the budget for PAMI (Prairie Agricultural Machinery 

Institute) has been increased.  And we saw . . . I'll never forget 

fighting for my life for PAMI under the previous government.  

I believe it was 1988 when 

Alberta pulled out, or '87, around then.  Alberta pulled out and 

the past government was very seriously thinking of pulling out 

as well, and dropping funding to the most prestigious 

manufacturing testing institute in the world, Mr. Speaker -- in 

the world. 

 

Right now PAMI has about 50 per cent funding from the public 

sector and about 50 per cent from the private sector.  Case 

International, John Deere, most of the major companies, Mr. 

Speaker, are working daily with the people at the Prairie 

Agricultural Machinery Institute.  And the people of Humboldt 

. . . And I especially am very pleased to see that this is the edge 

of the turnaround -- the edge of the turnaround.  The important 

parts of our Saskatchewan budget, many important parts . . . 

But to Humboldt these are two important parts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

People do not enjoy hurting, and the people of the Humboldt 

constituency do not enjoy it any more or less than anybody else 

in the province.  But I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, they understand 

what's taken place in this province.  They understand the 

history, the legacy that was left, and they understand what this 

government is attempting to do and will do in the future to turn 

this province around. 

 

We don't seem to be able to have any cooperation from the 

members opposite.  The official opposition, Mr. Speaker, is 

made up of 11 members.  And right now I want to talk just for 

a brief moment about the 11th member of the official 

opposition.  The 11th member of the official opposition, Mr. 

Speaker, is the member from Saskatoon Greystone.  Because if 

you look at the speeches, you listen to the speeches, you hear 

the comments, if you didn't see the faces or hear the tone of the 

voice, you wouldn't know if it was . . . which person from the 

official opposition it was, because it's all the same. 

 

Now you would think that a person who is aspiring to further 

themselves in this province . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Well the member for Estevan says that they have nominations 

and the Liberal Party doesn't.  Well that's just a guess, I think, 

because we don't know for sure.  We don't know for sure. 

 

I listened to the 11th member of the official opposition today, 

Mr. Speaker . . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The ex-premier 

has a lot to say from his seat tonight, Mr. Speaker.  Actually at 

times it's very entertaining, although it never makes any sense. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the few words that the 11th 

member of the opposition, the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone, said today.  What she said, as I listened to her and 

hear what she said before, she said I want more money for 

myself, then turned around to run down the expenditures of the 

legislature -- a little inconsistent. 

 

She said she had some phone calls from some people saying 

that they're going to shop in Alberta.  Well all I can deduce 

from that is that her Liberal friends are going to shop in 

Alberta.  I know . . . 



March 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 495 

An Hon. Member: -- There's a lot of people shopping in 

Alberta. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Well maybe some of the Tories' friends are 

going to shop in Alberta.  But I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, the 

people in this province who love Saskatchewan don't run 

around saying, well everybody's going to go shop in Alberta, 

and that's what they're saying. 

 

What they should be doing is saying, look, there is a problem 

here. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- And where was Bob Lyons when the 

budget was dropped? 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Well the member from Morse with his suit that 

he bought down in Minot, I believe last session, is asking 

where one of our members is.  Well I mean this is the facts.  I 

mean I don't have to . . . But that's the point,  Mr. Speaker.  We 

have to become more positive about cross-border shopping. 

 

But the member from Saskatoon Greystone said, basically what 

she was saying was, you first after me, and don't do as I do but 

do as I say -- in her sanctimonious way.  But I don't want to 

give that too much credibility because there is very little 

credibility there.  Just because she said she was going to bring 

one new business opportunity a week forward, and the last 52 

weeks has brought none, with her constant criticism and no 

solutions, with a party in such desperation to become elected, 

as we saw in the Merchant-Goodale fiasco, with the 

appointment of a member from Saskatoon-Humboldt with no 

process to go through to select a candidate, but the leader 

appoints it. 

 

People talk about jobs, but no solutions.  I want to ask the 

member from Greystone, do you think that she should be 

allowed to go and whine to the press when what she says in this 

session, in this legislature, is of very little consequence and 

very little credibility?  It reminds me of the whipped puppy 

running back to its mother to have its wounds licked. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the people look at the package and are 

starting to see what's inside that package.  And once the people 

see what's inside the package from Saskatoon Greystone, they 

will very quickly shake their head and say, no, that's not for 

me. 

 

The person who, on one hand, wants to give CPR (Canadian 

Pacific Railway) a break by cutting their tax rates on fuel and 

on the other hand wants to push for deregulation of the 

industry, begs me to ask: for whom does she represent? Whom 

does she represent?  Deregulation means less service and more 

profits for CPR.  And cutting taxes means more profit for CPR.  

I don't think she represents the needs of rural Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Lastly, I want to restate the position of that member on her 

farm policy.  That member is quoted in the papers as saying 

that she does not . . . In fact I'll read from the quote from the 

Star-Phoenix, 1991: Crow benefits 

should be paid directly to farmers, is what the Liberal member 

for Greystone says.  And also, paid directly to farmers, when 

we saw at the farm rally in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, 13,000 

people get up and say, no.  Say no, it shouldn't be paid to 

farmers . . . or it shouldn't be paid to farmers. 

 

Canadian Wheat Board, it says, and I quote: Haverstock has at 

times been critical of the degree of control exercised by the 

Wheat Board.  She says farmers must be more reliant and more 

directly involved in marketing their own crops -- deregulation 

of the Canadian Wheat Board. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 13,000 farmers in Saskatoon said no to 

deregulation to the Wheat Board and said no to changes in 

method in payment for transportation.  Well my question is, 

like one of my colleagues says of the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone, what part of no doesn't she understand?  Because it 

was very clear at the meeting and yet refuses to change the 

position.  Transportation, Wheat Board, third line of defence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one other thing.  One last point I want to make to 

the member from Saskatoon Greystone, the 11th member of the 

opposition.  The last point is: please, I understand, I think I 

understand what your strategy is, but for the life of me I don't 

understand why you fall in line with your federal leader, Mr. 

Chrétien. 

 

And if you will do something for me, Ms. Member from 

Saskatoon Greystone, tell me what your leader's position is on 

the Canadian Wheat Board.  Does Jean Chrétien want the 

Canadian Wheat Board to stay or go?  He's never said he wants 

it to stay and that's the key.  It's transportation.  Does Jean 

Chrétien want the transportation policy to change?  We don't 

know that either, but he hasn't said he wants it to stay the same, 

which the farmers want.  And on third line of defence, I ask the 

11th member of the opposition, the member for Greystone, 

does Jean Chrétien want a third line of defence payment?  I 

certainly have not heard him say that. 

 

So not only is there 11 members of opposition here, no matter 

what colour you paint them, it's the same thing in Ottawa.  We 

see the current government trying to get rid of our steadfast 

farm programs and the Liberal opposition falling right in line 

with them, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I want to just leave that 

for a moment, simply because I think the point has been made 

very well of the credibility of the 11th member of the 

opposition. 

 

(2000) 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk just for a brief moment about 

something that is a little bit personal.  You will recall, Mr. 

Speaker, that -- I believe it was on February 26 in this 

legislature -- that I introduced a motion under rule 42, asking 

that this Assembly call upon the Government of Canada to end 

its policies of offloading federal responsibilities on the backs of 

farm families by reversing its decision on increased grain 

transportation costs to Saskatchewan farmers, and by fulfilling 

its promise to provide at least $500 million in 



496 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1993 

third line of defence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was on February 26.  I was going to use the 

word offended, but considering the source, I don't know 

whether I should be offended or not.  But on March 4, the little 

member from Kindersley, standing in his place speaking on the 

throne speech, said, and I quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 . . . on the very first day that we thought there was going to 

be a debate, throne speech debate, that the member from 

Humboldt rises in his place and said, we want to debate 

agriculture.  We couldn't believe our good fortune, absolutely 

couldn't believe it, just absolutely . . . And then not only that.  

He proposes it but he wasn't prepared to speak to it.  Could 

you believe that?  He got up and had a few little comments 

about it . . . 

 

That was the member from Kindersley, Mr. Speaker, talking 

about my comments on the previous February 26, on an 

emergency motion in agriculture.  Well when he says I had a 

few little comments and I wasn't prepared to speak on it, Mr. 

Speaker, I will bring to the record the motion under rule 42, 

came up right before orders of the day, which is approximately 

10:30 in this House, went on, went on, Mr. Speaker, three 

pages in Hansard, until approximately 11:15. Now that is a 

45-minute . . . And I see the member from Kindersley leaving 

and so he should. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  The member knows full 

well he is not to refer to the presence or absence of members in 

this House. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- I apologize, Mr. Speaker.  Anyway, my point 

is this: the desperation of the opposition is reflected in the 

words of the member from Kindersley where basically he is not 

telling the truth -- I know I can't say "lie" in this Chamber -- 

but basically he is not telling the truth because . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'll ask the member to please 

obey the rules of this legislature and avoid using 

unparliamentary language even if he does it by imputation. He 

knows he can't do that, and I ask the member to apologize to 

the House and withdraw the word. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- I apologize, Mr. Speaker, and withdraw that 

comment.  My point is this. My point is this:  why would the 

member for Kindersley stand in his place and say something 

that was not altogether true?  I have three and a half pages in 

Hansard, in my estimation approximately 45 minutes of 

speaking, and yet the member for Kindersley is talking about 

agriculture.  Do you think it's a bit of a problem for the 

member? 

 

And you'll notice in this House, Mr. Speaker -- how many days 

have we been in now? several weeks -- and the members avoid 

the question of agriculture, avoid agriculture and finance on the 

18th day.  As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, they've avoided 

many subjects in this legislature but the one subject that they 

hadn't avoided up until a couple of days ago was the fact that 

they ran this province into debt up to $15 billion and now are 

asking why we're cleaning it up. 

 

Basically that's what they're saying.  Their questions in 

question period: why are you doing what you're doing -- 

forgetting that they ran this province into $15 billion worth of 

debt. A handful of has-beens, Mr. Speaker, a handful of 

has-beens. 

 

I want to touch for a minute, Mr. Speaker, on the credit rating 

of this province from 1976 till 1993.  Mr. Speaker, the 

Saskatchewan credit rating . . . First of all, Canada's credit 

rating has been a AAA right through the piece.  And there's 

another little component to this.  Canada's credit rating, AAA, 

and the members opposite say, well Ottawa's got no more 

money -- charming what Ottawa says, well we have no more 

money -- but the credit rating hasn't dropped one iota.  

Saskatchewan credit rating, Mr. Speaker, was the highest credit 

rating in Canada in the period of the mid-'70s to early '80s. 

 

Now the member says it had nothing to do with us, but just 

think of it.  The highest of all the provinces.  I mean every 

province was in the same boat.  Every province had the 

privilege of living through the times where things were going 

fairly well, but Saskatchewan, little Saskatchewan, had the best 

credit rating.  Now you talk about management, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- If that's a coincidence, it's a coincidence 

worth voting for. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- That's exactly right.  My colleague said, if it's 

a coincidence, it's a coincidence worth voting for, and that's 

what the people did. 

 

I just want to point this out to the members opposite who whine 

about, well anybody could have done anything in good times.  

But, Mr. Speaker, and members opposite, don't ever forget that 

the management in Saskatchewan under a New Democratic 

government gave us the best credit rating in Saskatchewan 

during the years from '71 to '82.  Just wash that little comment, 

that little whine line off your books. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to move now to a little question of what is 

fun and what isn't fun.  The members opposite, the question I 

have for them, Mr. Speaker, is this:  were you having fun?  

Were you having fun when you were increasing the revenues to 

this province and reducing the services and driving up the 

debt?  Things were pretty easy.  Things were pretty easy, 

weren't they, Mr. Ex-Premier, sitting on there just doling out 

the money, watching the credit rating go down and watching 

the interest rates go up and watching the debt go up.  I'll bet 

you were having a pile of fun. 

 

And the member from Morse -- I'll bet he was having fun as 

well.  Can you just hear a cabinet meeting or a caucus meeting?  

Of course there wasn't a very big caucus; they only had one 

back-bencher so it was all cabinet meetings. 



March 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 497 

Can you imagine them sitting around the caucus table talking 

about the fun they were having when they were talking about 

paying John Gormley $1,000 a month from the Liquor Board to 

go to university?  I'll bet that was great fun, eh.  I'll bet John 

thought you were real good guys.  I bet he just loved you -- 

$48,000 of taxpayers' money old John got.  I'll bet that was fun 

at the time, wasn't it?  I bet it was a great lark. 

 

I bet it was fun when Ted Urness put in 11,485 . . . 800 . . . 

$11,845 bill for charges, real estate fees it was.  I bet there was 

lots of giggling around the table saying, oh well, you know, 

we'll give this to old Ted.  I mean he didn't use a realtor; he just 

sold it privately but we'll pay him his real estate fees anyway.  

I'll bet you Ted thinks we're real good guys, eh?  I'll bet that 

was fun. 

 

Or when Property Management Corporation paid $30,000 for 

the boogie van so the premier could boogie around the 

province watching a TV, and the VCR (video cassette recorder) 

in it and all the other luxuries.  I'll bet you that was great fun, 

eh?  Anybody over at the opposition get a ride in the boogie 

van?  Driving up the debt, increasing fees and charges and 

revenues and decreasing services, but I bet you were having 

fun.  It was never going to end. 

 

Or SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation)?  

SPMC paid one individual over $53,000 to organize a summer 

tour for the ex-premier.  At that rate, it would take 49 weeks at 

$230 a day.  That was a long tour, but I bet that was great fun, 

eh?  I'll bet you Davey Black thought you guys were great 

guys.  Just $53,000.  Can you imagine the giggling around the 

caucus table, the cabinet table -- getting away with it, nobody 

knows what we're doing. 

 

Or SPMC -- this is a good one.  Can you imagine the decision . 

. . who made the decision?  Member from Morse, were you in 

on the decision?  I'll bet you thought this was real good fun.  

Paying SaskReport Magazine $324,000 so it could be used as 

a propaganda tool.  And under the terms of the agreement, 

SPMC had control of the magazine's content including a 

16-section editorial page.  I'll bet you thought you were really 

rolling high then, eh?  Really having a great time.  It'll never 

end -- $324,000, Mr. Speaker.  I'll bet, I'll bet that was great fun 

and the Tory caucus and cabinet were having fun. 

 

I wonder if you were having fun when they developed the 

Saskatchewan Investment Corporation.  Do you know what the 

Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . As one of my 

colleagues pointed out, the Saskatchewan Investment 

Corporation, if you use the first letters, it stands for SIC.  And 

this really was sick. 

 

A little private corporation of Grant Schmidt's and a couple of 

the other cabinet ministers.  I bet they were really having fun 

when they set this corporation up, thinking that nobody else 

knew and they could just take this money and pay off their 

political hacks and squander it in any way they wanted.  I bet it 

was great fun for a while. 

Or GigaText.  Can you imagine Mr. Berntson sitting back in 

his chair just having a gay old time. 

 

Mr. Berntson is one of the people . . . or the person who said 

that they were going to drive this province into such great debt 

that we'd never get them out of it.  Well he got his undue 

reward in the Senate and he's still happy, I'll bet.  But I know 

his former constituents aren't real happy. 

 

And the list goes on and on and on, Mr. Speaker.  I mean you 

bet they had great fun setting up Supercart.  I bet the people 

from Supercart thought this government was a great 

government.  Financed them to the hilt, financed them to the 

hilt and then walked away with the money.  Or the heavy oil 

upgrader.  Or the pasta plant.  Or Trinitel.  Or M.A.S. Medical.  

Or the band-aid factory.  I'll bet all these people thought the 

former government were really great guys and I'll bet they had 

a great time with their economic process they were going 

through. 

 

The Rafferty-Alameda dam. A few people made a few bucks 

off of that one.  Privatizing SaskEnergy.  Well they had fun for 

a while on that one, until the people grabbed them by the 

throats and reined them in and said, you can't do it. 

 

Well what about privatizing the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan?  Mr. Speaker, the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan had a debt of about $261 million, if my figures 

are right.  This government drove it up to $700 million -- the 

former government, the former government -- $700 million.  

And then what did they do?  They wrote off $500 million.  I bet 

they had a great time writing off $500 million with Chuck 

Childers.  I bet Chuckie thinks they're a great bunch of guys.  

Wrote off $500 million which the taxpayers picked up, and 

then privatized. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I could go on with their little fun and games 

that they were having.  But the reality has all of a sudden hit 

home; it's hit home in the province of Saskatchewan.  But the 

part that really bothers me, Mr. Speaker, is that as a 

government we have taken extraordinary steps to try to address 

the problem.  And what were the questions before the budget 

from the members opposite?  Why are you cutting here?  Why 

are you cutting there?  Why aren't you spending more here?  

Why aren't you spending more there?  Well, Mr. Speaker, that 

line of questioning is absolutely incredible, uncredible, no 

credibility, and irresponsible.  It's just like they don't even 

know the page of history has been turned.  It's like they're in 

another movie.  Have you ever seen one of these big screen 

TVs where you have one movie going on in the main part in 

the little corner box where you can watch another channel?  

Well that's what they are.  And it's still in black and white, as 

far as they're concerned, because it's the old style -- a handful 

of has-beens from the past asking questions with no new ideas. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there is one thing I will not do.  And they 

will stand in their place and chirp to the press and their friends: 

well all the NDP can do is blame us, 



498 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1993 

blame the past.  Well, Mr. Speaker, there's one thing that I will 

always, always do because I believe in learning from your 

mistakes.  As long as I live, I will never, ever forget or let 

anyone else forget the devastation, the mean-spirited, the 

bordering-dishonest, corrupt government that the past premier 

and his band left this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(2015) 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- And they want people to forget.  But, Mr. 

Speaker, people won't forget.  And there are people, there are 

people out in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, who are hurting.  

And because they're hurting, they don't want to believe the 

truth.  They don't want to believe that what this government is 

doing with our changes to health care, improvements to health 

care, with economic development, agriculture, and everything 

else, people who are severely hurting don't want to believe that 

we have to do what we're doing.  And I don't think there's too 

many of them, but some. 

 

And there're also people who are blind, Mr. Speaker, people 

who are politically blind, and say that we shouldn't be doing 

what we're doing.  But, Mr. Speaker, what's happening in 

Saskatchewan today is a course that's being charted to 

economic financial freedom. 

 

Whether they want to come along with us, dragging and 

kicking and screaming or whether they want to just live in the 

past, I could care less.  But the course has been charted.  We 

have an economic plan that includes full employment.  We 

have an economic plan, Mr. Speaker, that includes a number of 

small businesses coming to Saskatchewan. 

 

And the members may laugh.  But just before I get to that, let 

me go over what's happened in the last little while. 

 

Retail sales, Mr. Speaker, going up modestly -- one and one 

half per cent over the last year -- but going up.  Mining 

industry, Mr. Speaker, the mining industry which is very close 

to me in one respect because I have three mines located in my 

constituency, and one's mining in my constituency, so that's 

four altogether.  Potash sales up 22.19 per cent from the same 

time period in 1991.  Uranium up 11, just about 12 per cent.  

Coal sales up 8.2 per cent, and crude oil sales up nearly 20 per 

cent, Mr. Speaker.  And in the construction industry, housing 

starts up 59 per cent.  Value of building permits up 16 per cent. 

 

And look at the other side of the coin, what about 

bankruptcies?  Personal bankruptcy is down 11.29 per cent; 

business bankruptcies down 10.7 per cent, Mr. Speaker; farm 

bankruptcies down over 16 per cent; and others down 7 per 

cent.  So, Mr. Speaker, what's happening is that there is a small 

but significant attitude shift. 

 

I mean, I've heard in this legislature over the past 18 

sitting days the members opposite saying, well you've got so 

much doom and gloom you're driving people out of the 

province.  Well, Mr. Speaker, the facts say different.  And they 

can stand up here and give their political rhetoric and ignore 

the facts.  But I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, what they say doesn't 

matter because they're yesterday's group, yesterday's party, so it 

doesn't matter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have outlined an economic strategy.  Part of 

that economic strategy -- and it's a long-term, sustained 

strategy -- is to foster a positive environment for economic 

development.  And that is one of the major things we have to 

do in this province, and we'll being doing.  And it is done by a 

competitive tax system, renewing the infrastructures, 

developing training and labour markets and seeking 

community-based solutions.  And that is exactly what we've set 

out to do. 

 

Another point of our long-term, sustained strategy, Mr. 

Speaker, is to build on existing strengths of our political 

economy, focusing on existing resource-based industries and 

encouraging value added processing. 

 

And the third point, Mr. Speaker, is to coordinate a targeted 

effort from government -- a single window, a single window 

whereby people who are coming in to establish business in this 

province can have a one-stop shop to set up their business. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Most new jobs, Mr. Speaker, under this 

strategy will come from medium- and small-sized firms as 

opposed to the megaproject mania of yesteryear.  And the 

results are in the statistics, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The job strategy seeks to promote partnership with 

organizations and government -- not have a government over 

here and organizations and business over here, but a 

partnership, a cooperative effort, and the goal is to seek full, 

long-term employment. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite may laugh at that.  

They may laugh at that, but I'll tell you, it wasn't even in their 

vocabulary because they cared not about working people in this 

province, and it was one of their downfalls.  They cared not 

about the people who are producing the economic activities.  

They talked small business; they talked working people; they 

talked agriculture.  But what did they deliver?  They delivered 

the megaproject mania.  And the spinoff of megaproject mania 

did not do the job.  The opposite is true under our economic 

strategy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a list here of 15 or 16 new programs or 

expansions to business.  I just want to go over a few of them.  

The Spar Group in Swift Current, a hardware manufacturing 

expansion; Hitachi Canadian Industries, a turbine component 

expansion in Saskatoon -- 25 jobs, $9 million.  In fact the Spar 

Group in Swift Current is estimating 60 to 80 jobs. 



March 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 499 

Norquay Alfalfa plant, 45 jobs, Mr. Speaker; Babcock & 

Wilcox, 30 to 35 jobs, boiler parts manufacturing in Melville; 

Sears Canada, 900 jobs by 1995; AECL (Atomic Energy of 

Canada Ltd.) research agreement, 140 jobs, very high-paying 

jobs at that; Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting, rebuilding the 

smelter, 375 jobs, $170 million invested; Goldenhill Cattle 

Company, 24 jobs, $5 million invested. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it goes on and on.  One interesting little side note 

here is a little . . . from the Star-Phoenix, March 16, 1993, it 

says: "Hefty Contracts": 

 

 Two Saskatchewan companies have received a total of 

$400,000 in contracts for developing technology that could 

have applications in space. 

 

 DSG Communications Inc. and APRO Applied Robotics Inc., 

both of Saskatoon, have received the contracts under the 

Canada-Saskatchewan Strategic Technologies for 

Automation and Robotics program. 

 

 The contracts are part of a joint venture between the 

Canadian Space Agency and the Saskatchewan Economic 

Development Department to develop space-related 

technology with other industrial spinoffs. 

 

That's the kind of projects, Mr. Speaker, that are taking place in 

Saskatchewan.  And while the members opposite might think 

this is insignificant, which it isn't, but while they might think it 

is, the proof of the pudding will be in the eating.  Little by 

little, this government has a strategy.  And that's the key -- is 

the strategy. 

 

And when I hear the members opposite start talking about their 

. . . or whining -- I shouldn't say talking -- whining about why 

we're spending money here, why we're not spending money 

there, and why we're cutting back programs, Mr. Speaker, all I 

can say to them is that they better open their eyes.  And let's be 

honest about it.  Let's be honest about what's happening. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you might see a very significant change in 

the last couple of days since budget.  The change was, before 

budget they were asking budgetary questions.  But since the 

budget, all of a sudden there's been a real lack of questions 

about the budget.  And I think the reason is, Mr. Speaker, and 

as I've been around the province of Saskatchewan since the 

budget, most people are accepting of it.  And they say it is a 

tough budget.  Yes, it's tough. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- But it's necessary. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- But it's necessary, exactly.  And not only is it 

necessary, but it has a component of compassion to it where the 

poor people will not be paying more, where the people who are 

looking for jobs have a ray of hope with economic 

development, where the farm communities can look around and 

say 

to themselves, we now have a government in Saskatchewan 

who is going to put forward an honest plan for recovery -- not a 

phoney plan. 

 

We're still going to bash on Ottawa for the much needed 

federal dollars and third-line defence, absolutely necessary.  

And tradition has that it comes before an election, so we're 

counting on that, besides the negotiations.  But farm 

communities that will be able to sustain themselves with 

agriculture, with business, and with any other spin-offs that 

might come out of those two.  And that's a strategic, economic 

plan for recovery, for rebuilding this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to end by saying we have in this province a 

legacy.  The New Democratic Party has a legacy.  The last 

speaker, the member opposite from Souris-Cannington, said 

this is going to be . . . the NDP are going to be a flash in the 

pan.  Well I would remind him that the New Democratic Party 

in this province has governed for more years than he's lived. 

 

And for the most part it's been . . . Do you know what the job 

has been?  The job has been twofold.  In the 1930s we cleaned 

up the mess and built the economic activity for recovery from 

the past Conservative government, the Bennett government, I 

believe it was . . . No, Anderson government.  Right.  In the 

1971 took over from the Thatcher government, cleaned up the 

mess, built the economic activity for prosperity in this 

province. 

 

And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, here we go again -- the worst 

mess ever -- cleaning it up.  A plan for economic recovery.  A 

plan for renewed health care to the 19 . . .  to the 20th century . 

. . 21st century, rather.  A plan for Agriculture and Highways 

and Education and Health and all the other departments of 

government. 

 

The key, Mr. Speaker, is there is a plan, not just throw the 

money out and buy yourself an election until all of a sudden 

you're out.  There is a plan.  And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that 

the people of this province, I believe when they look at this 

plan, when they look at what this government's doing, when 

they're looking at the economic activity and the recovery that 

this province is going to go through, they will accept. 

 

They will turn to the New Democratic Party once more, as they 

did in the 1930s for many, many years and in the 1971 to 1982, 

and from 1991 until the year 2010 and beyond, Mr. Speaker.  

They will turn to us because the plan for recovery, 

sustainability, and wealth, is in this province, in this 

government.  And I say, let's get on with the job.  Thank you 

very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of 

pleasure to have this opportunity to stand in this House today 

and, on behalf of the people of the Rosetown-Elrose 

constituency, support the budget introduced last Thursday by 

the Minister of Finance. 

 

This is the first opportunity I've had to speak in 



500 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1993 

response to the major initiatives of this government, and I want 

to respond from the soul of the people of my constituency to all 

of the things that have been happening in government and the 

future that we are seeking through the plans we've laid out in 

this most recent budget address. 

 

The vision and determination of the people of my constituency 

and from across Saskatchewan is reflected in this budget 

document that has been just tabled.  Mr. Speaker, it astounds 

me to listen to the members opposite as they reflect on 

financial matters.  It's difficult enough to conceive of the fact 

that they, for 10 years without understanding an ounce of what 

they were doing, drove the province to the edge of bankruptcy, 

but that they should now, while we are working with the people 

of the province to try and restore the damage, that they should 

show such little understanding of financial matters and of good 

sense and restoring good management to the province. 

 

I'm reminded of a story that reflected an equal amount of lack 

of understanding by the recent vice-president of the United 

States who responded in the circumstance, when he was 

informed that the United States was about to impose an air 

embargo against Iraq, with a comment of, but how will the 

people breathe?  Well it is that sort of lack of understanding or 

good sense that is reflected in the members opposite and their 

response to the financial matters of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Saskatchewan and the west-central part of the province which 

is home to all of my constituents has been a rich homeland for 

people of a variety of backgrounds for the last 8 to 10,000 

years. In fact the record of life extends, according to some 

recent findings in our area, back 70 million years ago.  There 

was the remains of a plesiosaurus skeleton from 70 million 

years ago found in our area recently. 

 

(2030) 

 

Then we also have in the rich natural history of our area, the 

archaeological remains that are in the Coteau Hills of our 

constituency and the Bear Hills, a record of human occupation 

that go back 8 to 10,000 years ago and reflects the rich human 

culture that has existed in the area for a long time and reflects 

the response to challenges of humans in this rapidly changing 

and harsh climate of the area. 

 

There were significant changes in our area about 100 years ago 

when immigration became a major initiative, when probably 

the greatest change in any ecosystem on the earth took place 

when Saskatchewan became occupied by European settlers and 

the rich lands of a previous means of occupation was converted 

to an agricultural-industrial area. 

 

This change in circumstance again required a great deal of 

perseverance and determination by the new settlers.  It was a 

challenge for new people in our area to maintain a strong 

economy, to maintain a just society and to maintain a strong 

social fabric under these harsh circumstances. 

But whether it was the people who lived in our area 8 or 10,000 

years ago, or the people who have become immigrants and 

residents of the last hundred years, it has been the spirit of our 

people which has for this period of time met with 

determination these challenges that have confronted humanity 

living in the climates of our area and has provided 

determination to deal with new challenges that now face us.  

And today we debate our response to a challenge that no one 

would have anticipated 10 years ago. 

 

The members opposite who have left us all with a series of 

unprecedented messes in a number of government policy areas 

have left one particular mess of note in the financial area which 

will haunt us for generations.  This is not the first time the 

people of Saskatchewan have had to tackle a mess, but it's the 

first time the mess has been this bad. 

 

In the early 1930s, M.J. Coldwell became leader of the 

Saskatchewan Farmer Labour Party to give political voice to 

the plight of both workers and farmers.  In 1935, M.J. was 

elected as the Member of Parliament for my area of the 

province, Rosetown-Biggar.  Until 1958 he fought for rural 

Saskatchewan and justice for all people across the country. 

 

In 1944 the new CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation) government of Tommy Douglas and later of 

Woodrow Lloyd began a process of rebuilding Saskatchewan 

from the ashes one more time -- defining the new 

Saskatchewan, visionary health care, renewed educational 

enterprise, progressive agriculture, farm electrification and the 

initiatives go on and on. 

 

Again strong leadership for this renewal came from people in 

my constituency -- Maurice Willis, MLA for Eston-Elrose;  

Jack Douglas, MLA for Rosetown, and Minister of Highways;  

Ollie Turnbull, MLA for Eston-Elrose, and Minister of 

Education;  Al Stevens, MLA for Rosetown; and Hayden 

Owens, MLA for Eston-Elrose. 

 

In 1971 Allan Blakeney took over in another period of crisis 

and built again on the strengths of the governments of Douglas 

and Lloyd, developing our resource sector, building our 

agriculture, and creating a net of services for people which we 

will not see again for a long time.  We will not see them again 

because the members opposite, who came to government in 

April of 1982, destroyed the financial stability which had been 

built up over the previous 11 years.  They destroyed the 

financial base, gave away the assets, and built a debt to pass 

onto their children -- not only to their children but to all the rest 

of our children in the province as well. 

 

The members opposite should be ashamed of what they have 

done.  But rather than apologizing and joining together to 

restore fiscal balance to the province, they snipe and complain 

and criticize. 

 

Well we will not let that stop us from carrying out the 



March 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 501 

will of the people of Saskatchewan, the will to re-establish 

financial stability.  I want to express a special congratulations 

to the member from Saskatoon Westmount, the Minister of 

Finance, for the vision and the determination to bring forward 

this budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- When we see other provinces struggling 

with their budgets, it is indeed a credit that she has brought to 

this province, with the greatest debt and interest load, the most 

decisive steps to curtail the problems.  We are all in this 

together, all in this mess here together in Saskatchewan.  And 

not only the policy direction of we who are in government, but 

the many civil servants who are part of administering the 

efforts of government need to be congratulated for their efforts 

in this as well. 

 

Saskatchewan, last year, was the only province to achieve a 

reduction in expenditures.  That requires visionary leadership 

from the likes of our previous Finance minister, the member 

from Regina.  It requires visionary leadership from the Premier.  

But it also requires the dedication of civil servants in every 

department of government, and to them I want to express my 

gratitude for their efforts in helping manage the problems of 

this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- When we look at what's happening in 

other provinces, we see parallel struggles.  Manitoba has had 

difficulty keeping their budgets in line, and again the credit 

goes to our civil service in keeping our budget within several 

millions of the original targets.  In Manitoba, they're seeing last 

year's budget sky-rocket to something in excess of double the 

projected deficit, and this is with a great deal of effort on their 

part.  And they are struggling to achieve sensible numbers in 

their deficit for the current year. 

 

But in our neighbour to the west, we see a different kind of 

struggling.  There is almost a struggling to deny the fact that a 

problem exists. 

 

Our neighbours to the west, following it seems the lead of the 

members previously in power in Saskatchewan, are doing their 

best to bankrupt their province at as fast a rate as they possibly 

could.  I think there must be a good series of lessons being 

offered across the border.  The province of Alberta is now 

facing a $2.7 billion debt for this year saying there are a 

number of measures they are not going to take. 

 

Well the members opposite talk about what's happening across 

the border, and Alberta saying thank you.  The only thing 

Alberta should be saying thank you for is the example in good 

budget management that our Minister of Finance is 

demonstrating.  Because they must, they must recognize, and if 

you have an ounce of sense of brotherhood with them you will 

help them recognize, that they are only a year or two from the 

same 

devastation that you wrought . . . brought on to Saskatchewan, 

at the rate they are going. 

 

And when they come to their senses and stop denying the 

problem, Saskatchewan people will not have to compete with 

government dollars flowing into Alberta at a rate that they 

themselves cannot afford. 

 

Our people in Saskatchewan are ready to deal with the 

problem.  While I express congratulations to our Minister of 

Finance for putting together the budget plan that is here, I want 

to say that that budget plan reflects the will of the people of 

Saskatchewan in all corners, the will of people in the face of 

the difficulty it will cause for them individually on a number of 

fronts. 

 

And whether we're talking about health care changes or the 

cost of fishing licences or agricultural programs or you name 

your piece of the list, constantly since the introduction of the 

budget last Thursday we have had reinforcing messages from 

within our constituency saying, you're doing the right thing.  

We know it's tough.  We think you've picked a good balance of 

initiatives to bring good sense back to the province of 

Saskatchewan.  And for the future of our children and 

grandchildren, we're with you. 

 

The people . . . I've been around my constituency a number of 

times in the last number of months and in preparation for this 

budget.  People have said they're willing to work with us in 

trying to achieve the objectives of the province. 

 

On agriculture, clearly it's an area where the people of 

Saskatchewan are leaders in the world, but leaders in spite of 

the fact that we are . . . that we continue to have to fight the 

feds and the banks and the CPR.  There are some things that 

never change, and except for the period when the members 

opposite were in power and handed over to the federal 

government the keys to Saskatchewan, governments in this 

province have recognized that their interest lay in having the 

federal government of this country take responsibility for 

agriculture. 

 

And it is again in the spirit of that national interest in this 

important resource that we call on the federal government to 

take their responsibility one more time and let the people of 

Saskatchewan get on with the business of running the things 

that it is our business to run.  Let us do the agriculture, and let 

the federal government deal with the matters of international 

trade. 

 

So whether we're talking about transportation on which the 

members opposite's brothers in Ottawa continue to want to 

distort the stability that's here; or whether it's on the question of 

farm debt, in which case the federal government wants to deny 

their responsibility to our farm people; or whether it's on the 

question of farm support, where again the members opposite 

support their brothers and sisters in Ottawa in denying the 

required support to our agricultural sector; or whether it's on 

the Canadian Wheat Board, where the members opposite 

continue to support the initiatives of their federal counterparts 



502 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1993 

in undermining one of the key agricultural policies in Canada, 

it is our belief that it is our responsibility to continue to fight on 

behalf of Saskatchewan agriculture to maintain the stability 

that has been built up over the years on these key policy areas. 

 

But in spite of the fact that the members opposite's friends and 

they themselves support the demise of some of these programs, 

Saskatchewan farmers continue to reflect the energy and the 

willingness to diversify that circumstance demands.  We have 

in Saskatchewan a most innovative farm sector, a farm sector 

that has survived the toughest of circumstances, and will once 

again survive.  In the process of struggling with some of these 

initiatives, we have again come up with some very innovative 

responses. 

 

In my constituency is the home of the co-op farm, the Beechy 

Co-op and the Matador Co-op farm, where a number of farmers 

banded together to say, we are stronger working together than 

we are working apart.  I say with pride that the Matador Co-op 

has continued to flourish.  There are nine or ten families there 

now in the revitalized co-op of a number of years ago, and they 

continue to reflect a methodology of the Saskatchewan spirit of 

cooperation in dealing with the struggles and strains of an 

agricultural sector in a harsh climate. 

 

There are other initiatives by farmers in their responses to 

changing technology, that the farmers are increasingly 

concerned about soil conservation, about the reinstatement of 

habitat, about the impacts of drainage on the wildlife of our 

province.  And farmers will continue to look for ways of 

keeping a healthy ecosystem around them and look for other 

solutions to farm income, ranging from growing trees to fish 

farming.  I'm proud to say that within our constituency both of 

those kinds of initiatives exist and I'm confident that the 

farmers in our community will continue to respond to the 

changing circumstances of the world. 

 

It's curious to listen to the members opposite snipe and criticize 

the economic activity in the province because it was only 

yesterday in church I was visiting with a friend of mine, who 

works at Flexi-Coil, who says they're now running three full 

shifts a day at Flexi-Coil, I think six days a week.  It's not just 

Flexi-Coil, but a number of other farm machinery 

manufacturing enterprises across this province that are 

responding to the requirements of our industry in 

Saskatchewan, and the requirements of the markets 

internationally, to produce the necessary equipment that has 

helped keep Saskatchewan agriculture in the forefront in the 

world. 

 

So not only are they manufacturing at a record rate, they are 

engaging in research in new products to capitalize on more 

markets, not only in our country but in the United States and in 

what was once the Soviet Union.  The economic developments 

in Saskatchewan, economic initiatives, are inseparable from the 

agricultural sector, not only in all of the parts of the province, 

but especially in my constituency. 

Within my constituency there are initiatives that include the 

manufacture of a chaff spreader, the straw storm; a brand-new 

axle manufacturing plant in Rosetown of only a couple of years 

ago; a trailer manufacturing facility.  There is a fellow who has 

developed a pea burger.  And there's a fellow who has begun to 

do in excess of a million dollars a year in woodcrafts, calls 

himself the Wood Farm.  It's an excellent enterprise which 

brings hardwoods in from other parts of the world, 

manufactures them into products which are then sold across 

Saskatchewan and across Canada. 

 

(2045) 

 

The impetus of our economic development initiatives in 

Saskatchewan are essentially that we want to keep our capital 

at home, to do with our resources what we can to build in our 

communities, and our communities are fully behind that 

initiative.  And the energy of the people in my constituency 

will continue to drive the economic growth that is going to 

create the restoration of the economy that was so badly bungled 

under the members opposite. 

 

There are other initiatives in the province and again in my 

constituency that are worth noting.  My constituency I believe 

has the longest water boundary of any constituency in the 

province.  The full east and south sides of my constituency are 

bounded by the South Saskatchewan River and the South 

Saskatchewan River dam.  The opportunities that are there for . 

. . This is a unique dam.  This dam actually has water in it, not 

like the kind the members opposite build.  That's right.  There's 

water in our dam . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well you 

could fix that. 

 

The member from Estevan suggests they could fix that too, and 

I suspect they could.  If anybody could screw up a good water 

project, I think the members opposite would have the ideal 

tools in their hands, as they have with a number of other policy 

initiatives and the finances of the province.  If anybody has the 

capacity to screw up a good thing, they are.  The remnants of 

them are sitting opposite us here now. 

 

But in our constituency there are marvellous tourist 

opportunities in the water resources that are there, in the natural 

history that's there, in the rich Indian culture that I described 

earlier, and in a number of initiatives that have subsequently 

developed in recent years, be they ski hills or marinas or other 

such endeavours. 

 

But there are other initiatives in our area which also reflect a 

willingness and a determination to face the future with vision 

and with determination.  And it has to do with the vision of the 

people of our part of the province, my constituency, to look at 

the reorganization of services in Saskatchewan. 

 

As the members opposite know, the regionalization of a 

number of services is becoming the logical way to go.  Now the 

members opposite have stood opposite and challenged our 

Health minister for a number of days; curiously had a turn of 

heart today.  I'll be 



March 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 503 

interested to see if this is now a complete Damascus road 

conversion or not. 

 

But today the members opposite were claiming that this was an 

initiative now of their previously failed brother, George 

McLeod, that now they're coming onside after having criticized 

our Health minister for a month and a half.  Now it's their idea, 

the way it sounds. 

 

Well we welcome you if you've actually had such a positive 

change of heart.  We will welcome you onto the train.  And if 

you've finally seen the error of your ways, well we welcome 

you to join us in this initiative of regenerating a positive health 

delivery system in Saskatchewan. 

 

But I want to say that in spite of the difficult adjustments that 

face us in health care, the people of our constituency have 

joined together and became the first rural health district, the 

Midwest Health District, to put together all of the communities 

of the district from corner to corner to say, we want to look at 

the challenges of the future together, not apart. 

 

I'm delighted to say that I had two people from the Midwest 

Health Board visit me over the supper hour today and say that 

in spite of the very tough budgetary implications that come 

from a budget such as this, they are willing to sit down and 

plan cooperatively with all of their communities to deliver a 

health care system that is affordable and that provides the kind 

of sensitive and required care, both preventative and acute, that 

is required for the people of our part of the province.  And I 

take my hat off to them for their positive attitude in this 

initiative. 

 

But their vision does not stop there.  They challenge us as 

government to look at the full integration of social services 

with these initiatives.  And they recognize the value of 

re-examining the delivery of educational services as well.  And 

I think it's perfectly logical to believe that the same area that 

created the first regional health district may be the leaders in 

providing even a broader scope of integrated services for the 

people of our communities, because that's the way of the future 

and because they believe that it's the most efficient way to 

deliver services and the most effective way to pay attention to 

the individual needs of people young and old in our area. 

 

I want to say also that independently of this there is another 

initiative springing up in our area.  The Rosetown & District 

Credit Union has recently engaged in discussion with credit 

unions from across the west-central part of the province and are 

in the process of creating a very large, regional, rural credit 

union because it's a sensible way to address the financing needs 

of farmers and farm communities.  And again I take my hat off 

to them for seeing the benefits of cooperating, the benefits of 

working together, because there is a common interest in that 

area of the province for the delivery of banking services with a 

rural tone, and I wish them all the best in their planning. 

I want to say as well, that as I was meeting with all of the 

municipalities and town councils in the southern part of my 

constituency only a couple of weeks ago, again the message of 

cooperation and working together came through a meeting 

where they looked at the frustrations of dealing with their 

municipal waste disposal in that region of the province.  Here 

are 14 or 18 rural municipalities and town councils sitting 

down together saying: we have a problem; together how can 

we face it? 

 

They committed to each other at that meeting to go home, 

identify their most serious solid waste needs, come back 

together and to put a plan together jointly to deal with this.  It is 

this kind of spirit of recognizing a challenge, facing it together 

and cooperating, that will lead us out of the morass that has 

been created by the mismanagement of the past and the failure 

to address the solutions of the future by the members opposite. 

 

I want to say, in returning to the theme of economic 

development, that there's been another important regional 

initiative in our area of the province, where we had one of the 

first soap exchanges.  Now in a world where the waste system 

is becoming an increasing challenge to our municipalities, in 

the town of Rosetown, about a month ago a soap exchange was 

opened, where you buy your cleaning products and you bring 

your container back and refill them from a bulk supply.  This is 

an initiative that is financed and developed through 

Saskatchewan business people.  It's their expectation that 

within the year they will have 70 or 80 outlets across the 

province and reflects the kind of spirit of innovation and 

response to the critical needs of a population and to the realities 

of the future in a way that is responsible. 

 

And that brings me to the theme of our environmental change 

and the theme of reorganization of government services in this 

last budget.  One of the things that the people of the province 

have said to us repeatedly is that we are prepared to do our part 

in addressing the financial dilemmas in the province, but we 

think government should rationalize as well.  And as you well 

know, there have been a series of integrations in this last 

budget where departments have been eliminated, and agencies 

brought together in the area of agriculture, in the area of 

municipal services, in the area of environment, in the area of 

natural resources, and in the area of cleaning up a large number 

of boards and commissions.  Our government has responded to 

that public belief that government needs to make their services 

more efficient. 

 

In the areas of . . . in integrating the departments of 

Environment and Natural Resources, we have done something 

other than introduce an efficiency to the delivery of services.  

We have introduced the theme of sustainable development into 

government departments. 

 

As you know, a Round Table on Sustainable Development in 

Saskatchewan over the last year made a number of 

recommendations to government, amongst them being that we 

as a government have a 



504 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1993 

responsibility to lead on environmental matters.  I tell you that 

the way of the future with respect to the management of our 

economy is that in fact it will be through recognizing that the 

economy cannot be separated from the environment, and 

environmental decisions cannot be separated from their 

economic impact, and that both need to consider the impact on 

the community when we make those kinds of decisions. 

 

In bringing together the department of the Environment and 

Natural Resources, we have moved a significant step towards 

integrating resource management decisions with environmental 

initiatives, and in that way are responding to an ethic that 

already exists out in the community and the business 

community that recognizes that business decisions and 

environmental decisions go hand in hand. 

 

Saskatchewan is a province that is dependent very heavily on 

international trade.  And the product that we produce is very 

heavily dependent on the environment.  We are very aware in 

Saskatchewan that matters . . . that through international 

negotiations people have been trying to reduce trade barriers in 

order to allow trade to happen more freely around products like 

our grains. 

 

I want the members opposite to recognize that we must 

demonstrate environmentally sound practices in our production 

or we will be the subject of trade barriers that are based on 

environmental considerations in the near future.  This is a truth 

that is evident to our business community, it is a truth that is 

being reflected in the reorganization of government, and I'm 

proud to say that our government has responded to that public 

will to say, keep our environment clean but build the economy 

at the same time.  These are objectives that have a common 

interest for all of us and we should work together to achieve 

them. 

 

So as we face the challenges of keeping our environment clean, 

of looking after the interests of our water and making sure that 

our soil resources are preserved in a productive state for the 

future, and so that they are used in the best balance for our 

future and that of our children, we commit ourselves as 

Saskatchewan people to achieving those objectives while we 

struggle with the other objective that we began this speech 

talking about, that is the objective of maintaining or re-creating 

a sound financial base for this province. 

 

I want to say that, in conclusion as I began, that the people of 

Rosetown-Elrose recognize the collective needs of our society.  

They recognize that if the future for our children is to be a 

sound one, we will require all of us working together to 

overcome all of the hurdles, not the least of which is the 

monumental financial mess left to us by the members opposite. 

 

I congratulate again the Minister of Finance for her initiatives 

in this regard and commit to her the support of my constituents 

in dealing with this problem and 

wrestling it to the ground.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is my honour and my privilege to enter 

into this debate on the budget address before us and to offer 

some remarks from my perspective. 

 

Let me make it very clear as I begin, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

it is my intention, on Thursday evening when we come to a 

vote, to stand in support of a responsible and compassionate 

budget having been presented by the Minister of Finance last 

week. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I say that because 

there are a whole number of things that are within that 

document that I feel are important to the people of 

Saskatchewan today.  And I want to reflect on those things 

before this House this evening, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  More 

than anything else, as I look at the budget, I find attractive most 

of all the fact that it's a document that offers solid reason for 

hope.  It offers hope for a balanced budget in 1996 and for me, 

Mr. Speaker, that is an extremely important factor because it 

allows me, as an elected member representing the good people 

of Moose Jaw Palliser, to be able to go -- come the next 

election if I have the privilege of running for office to represent 

the New Democratic Party again -- to go door to door talking to 

my constituents, looking every one of them in the eye knowing, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that in this term of office we kept our 

promise in one of the most difficult tasks to achieve in modern 

government today.  Keeping the promise is what it's all about. 

 

(2100) 

 

In the last election, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I went door to door, 

and at door after door after door after door with constituents, I 

talked about our commitment to bring a balanced budget by the 

end of the first term in order to regain fiscal control over the 

expenditures of our province for our future and for our 

children.  And so far, Mr. Deputy Speaker, although I quite 

freely admit it's early in the review of the budget, I would have 

to say that it has met the test of fairness with my constituents 

and the people of Moose Jaw. 

 

I had a chance over the weekend to talk to a large number of 

people on a number of different occasions.  I have to admit, 

however, Mr. Speaker, at the same time that I say that it's met a 

test of fairness . . . And my good friend the hon. member from 

Thunder Creek wants to enter into debate. He has already, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker.  I think it's only fair that I bring to the 

attention of the House that in fact it's been noted in my 

constituency that he's already entered into debate. 

 

It has been said, as a matter of fact, as I talked to constituents 

this weekend, that . . . I have a deep 



March 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 505 

suspicion as a result of what's been said that he has, with his 

remarks on Friday, contributed significantly to television sales 

in the province of Saskatchewan.  Because over and over, Mr. 

Speaker, as I talked to constituents this weekend, they said, 

what in the world was that man talking about?  Do the PCs 

know no shame?  And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that if 1 out 

of 10 who felt like throwing something through their television 

when the Leader of the Opposition was up, actually did that, 

TV sales in Saskatchewan hit an all-time high in Saskatchewan 

this weekend 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Speaker . . . well, Mr. Speaker, well 

the member from Thunder Creek, and he's joined by the hon. 

member for Morse, and I'm sure that we'll find a rambunctious 

debate on this and other topics through the session. 

 

But I would think that it's only fair, it's only fair, Mr. Speaker, 

in spite of the . . . well in light of the enthusiasm expressed by 

the Leader of the Opposition and his good friend and colleague, 

the hon. member from Morse, who were wondering just why 

the people of Saskatchewan are feeling this way, to share with 

them an observation that was written in the Toronto Globe and 

Mail on February 6 of this year by Stevie Cameron, in an 

article entitled "How the gravy train went off the rails". 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What's the title? 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- "How the gravy train went off the rails".  And I 

know that my good friends and colleagues opposite will take 

great interest in this article.  And if I can just share with the 

House, Mr. Speaker, just a bit of this article, because I think it 

will be of special interest to the members opposite. 

 

The subtitle, by the way, Mr. Speaker -- and I think it's only 

fair to include this -- says, and I quote: 

 

 The '80s were the province's time for expansive deal-making.  

Indeed, it sometimes seemed as though everyone was striking 

it rich.  But today, with the province $15-billion in debt, it's 

time to pay the piper. 

 

Time to pay the piper.  And is there any doubt whatsoever just 

why people across the province of Saskatchewan were 

exercising great restraint with their televisions on Friday 

morning as they listened to the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if I could just share with the members of 

the House, and particularly for the interest of the members 

opposite, the first few paragraphs of this article.  And it goes 

like this, and I quote: 

 

 John Gries slides back the front window of his coffee shop, 

letting in gusts of wind and snow as he serves up a big bag of 

buttered popcorn to a pedestrian.  Once the cash register has 

jangled shut and the window is tightly closed, he's back 

at his counter, brewing fresh coffee and heating up 

knackwurst for his regular lunch customers. 

 

 It's a modest coffee shop and a modest living for an eager 

entrepreneur who had hoped to hit the big time in the heyday 

of the Conservative government of Grant Devine.  Instead he 

crashed and lost everything, including his home and savings, 

when he was out-smarted and out-hustled by new partners.  

Mr. Gries isn't blaming Mr. Devine, "just those guys around 

him" -- guys like former deputy premier, Eric Berntson, now 

a Tory senator, prosperous businessman and a director of the 

company Mr. Gries helped to start. 

 

 To John Gries, it sometimes seems as though he is one of the 

few Tories in Saskatchewan who didn't strike it rich during 

the eight years of Devine rule.  And it's not hard to see why. 

 

 Consider. In 1982, there were four people (four people I 

underline, Mr. Speaker) in Regina working as 

public-relations consultants for lobbyists;  eight years later, 

there were 178 jostling for a place on the gravy train.  

Millions of dollars were poured into pet projects in cabinet 

ministers' ridings.  And hundreds of untendered contracts 

were up for grabs, everything from legal work to advertising 

to decorating government offices. 

 

Ah, Mr. Speaker, it is no secret why we etched our way into the 

fiscal debt that we've got today.  Now it didn't say that in the 

article, Mr. Speaker, but let me go on to quote: 

 

 Just a couple of doors away from Mr. Gries's coffee shop, 

hoardings protect pedestrians from the construction debris of 

the new Crown Life building where more Devine largesse is 

making wealthy local businessman Paul Hill even richer. 

 

 Mr. Hill wasn't the only one.  A number of well-connected 

developers grew fat from long-term government leases on 

their buildings.  "We have an expression around here about 

those," cracks one local businessman.  "The developers had 

14-year mortgages and 15-year leases."  What this means is 

that they would use the security of these government leases to 

borrow money to finance their buildings, then enjoy 

ownership of the building even before the government lease 

ended. 

 

And I'll just conclude, Mr. Speaker, with this paragraph: 

 

 The days of the Tory pork barrel are gone now, leaving this 

province of 950,000 souls flat broke.  The Devine era began 

with a small budgetary surplus . . . 

 

This is from The Globe and Mail, not from within the province.  

This is not The Commonwealth; this is The 



506 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1993 

Globe and Mail: 

 

 . . . began with a small budgetary surplus and an accumulated 

debt in Crown corporations of $3.5 billion.  When the Tories 

left, the debt was nearly $15 billion. 

 

What, what, what a conclusion, Mr. Speaker, to pass on to the 

children of Saskatchewan, to the next government.  And there 

is no doubt in my mind that when the people of Saskatchewan 

listen to the remarks of the members opposite, they say, do 

those Tories know no shame? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as I look at this budget, and it's an attempt, 

honest attempt and I think what will be a successful attempt, 

Mr. Speaker, to get the train back on the track -- not the gravy 

train, not the gravy train -- to get the good train Saskatchewan 

back on the track, Mr. Speaker, I see a budget that I would 

certainly label -- and I think many others -- as tough, but more 

important than that, Mr. Speaker, realistic and fair. 

 

What's interesting, Mr. Speaker, as I look at it, is the interest 

itself, $847 million just in interest to service the debt in this 

year's budget; $847 million eating up, literally eating up health 

care and education and social services and highways and parks 

and on and on from the people of Saskatchewan -- $847 million 

in interest to service the debt, $2.3 million a day, Mr. Speaker, 

in Saskatchewan, $97,000 an hour.  This is even more money 

than the Tory government paid some of their consultants, Mr. 

Speaker, if you can believe that.  Ninety-seven thousand dollars 

an hour is the price we're paying today for Tory largesse and 

patronage over the last decade; $97,000 in interest just to 

service the debt. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in this budget there has been leadership 

demonstrated and I'm proud to say, Mr. Speaker, it's been 

demonstrated by members in this House, on both sides of the 

House, Mr. Speaker.  And for the information of the people of 

Saskatchewan, I'd just like to remind the public, to advise them 

of some of the leadership in restraint and sacrifice that's been 

accepted quite willingly by the members of this House. 

 

For the third year in a row, the salaries of elected members 

have been frozen -- third year in a row.  This year, freezes in all 

allowances, all allowances for elected members and the 

caucuses, as provided by the budget.  I add as well, Mr. 

Speaker, that last year elected members took a reduction of 25 

per cent in the communications allowances to communicate 

with our constituents.  And I add as well, Mr. Speaker, that last 

year the Premier, ministers, and even you yourself, Mr. 

Speaker, took a 5 per cent reduction in your pay for those 

duties. 

 

I know, Mr. Speaker, this is not something that you've ever said 

and that you can't, I think, in all fairness -- that you would feel 

it would not be proper for you to say.  But I simply want to 

recognize, Mr. Speaker, that it's a decision that you also made 

voluntarily and 

contributed as did the members of Executive Council and the 

Premier of the Government of Saskatchewan last year in taking 

a reduction in pay.  And so I simply want to recognize that 

there has been some symbolic -- granted it's not large numbers 

-- but symbolic willingness to share the sacrifice and restraint 

by the elected members. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are two things I'd like to particularly 

comment on that have not been referred to so far, that 

particularly please me about this budget.  This morning I had 

one of the most exciting moments that I've had for quite some 

time.  I had the -- no it's not at all what you're thinking, Mr. 

Speaker . . . but in fact, while I'm not sure, I don't know what 

you're thinking, Mr. Speaker, but I would say no, it's not likely. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this morning I had a chance to attend a news 

conference in the city of Moose Jaw, that represented a 

significant milestone in health care, certainly for Moose Jaw, 

for southern Saskatchewan, and across the province of 

Saskatchewan.  And the honourable member from Morse 

expresses great interest in this and so I'd like to tell him about 

it, Mr. Speaker, because I know that he has a different point of 

view from me as to just exactly how we got to this 

announcement that was made this morning. 

 

Well there were two very significant things, Mr. Speaker.  First 

of all, number one, this morning it was announced the 

formation of the first rural-urban district health board in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  Number one. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- I am proud to say, I am proud to say, Mr. 

Speaker, that the good people of Moose Jaw and a number of 

rural municipalities around the city of Moose Jaw have come 

together, rural and urban together, town and country together, 

cooperatively with compromise, with cooperation, with vision, 

and with caring, to form the first rural-urban district health 

board in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And in this budget, Mr. Speaker, it was announced as well this 

morning, that there will be a new facility that will be built in 

the city of Moose Jaw to serve Moose Jaw and the rural area 

with a new, improved geriatric services centre, which will be 

known as Providence Place and run by the good Sisters of 

Providence in the tradition that they've exemplified through St. 

Anthony's Home in Providence Hospital for many decades in 

the city so far. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the member from Morse, hon. member from 

Morse, wants to remind the House that this has been . . . this 

announcement's been made before.  He's right.  He's right.  The 

announcement of Providence Place was made before.  It was 

made before the 1986 election, by the former premier.  And 

then . . . just in weeks before the 1986 election.  And 



March 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 507 

the member from Morse is right.  It's been announced not once 

before; it's been announced twice before.  It was announced 

again before the 1991 election.  And they refer today to George 

McLeod having contributed to it, and he did.  He did, Mr. 

Speaker, when he was minister of Health; there was some good 

review and consultation and cooperation and sacrifice going 

on.  And George McLeod came over to Moose Jaw, and he sat 

down with the member for Thunder Creek.  They had a public 

meeting, and before the 1991 election, they announced it again.  

They announced it again. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there was a difference.  There was a 

difference because today Providence Place, the result of 

cooperation and compromise from people in town and city 

together, was announced for the third time.  But there was a 

difference, Mr. Speaker, because today the announcement was 

for real.  Today for the first time the announcement came after 

the provincial budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(2115) 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- And so, Mr. Speaker, I simply want to 

compliment all the people of Moose Jaw and rural area who 

have been a part of the planning that's gone on for a decade in 

reaching this point today.  And I know that the member for 

Thunder Creek joins me in feeling pride and satisfaction 

because I know that the member for Thunder Creek also shares 

the same kind of desire that I do for good health care for his 

constituents and mine. 

 

And so I'm pleased as well to say, Mr. Speaker, that the official 

name given to the new health district is the Moose 

Jaw-Thunder Creek Health District.  How appropriate that is.  

How appropriate that is that it brings together town and 

country, and I welcome very much the support and 

appreciation that both the member for Thunder Creek and the 

member for Morse who will have constituents who will be able 

to make use of this new facility. 

 

And I know that the hon. member for Morse, who is trying to 

enter into debate now, will want to speak later on, and I will be 

disappointed, Mr. Speaker, if he doesn't in fact recognize it in 

this budget.  There is a facility that will help to better serve the 

health care needs of his constituents as well as his good friend 

and colleague, the member for Thunder Creek. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there is also something in this budget that I 

want to recognize as being important and not yet referred to.  

Now, Mr. Speaker, before I refer to the content of the budget, I 

want to draw attention to a social concern that exists in 

Saskatchewan today that unfortunately has not had all that 

much attention in this House -- all too little attention in this 

House over the last number of years. 

 

I'd like to make some comments, Mr. Speaker, about the 

circumstances and the realities that faced the aboriginal people 

of Saskatchewan.  The reality is this, Mr. Speaker, that in 

Saskatchewan we have some 30,000 people who describe 

themselves as 

Metis; nearly 100,000 people who describe themselves as 

status Indian or non-status Indian but Indian, and together some 

13 per cent of our population who would describe themselves 

as being of aboriginal ancestry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we look ahead in Saskatchewan . . . I know the 

member from Thunder Creek is well aware of these statistics 

because he served for a while as the minister responsible for 

aboriginal affairs, and he and I have had some good chats about 

the challenges that lie ahead for us in this area.  And as we look 

ahead, Mr. Speaker, forecasts suggest that because of the fact 

that about half of the aboriginal population is now under the 

age of 20 years today, that by the turn of the decade, by 2001, 

about a quarter, one of every four people coming into the 

labour force will be of aboriginal ancestry, and one out of 

every three new young children -- new students coming to 

school -- will be of aboriginal ancestry. 

 

But unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, we have in our province 

discrimination.  And I say not so much discrimination based on 

person to person in a restrictive or a prohibitive way, but we 

have discrimination in Saskatchewan which I describe as 

systemic.  Our system, our social system, Mr. Speaker, has 

engendered discrimination against our aboriginal people. 

 

If I can just describe some of the harsh realities for aboriginal 

people in Saskatchewan today.  Review by the Government of 

Saskatchewan realizes that the conditions in wellness of 

aboriginal people can be described as nothing other than 

deplorable.  Welfare dependency is steady at 75 to 80 per cent.  

Unemployment of 70 to 75 per cent.  All across major social 

and health indicators, the situation for Indian and Metis people 

has worsened over the last 15 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, sad to say, aboriginals in Saskatchewan are three 

times as likely to die a violent death as a non-aboriginal person, 

five times more likely to be murdered, six times more likely to 

die by fire, two-and-a-half times more likely to commit suicide 

and five times more likely to die from alcoholism or cirrhosis 

of the liver.  What a price to pay. 

 

There would be some who would say, I suppose in a 

hard-hearted kind of way: well that's too bad; that's their 

problem.  But you know, Mr. Speaker, even if you don't care 

about the human suffering that's been experienced by far too 

many of our aboriginal people in Saskatchewan today, there is 

a massive expense.  And even if, even if you were so 

hard-hearted as to say that you don't care about the human side 

of the price, let me just report to the House, Mr. Speaker, the 

financial price of this systemic discrimination. 

 

Of our Social Services budget, Mr. Speaker, 33 cents of the 

dollar, one out of every three dollars, is spent to meet the needs 

of an aboriginal person -- 13 per cent of the population, but a 

third of our Social Services expenditures; Justice, 47 cents on 

the dollar, nearly a half -- 13 per cent of the population, but 47 

per cent of our Justice expenditures related to aboriginal 

people; in Health, a little over $1.05, 22 per cent, Mr. 



508 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1993 

Speaker -- 13 per cent of our population, but 22 per cent of our 

Health budget; in Education, exactly a fifth, 20 per cent -- 13 

per cent of our population, but 20 per cent of our budget. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what I've described when I combine Social 

Services, Justice, Health and Education, I've lumped together 

two-thirds of our budget.  Thirteen per cent of our population is 

aboriginal but 30 per cent of that two-thirds of the budget is 

being spent to meet the needs of aboriginal people. 

 

What this says to me, Mr. Speaker, that we can only conclude 

that what we have done, those of us who are not aboriginal, in 

the past was not done particularly well.  And about that I think 

there is very little debate. 

 

And we must also conclude, I think, Mr. Speaker, that new 

approaches are necessary -- new approaches which involve the 

ideas and the efforts put forth by aboriginal people to improve 

their own circumstances here in our beautiful province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I say, Mr. Speaker, that this must be a new direction taken 

by the Saskatchewan government with the support of 

Saskatchewan people.  And in my remarks this evening, I ask 

for that support from Saskatchewan people. 

 

What I want to conclude my remarks on this topic with, Mr. 

Speaker, is by recognizing that in this budget, for the first time 

in the history of Saskatchewan, in this budget there is money 

which will be spent in this budget to honour long-standing 

agreements for treaty land entitlement for the first time in the 

history of Saskatchewan.  And for that, I say to the Minister of 

Finance and the minister responsible and the cabinet, and the 

Government of Saskatchewan, I ask for the support of the 

members opposite to say that is an important reason for passing 

this budget. 

 

I want to as well, Mr. Speaker, to recognize that in a small way 

we're trying to recover some ground, some lost ground.  

Forty-seven per cent of the Justice budget is being spent related 

to aboriginal people.  I'm very, very pleased to recognize, Mr. 

Speaker, that that very important service to help aboriginal 

people stay out of the justice system unnecessarily has been 

reimplemented with the reintroduction later this year of the 

native court worker program.  And to the minister responsible 

and the Minister of Finance, again I say, thank you. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I said before when I began, that I support 

this budget because I see it as a document of hope.  It has hope, 

I think, for aboriginal people.  It has hope and optimism for 

people in Moose Jaw and area, health care services.  It has 

hope for us all because what is implicit in this plan is a 

balanced budget by the year 1996 at which time the 

Government of Saskatchewan will once again begin to take 

control of our fiscal management. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I was doing some reading the other day and 

I came across a phrase that kind of struck home to me.  

Because I thought the members opposite have been saying, 

well you know, that forecast is dependent upon some 

assumptions and you can't always count on your assumptions 

being right.  And you know, Mr. Speaker, they are right.  You 

can't always count on your assumptions being right. 

 

But for the first time in a long time, in a decade, Mr. Speaker, 

the forecasts and the budget have been made on the basis of not 

wildly optimistic projections, but realistic projections, Mr. 

Speaker.  And I'm kind of confident that this objective of a 

balanced budget by 1996 will be reached. 

 

The budget forecast doesn't count on luck, Mr. Speaker.  But 

you know, I think Stephen Leacock was right when he wrote: I 

am a great believer in luck and I find the harder I work, the 

more I have of it.  Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that in a nutshell 

summarizes the kind of luck that this New Democratic 

government is prepared to receive because this is a government 

prepared to work hard, together with the people, to achieve our 

objectives. 

 

At the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, this budget more than 

anything else is for our children.  It's for tomorrow.  There are a 

number of decisions within the budget that have been referred 

to by my colleagues before and will be after, which can be 

described as nothing other than gut-wrenching, particularly 

gut-wrenching for social democrats.  I picked up the Star-

Phoenix for March 20, Mr. Speaker, and it had an article 

entitled "Bond rating analysts call Sask. budget very positive 

step."  It is.  But you know what, Mr. Speaker, as a social 

democrat, I detest, I detest that this has to matter to me. 

 

There was a day in this province in which political decisions 

and services provided to people were done for reasons of 

caring and compassion by the government, in concern for the 

people of the province.  Far too many decisions today and in 

this budget are being made to meet the needs of the bond raters 

because we have been driven so deeply in debt that we can no 

longer ignore the priorities of the bond dealers.  Now I know, I 

know the reality. We campaigned seeking the responsibility to 

govern and the reality is that we've inherited a mess. 

 

As my good friend and colleague from Humboldt said earlier, 

consistent with the traditions of history in Saskatchewan in 

1944 and 1971 and again now in 1991, a New Democratic 

government was elected by the people of Saskatchewan to 

clean up the mess left behind by the right-wing governments.  

And so here we are.  And so I recognize and I appreciate that 

the bond rating analysts call the Saskatchewan budget a very 

positive step but I say to this House, Mr. Speaker: I detest, I 

detest that I have to care about that. 

 

And so let me conclude, Mr. Speaker, by saying this.  Do I 

believe in a comprehensive dental plan for Saskatchewan 

people?  Yes I do.  Do I believe in improved health coverage in 

optometrics and  



March 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 509 

chiropractic and geriatric without restrictions of financial 

payments, Mr. Speaker?  Yes I do.  Do I believe in a 

comprehensive prescription drug plan so the people of 

Saskatchewan can have access without restrictions of finances 

to the medicines for the need for their health?  Yes I do.  Do I 

believe in lower taxes for the people of Saskatchewan and 

particularly the middle class and the lower income groups of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker?  Yes I do.  And do I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, in increased funding for education and for 

municipalities to do their jobs to serve the people of 

Saskatchewan?  Yes I do.  And, Mr. Speaker, if there was no 

$847 million debt in interest included in this budget, then there 

would be a surplus of $550 million and those things could all 

be done now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that people want this great province 

rebuilt for our children, to secure our future.  And so I say for 

the children of Saskatchewan and their future, for the people of 

Moose Jaw, for aboriginal people of Saskatchewan, for people 

in town and country, for people working and those who want to 

work and those who have chosen to retire, and their 

grandchildren, on Thursday, Mr. Speaker, I will stand and vote 

yes to this budget.  Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(2130) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I just 

want to take a few moments tonight to point out a few things 

regarding the budget and the budget debate that we are now 

entered into.  And I listened with interest to the member from 

Moose Jaw Palliser who just told the Assembly that he didn't 

quite agree with the fact that this province or this government 

or this legislature should be dictated to by the bond raters of the 

world of North America. 

 

The facts are, Mr. Speaker, that this province, as many other 

provinces and other governments, operates on borrowed 

money.  Many people . . . in fact I don't know of very few 

people who don't operate on borrowed money.  And when 

you're operating on borrowed money, you must make sure your 

credit rating is in order, in order for the lenders to continue to 

lend money. 

 

And when I look at where the bond raters have us today and the 

fact that we must heed the warnings of the bond raters, I'm 

reminded of the fact that back in the 1970s, Mr. Speaker, and 

even prior to, there were millions of dollars that were borrowed 

outside of this country.  And the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 

have, for years -- not just through the '80s -- but for years, been 

paying money, interest, sending it outside of this province and 

outside of this country to people, most of them in the East, 

most of them in the New York market. 

 

And so it's imperative that certainly the Government of 

Saskatchewan take the time to try and get its house in order.  

But as I go through some of the remarks I want to make 

tonight, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to try 

and take a moment to point out some of the areas where the 

government, many of the members opposite, government 

members, talked about choices and the difficult choices that 

were made and that must be made. 

 

And I remember hearing the same phraseology back in the 

spring of 1991 when the former minister of Finance, the 

member from Weyburn, Mr. Hepworth, introduced his budget 

and talked about the difficult choices that must be made.  The 

choices that were laid out for the public, laid out for the public 

to see going into the election of 1991. 

 

And yet the public, Mr. Speaker, were fooled.  They were 

fooled by a government and by a Premier, then opposition 

leader, who chose not to be honest, not to be very open with the 

public, but chose instead to tell the public there'd be no new 

taxes.  In fact, if I could take a term from one of the world 

leaders, I think it was played up an awful lot.  It says, read my 

lips. 

 

And I'm sure as an election was taking place and as the election 

trail, the Premier was going . . . or the Leader of the NDP Party 

was going across Saskatchewan and the Saskatchewan 

taxpayers were asking him about taxes and asking him how he 

was going to address the deficit situation.  And he kept 

referring to the fact that it was a deficit created by the 

Conservative government of the 1980s, forgetting about the 

debt that was there prior to 1982.  And he kept telling people 

no more taxes.  Read my lips.  In fact I look at the Leader-Post, 

September 1991, no new taxes.  That's what the present 

Premier said when he was in opposition. 

 

And it begs us to wonder exactly where today's Premier was 

coming from when he was the Leader of the Opposition, if 

indeed he wasn't looking at the premier's chair and overlooking 

the realities of what we were facing and leading people to 

believe that the budget that was presented by the minister of 

Finance in 1991 was indeed a budget that was on the right 

track. 

 

I look with interest at four points laid out by the Minister of 

Finance in this present budget.  The Minister of Finance talked 

about a plan to create jobs and strengthen our economy.  And 

as I relate some of my remarks tonight, Mr. Speaker, I just 

want to point out the fact that I'm not sure if there was a real 

plan in place to create jobs or if the choices that were made 

were the wrong . . . indeed the wrong choices, that instead of 

creating jobs they're going to chase away jobs. 

 

The minister promised a plan that balances the budget within 

four years.  One begs to wonder what happened to that plan to 

balance the budget within a matter of the first term of this 

government.  At least that's what the members said when they 

were in opposition: within one term, they would balance the 

budget.  And they would balance . . . or eliminate the debt, I 

believe it was in 10 or 15 years.  Well it seems to me that's 

disappeared, and we just have to look at the budget that's 

presented today from last year.  And we 



510 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1993 

already see an increase of $1.5 billion in the overall deficit. 

 

The minister talked about a plan that rationalizes and improves 

the delivery of services. 

 

And as I relate tonight, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to show the fact 

that that plan of rationalizing and improving the delivery of 

services is not going to be a plan that's going to be carried out 

by the members of the front bench, but indeed they've 

offloaded as they complain about the federal government.  

They're putting all of those services and the decision making, 

putting it on the backs of the taxpayers, the ratepayers, the 

property owners of Saskatchewan through municipal 

governments, through our urban and rural governments, Mr. 

Speaker, through school boards and health boards. 

 

And then the minister talked about a plan that is committed to 

compassion.  Saturday, March 20, Saskatoon Star-Phoenix -- I 

just want to start out here, Mr. Speaker.  I wonder where the 

compassion really was, the compassion that was talked about 

by the Minister of Finance. 

 

And this, Mr. Speaker, headline is: "Nine farm service centres 

shut doors."  What took place in this situation, Mr. Speaker, 

and what's on the headline of . . . what's part of the story under 

this headline, an individual from the farm service centre, rural 

service centre at Wakaw, a Wakaw employee said: 

 

 "We can't believe they handled the closure the way they did . 

. . 

 

 "They walked in 15 minutes before the budget and posted 

signs on the door saying it was a closure.  I'd like to get my 

hands on the guy who planned this." 

 

For the Wakaw employee it means the end of 14 years working 

at the same office -- 14 years working at the same office -- 

which begs me to wonder, I ask myself, who was the 

government 14 years ago when this person first started 

working, working in Wakaw, raising a family, being a part of 

the community?  It says she now must use her seniority to 

bump into another position. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I saw that, I thought where indeed is this 

compassion that the minister talked about, a plan committed to 

compassion. And that's just not the only story.  If we went 

around the province of Saskatchewan we would find many 

individuals who have just received notice without any . . . or 

were just warned without any previous notice that their jobs 

were terminated.  And then you talk about when people are 

looking at using their seniority to bump, is that compassion?  

So we've got men and women across this province, young 

people, working at jobs, doing their best to fulfil their 

responsibilities, now looking over their shoulders to see who is 

going to be bumping them from their positions.  Is that 

compassion? 

When I look at the seniors, and I'll get into this a little later, the 

seniors and the boards of education and the drug plan and 

people on . . . As I've had some calls into my office already 

regarding the drug plan, an individual who's facing $600 a 

month charges for his oxygen so he can continue to live at least 

a somewhat normal life.  Or the seniors out there, in many 

cases, Mr. Speaker, senior women who have substantial drug 

bills and all they've got is a basic pension, and today that basic 

pension doesn't even come close to meeting their drug needs 

and will wonder where the compassion is. 

 

But the children of low income families who are now faced to 

pay for their dental fees, a dental plan that created jobs in rural 

Saskatchewan, and the government today talks about the fact 

that they might revisit the old dental plan, the school-based 

dental program which was a major cost to the province of 

Saskatchewan, to the taxpayers of this province.  And yet when 

the plan was changed and young people were offered the 

service at the hands of professionals, and businesses were built 

and created across this province, they would begin to wonder 

how many communities are not going to have a dentist any 

more.  If I get a chance, I'll get to that a little later. 

 

But first of all I want to take a quick look at the debt and where 

it was.  Back in the leadership debate in October 1991, the 

present Premier of this province, then NDP leader, debating on 

provincial television acknowledged the fact that there was an 

overall debt of just over 14 billion -- 14.3 billion.  In the 

minister's financial statement of 1992, the gross debt of the 

province was 13.2 -- the same as the debt shown by the 

previous minister of Finance prior to the October election -- 

13.2, and the additional 1.1 billion comes from capital projects 

and funds in that area,  Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I just want to point that out so people realize that prior to 

the election the Premier, who said no more taxes, we'll live 

within $4.5 billion and we'll provide more for schools, we'll 

provide more for hospitals, we're going to provide more for 

rural and urban Saskatchewan, we're going to do so much more 

-- all of a sudden can't hide behind the fact that the debt was 

beyond his wildest imaginations.  And then he talks about how 

the debt has mushroomed again. 

 

And yet we look at last year's financial report and we see that 

the Minister of Finance chose to move $875 million of its debt 

from CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan), 

transferred it to the Consolidated Fund.  Well that's a nice way 

of ballooning a deficit.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, if the Minister of 

Finance in the spring of 1992 would not have transferred that 

long-term, amortized debt into the Consolidated Fund, last year 

the Minister of Finance would have brought in a budget right 

within the realms predicted by the former minister prior to the 

election of 1992, of 265 million.  And in fact with what the 

government today have taken and grabbed, Mr. Speaker, that 

operational budget would be balanced.  That operational deficit 

would be balanced, Mr. Speaker.  And that's right in the 1992 



March 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 511 

financial statements.  This is coming from a Premier who said 

no more taxes.  Well what about taxes, when we say no more 

taxes?  We don't have to look all that hard, and every taxpayer 

across this province realizes that. 

 

I believe it was the member from Humboldt, the member from 

Moose Jaw Palliser, who talked about the fact that the line has 

been held on public sector salaries, and indeed on MLAs' 

salaries, in fact a reduction in a number of cases, Mr. Speaker.  

And we see people right across the sector who have taken 

reductions.  Well the reductions are fine, but what hurts people, 

Mr. Speaker, is the fact that power rates have increased.  

Telephone rates have increased.  Natural gas prices have 

increased.  We now have a sales tax that's gone from 7 per cent 

this year to 9 per cent, and it's expanded, Mr. Speaker.  And the 

bottom line, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that the take-home or the 

net that a person has in their pocket has diminished 

substantially since the fall of 1991. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no wonder people in Saskatchewan are beginning 

to ask themselves what kind of a decision did they make in 

October of 1991.  How could they be taken in and be fooled 

and fall for the so-called promises of this government while 

they were . . . as this NDP Party when it was campaigning, 

rather than being realistic with the people of Saskatchewan?  

Indeed, as one person has said, last Thursday was black 

Thursday.  And just to reiterate it: a 29 per cent increase in 

sales tax over two years, bringing the total sales tax burden to 

16 per cent; an addition of 9 per cent new sales tax on clothing 

and shoes; gas tax jacked up 2 cents a litre -- we're one of the 

highest provinces in Canada now for provincial sales tax on 

gasoline; 20 per cent increase in resource tax threatening 

mining and oil jobs.  Mr. Speaker, one wonders where this will 

end or if it will ever end.  My guess, Mr. Speaker, is that this 

tax increase will not end, and I want to point a few of those 

areas out why I believe we haven't seen the end of the tax 

increases yet. 

 

The tax increases announced by the Minister of Finance the 

other day will grab nearly $200 million from taxpayers, double 

the amount cut from government spending.  But the tax and 

utility increases already announced and the hidden property 

taxes resulting from the offloading onto municipal government 

will amount to millions more than that amount. 

 

(2145) 

 

And that's the big problem we see out there, Mr. Speaker.  

That's the big problem that people are going to have to deal 

with and to face, the fact that the tax increases announced by 

the Minister of Finance on Thursday last are not the end.  In 

fact there are major tax increases that we are going to continue 

to see as the offloading into education and health and rural and 

urban municipalities, and means our local governments and 

school boards and hospital boards sit down to assess their 

budgets and to make the decisions they are going to be forced 

to make. 

We are going to find out, Mr. Speaker, that indeed the tax grab 

hasn't decreased because what we'll find is all these levels of 

government have only one option and that is to go to the 

property taxpayer of Saskatchewan.  The farmers and the 

small-business men and the working people of this province are 

still going to have to cough up that much more. 

 

And the member from Humboldt said we should have thought 

of that a number of years ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you look at the deficit created through the 1980s. 

You look back to 1982 and you ask yourself how many 

home-owners in 1982 were on the verge of losing their houses.  

Was it wrong for the government of the day, Mr. Speaker, to 

subsidize interest rates when they hit 22 per cent?  It doesn't 

take too long, Mr. Speaker, to show that, yes there was a 

deficit.  The deficit was added to in the 1980s, but indeed that 

deficit was added to because there was a government that 

cared, because there was a government that was willing to back 

young men and women who were just nicely starting families 

and to subsidize their interest rate so that they could continue to 

make their payments and maintain their own home.  There was 

a government that was continued and committed to trying to 

meet the needs of people, in not only rural Saskatchewan, but 

even large, urban Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think of the fact that a number of members have 

talked about all the money that was supposedly left in the 

treasury in 1982 by the then Finance minister.  I believe Mr. 

Tchorzewski at that time was the Finance minister.  The 

present member for Regina east was the Finance minister and 

the government of the day, the NDP, would like to remind us 

of the fact that there was $139 million surplus in the 

Consolidated Fund.  But they forget about the debt in the 

public pension fund liabilities, they forget about the debt in the 

Crowns.  This is all part of the overall deficit. 

 

And they like to lead us to believe that there was so much 

money and that the former government, the Conservative 

government of Grant Devine, just wasted it.  And yet when I 

think about that, I look back at some comments made by the 

then leader of the NDP Party in 1982 -- says even Allan 

Blakeney acknowledged that there was no money left in the 

kitty when the Tories took power in 1982.  Quoting from the 

Moose Jaw Times-Herald: the public believed the government 

was well to do, had lots of money.  There was, in fact, no lots 

of money. 

 

And I'd like to believe that indeed maybe the member from 

Moose Jaw North . . . or Palliser is right, that you can't believe 

the Moose Jaw Times-Herald, but I would have to put a little 

bit of faith in the editors of the Moose Jaw Times-Herald. 

 

The money supposedly in the Heritage Fund was illusionary, 

and in fact had been spent mostly by the now Premier, 

Romanow himself, in purchasing already existing assets like 

potash mines. 



512 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1993 

Again, Alan Blakeney confessed.  This is from the Moose Jaw 

Times-Herald.  He says on an open line, CFQC open line, 

November 7, 1985: The Heritage Fund was to take money and 

invest it, like Saskoil and potash and uranium mines.  It was 

not the belief that the money would be there in cash to build 

hospitals or nursing homes.  And yet, up to the election of 

1982, the spring of 1982, we were led to believe that there was 

a Heritage Fund of some $1 billion. 

 

And yet, as we found out, Mr. Speaker, the government of the 

day found out on being elected in 1982, there wasn't that $1 

billion.  In fact, that Heritage Fund was depleted. 

 

And I go on to quote from the Moose Jaw Times-Herald: 

Blakeney was pressed on the wisdom of putting all the 

province's windfall revenues during the 1970s into resources 

and farm land.  What would happen, reporters asked him, if all 

the commodity prices fell at the same time? 

 

Blakeney responded that it would never happen.  But what if it 

does, the reporters persisted.  It would be a disaster, Blakeney 

finally consisted . . . or conceded.  It would be a disaster.  And 

in the 1980s, lo and behold, it did happen.  It was a disaster. 

 

The province was left holding nearly useless assets and no 

bank account for the tough times to come.  Arthur Andersen 

conducted an independent study that shows the purchase of the 

potash mines alone cost the province over $1 billion that can 

never be recovered.  That represents almost 20 per cent of the 

accumulated operating deficit in just one NDP transaction -- 

Budget Address, May 1992 by the minister of Finance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there's a long litany that we could go into and I 

think that over the period of even this Assembly that it will be 

the responsibility of this opposition to bring forward, to let 

people know exactly where some of the debt was and the fact 

that there was debt in 1982.  And it would be fitting to the 

people of Saskatchewan that the government of the day, instead 

of always blaming somebody else -- the third parties for their 

spending or blaming the federal government for not providing 

enough revenue -- would acknowledge the fact that there was a 

deficit in 1982. 

 

And yes, through the 1980's that deficit increased, but a lot of 

that deficit increased because of money put into land at high 

values and you know where land is today, Mr. Speaker, land 

bank I'm talking of and the loss of land bank, potash mines.  As 

I said, Mr. Speaker, there is a long litany I could get into about 

the debate regarding financing, and my colleagues and I will 

certainly get into more of that as we continue the debate on the 

budget process and the budget presented by the Minister of 

Finance. 

 

But I want to go through a couple of comments from 

individuals who are writing about the budget process and the 

budget brought down by the province of Saskatchewan and 

some of the decisions that were 

made.  And no one acknowledges or discredits the fact that 

some tough decisions had to be made and will continue to be 

made.  I look at an article from the Regina Leader-Post, Friday, 

March 19, 1993, "Different battle plans" is the headline, Mr. 

Speaker.  And in this it talks about the Saskatchewan and 

Newfoundland budgets.  It talks about the two different 

governments and what they tried to do in presenting their 

budgets: 

 

 Both (it says) managed to whittle down their deficits -- 

Saskatchewan to . . . 296 million, Newfoundland to . . . 51 

million. 

 

But then, it goes on: 

 

 But while Saskatchewan hiked provincial sales tax, fuel tax, 

and corporate capital tax, Newfoundland didn't announce any 

new taxes. 

 

In fact, they heeded the words of the present Premier.  They 

didn't increase taxes, not unlike what this government has done 

for the first two budgets that it's presented to this Assembly in 

its term as government of this province. 

 

 While Saskatchewan cut 363 civil service jobs, 

Newfoundland's budget contained no large-scale layoffs, but 

called for wage and benefit cuts for public workers, 

politicians and non-unionized employees. 

 

It would seem to me that that is a lot fairer. 

 

And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that is one of the areas the 

Government of Manitoba is working on too, in asking its 

employees and asking people to work together and to share and 

to give a little bit, not always demanding more.  And it's going 

to fall on politicians to follow and give some leadership in that 

area, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So while Saskatchewan's cutting jobs without any care or a 

shred of compassion, Newfoundland asked their employees to 

do some job sharing and to take some cuts.  Therefore, Mr. 

Speaker, that was the option they offer. 

 

 Another difference: a year after Saskatchewan laid off 

members of its Social Services Department (get this, Mr. 

Speaker) "fraud squad," (as the members opposite talked 

about) Newfoundland was announcing it would hire extra 

investigators to catch welfare cheaters and thus save tax 

dollars. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there isn't a person in this province -- you 

can talk to anyone on the streets -- who doesn't want and 

doesn't believe that welfare should be there and should be 

available to those in need.  And we should reach out to help 

those who are less fortunate and those who, due to 

circumstances beyond their control, need some help.  But there 

are many people across this province also believe that people 

should be accountable for the public funds that are put into 

their hands, Mr. Speaker.  So while the 



March 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 513 

NDP government has eliminated what they call the fraud 

squad, we have Newfoundland taking the other approach and 

making sure that their money is invested and handled wisely. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, it says Saskatchewan slashed 

spending on its prescription drug plan and children's dental 

plan while Newfoundland laid out a more gentle plan to save 

money through shorter hospital stays and increased use of out 

_patient surgery.  Mr. Speaker, this is just a bit of a scenario in 

showing what the government . . . some of the decisions the 

government could have worked themselves into. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I realize my time is quickly depleting, but I 

want to take time at another date, Mr. Speaker, to getting into a 

larger debate and an overall debate on the budget address.  So 

at this time I move to adjourn debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  By leave 

of the Assembly I would wish to make a motion concerning the 

composition of Public Accounts. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Substitution on Public Accounts Committee 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I move 

that: 

 

 The names of Mr. Martens and Mr. Boyd be substituted for 

those of Mr. Swenson and Mr. Muirhead on the Standing 

Committee on Public Accounts. 

 

I so move, seconded by the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:57 p.m. 

 


