




















































Hansard: February 25, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN  

 February 25, 1993 

 

1 

The Assembly met at 3 p.m. 

 

The Speaker: — I beg to inform the Assembly that I have 

received a communication from the private secretary to Her 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor stating that Her Honour will 

open the third session of the twenty-second legislature at 3 p.m. 

today, the 25th day of February, 1993. 

 

3:03 p.m. 

 

Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor was then pleased to open 

the session with the following speech: 

 

Mr. Speaker, 

 

Members of the Legislative Assembly: 

 

It is my privilege to welcome you to the third session of the 

twenty-second legislature of Saskatchewan. 

 

Today, as I speak, I invite you to pay honour to Madame Jeanne 

Sauvé, who died on January 26th. A native of Prud’homme, 

Madame Sauvé won our pride and respect as we watched her 

distinguished career and her courageous battle against illness. 

Her achievements will inspire the generations of women who 

follow. 

 

When my government assumed office it urged the people of 

Saskatchewan to join in a journey of renewal — a journey to 

right the wrongs of the past and rebuild our economy and 

society together. 

 

And when this Assembly convened in 1992, my government set 

forth its broad objectives for that journey: to restore common 

sense and competence to the management of the public 

treasury; to restore public faith in the ability of politicians to 

service the public interest; to give new hope to the less 

fortunate; and to bring people together. 

 

Judge us, my government said, on our success in achieving 

these objectives. This government renews that invitation today. 

 

The journey is not an easy one. But all the elements required to 

build a better future are here. To make sure that future is the one 

which Saskatchewan people want, my government has enlisted 

their partnership to renew the economy, to reinvest in people, to 

restore our sense of community. My government has asked the 

people to join in reinventing Saskatchewan’s future. 

 

Sound Financial Management 

 

Step one in that process is to begin living within our means — 

an issue confronting not only governments in Canada, but even 

in the United States. We have taken the first step. This year, 

Saskatchewan was the only province to reduce annual operating 

expenditures. Both the annual deficit and borrowing 

requirements were also sharply reduced. 

 

Were there no interest to pay on our accumulated debt — the 

legacy of past deficits — the current year’s accounts 

would yield a surplus. 

 

And when the government offered its first issue of 

Saskatchewan savings bonds, the people’s response was 

overwhelming. Thirty-seven thousand Saskatchewan people 

purchased of $550 million in bonds to help rebuild our finances. 

However modestly, Saskatchewan has begun to turn a most 

important corner. My government took the hard path toward 

deficit reduction — not because it believes in reducing 

government’s role in society, but precisely because it is the only 

way to restore our capacity to meet people’s needs. 

 

It is no longer appropriate to measure success in meeting those 

needs solely by the level of government expenditures. 

Compassion is not lessened by improving efficiency. Equity 

and fairness are not constricted by rediscovering the important 

role the community can play in delivering services effectively. 

 

Despite the financial restraints, my government has launched 

important new initiatives in health, in job creation and in 

education. As we reduce the deficit, Saskatchewan will thus be 

positioned in the forefront of development. 

 

This way lies the direction for our journey of renewal. We must 

restore financial stability in Saskatchewan — not as an end in 

itself — but to gain our freedom to choose a better future for 

ourselves and our children. 

 

Economic Renewal and Job Creation 

 

There is no more important dimension to that future than the 

creation of jobs, and no more important location for those jobs 

than Saskatchewan’s smaller communities. 

 

Of the hundreds of new, expanding and potential business 

projects in the province, more than half are outside Regina and 

Saskatoon. Those outside our two largest cities have the 

potential to create or maintain almost 8,000 jobs. 

 

Community bond corporations continue to help local people 

spark needed development. Thirty have been incorporated since 

my government took office. 

 

Hopeful things are happening in places like Esterhazy, Moose 

Jaw, Swift Current, Kerrobert, Aylsham and Cut Knife. 

 

The government has also concluded an agreement with Atomic 

Energy of Canada Limited to locate a share of its nuclear 

research facilities in Saskatoon. This will create high-quality 

jobs in research and development. 

 

Several new uranium developments are currently proposed in 

northern Saskatchewan. All are being carefully reviewed with 

respect to environmental protection, occupational health and 

safety and northern socio-economic concerns. 

 

Sears Canada, with modest assistance from the government is 

establishing a telemarketing centre in Regina. The centre is a 

major investment in 



2 Saskatchewan Hansard February 25, 1993 

 

communications technology and will create up to 900 jobs. 

 

To build on this developing momentum, my government in 

November launched Partnership for Renewal — A Strategy for 

the Saskatchewan Economy. The strategy, designed in 

partnership with a broad spectrum of Saskatchewan people, sets 

out to create a positive environment for economic renewal, to 

build on existing economic strengths and to seek full 

employment. 

 

To guide the strategy and evaluate progress toward these goals, 

the government has named a broadly based Provincial Action 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

In 1992, this government began the task of making its economic 

development programs more accessible. It undertook to 

establish a single window for the delivery of services. In time, 

this will mean a common location and name for all 

development services in each region. As a start, a new toll-free 

800 number will put those seeking help in touch with the right 

person. 

 

In addition, my government will empower communities to deal 

directly with their development opportunities by introducing 

regional economic development authorities. 

 

To provide a sound statutory basis to coordinate the initiatives 

of the new economic strategy, my government will introduce 

The Economic Development Act. Currently the Department of 

Economic Development is responsible for legislation under 11 

different acts. By ending this fragmentation, the new Act will 

strengthen coordination and improve accountability. 

 

Tourism is a key part of Saskatchewan’s economic future. A 

joint industry-government tourism task force will explore 

options for future partnerships in developing and marketing 

tourism opportunities. 

 

Using existing resources, the government has established a new 

cooperatives directorate within the Department of Economic 

Development in recognition of the vital role that cooperatives 

play in Saskatchewan. 

 

Saskatchewan is more dependent on international trade than any 

other province. Working in partnership with out exporters, the 

government will work toward establishing a new Saskatchewan 

trade and market development organization. 

 

Benefits have already accrued to Saskatchewan’s economy 

from a December European trade mission which produced over 

100 jobs and many profitable future opportunities for 

Saskatchewan firms. 

 

My government continues to develop a comprehensive energy 

strategy for Saskatchewan. It will cover all forms of energy 

production, the role of renewable and alternative energy sources 

and energy use. The strategy will identify economic 

opportunities in the production, processing and transportation of 

energy resources and ways to reduce our energy consumption. 

 

Agriculture and Farm Income 

Mr. Speaker, in the crisis which faces our farmers, 

Saskatchewan should not stand alone. This crisis demands a 

national solution. 

 

My government will do all within its power and capacity to 

rebuild the province’s farm economy. But it will continue to 

insist that the federal government stand by its promises and 

fulfil its responsibilities. 

 

The shortfall in farm income over the past several years has 

been devastating to Saskatchewan farmers and to rural and 

urban communities. Provincial net farm income in 1993 is 

projected to sink to $241 million, the lowest level since 1970. 

My government stands firmly with the farmers in their demand 

that the federal government fulfil its promise to deliver a third 

line of defence. 

 

The plight of farmers is made more critical by the serious flaws 

in the second-line support programs. Current farm income 

programs not only fail to meet the real needs of farmers, they 

cannot be modified to do so. This government has therefore 

appointed a new Farm Support Review Committee to guide it in 

developing new safety nets. The committee began its work in 

January and will be asking for public input over the next few 

months. 

 

Saskatchewan’s farm income is under further attack by the 

federal government’s recent proposals to change the current 

method of paying grain transportation assistance and to speed 

up rail line abandonment. Changes must indeed be made to 

develop a transportation system which is effective, efficient and 

affordable. But my government firmly believes that this can be 

done while maintaining the current method of paying the Crow 

benefit. 

 

How to achieve a commercially, viable, self-sufficient and 

sustainable agricultural industry is at the centre of my 

government’s concerns. In the consultation paper — Forging 

Partnerships in Agriculture — my government seeks to engage 

farmers and their organizations in a positive dialogue leading to 

the adoption of a new agricultural strategy. 

 

One crucial question to be examined is a strategic approach to 

modern global marketing. Historically, institutions like the 

Canadian Wheat Board have provided muscle to individual 

producers confronted by large international buyers. But if the 

federal government removes barley sales to the United States 

from the purview of the board, that strength will be eroded and 

–s farmers will suffer. 

 

My government strongly believes that we must build on the 

success of the Canadian Wheat Board, not undermine its 

mandate. 

 

To assist farm families in financial difficulties, the government 

in 1992 enacted the farm land leaseback program. Many banks 

and credit unions have been active in providing six-year 

leasebacks, and my ministers continue to encourage the federal 

government to direct the Farm Credit Corporation to cooperate. 

 

Alarming to my government were recent attempts to assemble 

large tracts of farm land near Eston. At this session we will 

amend The Saskatchewan Farm Security 



February 25, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 3 

Act to broaden the investigative powers of the Farm Ownership 

Board and to strengthen enforcement provisions. 

 

New National Goals 

 

This year Canadians will vote for a new national government. 

My ministers believe that we must set out new national goals 

which are practical, realistic and centred on critical economic 

issues. 

 

All governments face fiscal problems. We cannot solve them by 

ourselves. We must cooperate to find solutions. 

 

But such solutions cannot slow our economic recovery. We 

must work together creatively and quickly to make sure we do 

not repeat the mistakes which so aggravated the effects of the 

recent recession. Saskatchewan felt the burden of that recession 

acutely. We want to be part of the solution to the problem. We 

want a national economic strategy which will unite the 

provinces and the federal government in a common cause. 

 

Of central interest to all Canadians is the future of our social 

programs. Despite its fiscal problems, the federal government 

still has more flexibility to act than the provinces. Now is not 

the time for Ottawa to withdraw further support from health, 

education, training and the many other areas so important to the 

future of Canada. 

 

My government is committed to working with whomever forms 

the next federal government to build a realistic national strategy 

to create jobs. keep our social programs and regain fiscal 

stability. 

 

Renewing Health Care 

 

Some thirty years ago, Mr. Speaker, the eyes of Canada were 

riveted on Saskatchewan as the Lloyd government struggled to 

launch North America’s first public, prepaid medicare program. 

Today, those eyes are again on Saskatchewan as we engage our 

communities in moving to what Tommy Douglas described as 

the ―second phase‖ of that struggle. He said, and I quote: 

 

The first phase would be to remove the financial barrier 

between those giving the service and those receiving it. The 

second phase would be to reorganize and revamp the whole 

delivery system — and of course, that’s the big item. 

 

My government has begun to tackle this ―big item‖, to 

rebuild our entire health care system. 

 

Over the past months the Minister of Health has met with 

thousands of Saskatchewan people about wellness and health 

reform. My government is grateful for the participation of all 

those who shared their vision for health in Saskatchewan. 

 

The wellness approach is a new way of looking at the 

province’s health system to help achieve the highest possible 

level of health in all aspects of our lives. It encompasses 

physical, mental and spiritual well-being. Wellness means 

improving quality of life. 

The reorganization of the health delivery system has already 

started with the creation of the Mid-West, Prince Albert, 

Saskatoon, and Regina health boards. In this session, the 

government will introduce legislation that will provide a 

foundation for increasing community control over the health 

system; encouraging the adoption of a wellness approach to 

health which emphasizes disease prevention, positive 

lifestyles and community-based health programs; and 

promoting the coordination and integration of health services 

to provide a more responsive and efficient health system. 

 

The Assembly will also be asked to enact a new Public 

Health Act. This legislation will modernize public safety and 

security measures in such basic areas as the provision of 

water and food and the containment of communicable 

diseases. 

 

While some other provinces are wringing their hands as they 

watch health care costs skyrocket, while our powerful 

neighbour to the south struggles with a system which leaves 

many without adequate health care, Saskatchewan people are 

moving forward toward a reformed health system which 

emphasizes community involvement and control. In 

partnership with the people, my government is determined to 

meet the health challenge which Tommy Douglas 

acknowledged is greater than the introduction of medicare 

itself. 

 

Education and the Community 

 

One of the basic principles which my government seeks to 

apply in all the services it provides is that of dealing with the 

whole person. Thus, in economic development we have 

created the single window. In health, we have adopted the 

wellness concept which encompasses quality of life. 

 

In education, as we have focused on the child, we have found 

that learning depends on much more than the provision of a 

schoolroom and a teacher. Some children and young people 

— too many — come to school hungry, abused or suffering 

from stress. 

 

Currently being tested are school and community 

partnerships in which the school becomes the centre for a 

broad range of services focusing on the needs of the student 

and the family. This approach works. Learning is enhanced. 

As part of this children first: community action program, 

nearly 20 communities are involved in deciding the most 

effective ways of working together, using the school, as a 

base, to meet all the needs of children that affect their ability 

to learn. 

 

My government is committed to building a high-quality 

education system that responds to the province’s social and 

economic needs. One partnership set up to work toward that 

end is the Saskatchewan Education Council, made up of a 

broad range of community and education interests. It will 

recommend a vision for education and new approaches to the 

issues facing the province’s education system. 

 

Also, over the past year, the government commissioned 

reviews of the universities, the regional colleges, the 

Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 



4 Saskatchewan Hansard February 25, 1993 

Technology, the private vocational schools, and the high 

school program. 

 

This government is determined to use the recommendations 

of these reviews and the Saskatchewan Education Council to 

build an integrated and comprehensive education system, one 

which will make possible lifelong learning and meet the 

expanding needs for training and retraining. 

 

My government is committed to finding, in consultation with 

communities and our educational partners, affordable ways to 

deliver education. An advisory group is examining changes 

to the funding formula for school divisions that will provide 

equitable support in a time of change. This group will also 

work with school boards to develop new ways of doing 

business at the local level that will make best use of the 

resources available for student learning. 

 

My government intends to introduce legislation to allow 

Saskatchewan francophones to control and manage their own 

schools. This Act will meet both the province’s constitutional 

obligations and the needs of the francophone community. 

 

Enhancing Social Justice 

 

My government is determined that our journey of renewal not 

bypass Saskatchewan’s most vulnerable people. We will, in 

the year ahead, continue to build on such initiatives as the 

reform of the income support system. 

 

Almost one in six Saskatchewan children lives in poverty, a 

rate which has doubled since 1980. To help meet the needs of 

children in the lowest income families, the government will 

introduce a new more broadly based children’s benefit in the 

coming year. 

 

My government will focus on the needs of children and 

families. We are initiating an action plan for children, a plan 

built on the belief that children have a right to adequate food, 

clothing, shelter, and a safe, nurturing environment.  As part 

of the plan, we will undertake a review of the child care 

system and examine processes for advocacy on behalf of 

children. 

 

Where family relationships are in conflict, additional 

supports will be provided to strengthen the family and protect 

children in their own homes. For families with children who 

have disabilities, several demonstration projects will offer 

enhanced respite and support services. 

 

Through cooperative action with our communities, my 

government is determined to reclaim Saskatchewan’s 

position as a leader in social reform. 

 

One of Saskatchewan’s greatest challenges in rebuilding a 

vital, full-employment economy is to meet the needs of the 

province’s working men and women. 

 

The government will strengthen legislation to assist workers 

and employers in working together to reduce workplace 

hazards and to prevent injuries through the introduction of 

The Occupational Health and Safety Act. The Act will further 

provide a framework for dealing with 

sexual and other forms of harassment. 

 

The Workers’ Compensation Act will be amended to ensure 

that injured workers receive fair compensation and treatment. 

 

The government will soon circulate a discussion paper to 

gather views on changes to The Labour Standards Act. To 

ensure decent working conditions in the face of a changing 

labour market, our minimum employment standards must be 

brought up to date. 

 

My government will expand the employment equity program 

in the public service to make sure that fair employment 

opportunities are available to persons of Aboriginal ancestry, 

women in management and non-traditional roles, persons 

with disabilities and members of visible minorities. 

 

At this session, amendments to The Saskatchewan Human 

Rights Code will be introduced to prohibit discrimination on 

the basis of sexual orientation, family status or receipt of 

public assistance. 

 

Amendments to The limitations of Actions Act and The Fatal 

Accidents Act will remove certain restrictions which have 

been disadvantageous to women. 

 

A new Correctional Services Act will be placed before you. It 

will provide for stronger and more efficient community-

based corrections programs and permit greater participation 

by communities, including Aboriginal peoples, in the design 

and delivery of programs to help reintegrate offenders into 

society. 

 

In 1992, the government was pleased to sign the historic 

Treaty Land Entitlement Agreement. During this session we 

will introduce an omnibus Bill to change a number of 

provincial laws and regulations to accommodate the 

agreement. 

 

In recent days a Tripartite Process Framework Agreement 

was signed by the Metis Society of Saskatchewan and the 

governments of Canada and Saskatchewan. This agreement 

will enhance Metis administration and control over matters 

which affect their lives. 

 

During the year ahead, my government will continue working 

with Indian and Metis people toward self-management of 

services in education, social development, justice and 

employment. 

 

The year 1993 has been designated by the United Nations as 

the International Year of Indigenous Peoples. During this 

year my government will pursue new partnerships with our 

Indian and Metis communities, and we encourage others to 

join with us. 

 

Building Communities 

 

Much of our quality of life depends on strong communities, 

strong local governments and access to quality services. 

Sustaining service delivery in today’s circumstances is a 

major priority of my government. 
 

We note that the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 



February 25, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 5 

Association (SUMA) has begun a planning process among its 

members to seek thoughtful and orderly improvement of our 

local government system and methods of delivering services. 

 

During the coming months, my government will expand 

discussions with SUMA, and potentially others, to pursue 

ways of achieving our common goal for the 1990s and 

beyond: strong and vibrant communities, places to work, 

places to grow with family and friends, places with access to 

the services we need. 

 

The North is a unique part of the Saskatchewan community. 

My government is committed to working with the people of 

the North to help ensure that its destiny is fulfilled. This 

means an emphasis on developing adequate housing, water 

and sewer systems, community infrastructure and jobs. 

 

My government will work with Northerners, their businesses, 

their organizations and their local governments, to promote 

northern economic and community development. 

 

Recognizing that racial discrimination is a problem here and 

across Canada, the government will join in the worldwide 

observance of the International Day for the Elimination of 

Racism on March 21, 1993. 

 

Improving Environmental Management 

 

My government enthusiastically received the Saskatchewan 

Round Table’s Conservation Strategy for Sustainable 

Development in Saskatchewan in June 1992. Our response 

and proposed implementation plan will soon be released in a 

document entitled: An Environmental Strategy: Partnerships 

to a Sustainable Future. 

 

My government awaits the report of the Standing Committee 

of the Legislative Assembly on the Environment with respect 

to intersessional hearings held on the environmental charter 

of rights and responsibilities Act. 

 

In the coming year, the province will hold consultations 

concerning designation of a third ecological reserve. The 

proposed site is near the Rafferty Dam, and covers 392 acres. 

The reserve will include an area which contains the now-rare 

prairie plant, buffalo grass. 

 

In this session, the government proposes to establish a new 

Round Table on Sustainable Development. It will provide an 

effective link between government agencies and the public in 

forging policies which protect the environment and support a 

sustainable future. 

 

Open and Accountable Government 

 

When this government took office, it acted quickly to restore 

open and accountable government. Most of the 

recommendations of the independent Financial Management 

Review Commission are now in place. As a result, the 

province’s financial position is being reported on a more 

timely basis, the financial stability of the Crown corporations 

is being restored, and a commitment has 

been made to disclose significant government transactions 

with minimum delay. 

 

in this session, a new Crown Corporations Act will be 

introduced to ensure that Crown corporations are publicly 

accountable and will prohibit Crown corporations from 

creating subsidiary corporations without full public 

disclosure. 

 

The government continues its commitment to reform the 

process for acquiring government goods and services. Open, 

fair and competitive contract tendering will be the rule rather 

than the exception for all government departments, Crown 

corporations and agencies. 

 

Another recommendation of the Financial Management 

Review Commission will be implemented by adopting the 

principles of accrual accounting beginning with the 1993-94 

fiscal year. 

 

The government will act to eliminate political influence in 

setting polling boundaries. The Constituency Boundaries Act 

will put in place an independent boundaries commission. 

 

The Members of the Legislative Assembly Conflict of 

Interest Act will set new rules for all members of the 

legislature. It will also introduce the concept of a Conflicts 

Commissioner to advise members and to rule on violations. 

 

In addition, the government will introduce a code of ethical 

conduct which will set out a high standard of behaviour for 

all elected representatives. 

 

A New Future 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are extraordinary times. 

 

For some the depth of Saskatchewan’s problems tempts 

despair. 

 

But Saskatchewan people have always been optimists. What 

could be more optimistic than to call your province ―next 

year country‖? 

 

That optimism is soundly based. Saskatchewan’s land and the 

families who farm it will always be Canada’s prime 

agricultural resource. The people in our communities, rural 

and urban, have the visions and the capacity to renew this 

province. True, our journey of renewal will encounter more 

change and face more hard choices before Saskatchewan 

fully regains its fiscal and economic health. The demands are 

daunting. But Saskatchewan people have adapted to change 

before, and done it with a flair. 

 

The people whose ingenuity produced a Wheat Pool and 

medicare need not be daunted by change. 

 

With change comes opportunity, and it is the opportunities 

which beckon us. 

 

Together, on this journey of renewal, we will unlock 

opportunity and create a future where all can say ―next year 

country is here‖. 



6 Saskatchewan Hansard February 25, 1993 

I leave you now to the business of this session, with full 

confidence that you will favourably discharge your duties and 

responsibilities. May Divine Providence continue to blew our 

province and guide the legislature in all its deliberations. 

 

God save the Queen. 

 

Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 3:35 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Pro Forma Bill 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I move that a Bill respecting the administration of 

oaths of office be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Introduction of Pages 

 

The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that the 

pages for this session will be: Surjit Basi, Larissa Fuhr, Lilia 

Kusiak, Michelle Oussoren, and Denise Psiurski. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

 

The Speaker: — I beg to inform the Assembly that in order 

to prevent mistakes I have obtained a copy of the speech of 

Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor which I now lay on the 

Table. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Speech from the Throne 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 

move, seconded by my colleague the Deputy Premier: 

 

That the speech of Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor be 

taken into consideration on Friday, February 26, 1993. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Printing of Votes and Proceedings of the Assembly 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by my 

colleague the House Leader: 

 

That the Votes and Proceedings of this Assembly be printed 

after first having been perused by Mr. Speaker, that he do 

appoint the printing thereof, and that no person but such as he 

shall appoint do presume to print the same. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this House 

do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — Before we put the question on the 

adjournment, there are a number of acknowledgements that I 

wish to make. The music that you have been listening to this 

afternoon is provided to us by the Regina Police Junior A Band. 

They are playing under the direction of Ms. Shelley Jagow. Our 

thanks to the band for a fine performance. You will have the 

opportunity to hear more from these young musicians later this 

afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I would like to thank all the guests and 

members of the public who have joined us today, and in 

particular, I want to acknowledge a group of students in the east 

gallery. They are 50 Grades 5 to 8 students from Thompson 

School. They are accompanied by Miss Dohlen, Miss 

Widdifield and Mrs. Reilly. 

 

In the west gallery I want to welcome members of the Balfour 

Collegiate choir from Regina. I will be calling on them to sing 

for us immediately following the adjournment. 

 

Following the choir selections, I would like to invite everyone 

to join Her Honour, the Lieutenant Governor, the Premier, the 

Leader of the Opposition, and members of the Legislative 

Assembly at the Speaker’s tea which will take place 

immediately following the Chamber ceremony. The tea will be 

in two locations — in room 218 in the west wing and in the 

Legislative Library in the east wing. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Speaker: — I now welcome the students of the Balfour 

Collegiate choir and invite them to perform under the direction 

of Mrs. Deidre Mallett. 

 

(The choir sang.) 

 

The Speaker: — On behalf of all here present, I want to thank 

the choir under the direction of Mrs. Mallett, for just an 

excellent performance. Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 3:45 p.m. 

 


