




















































Hansard: May 05, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1451 

 May 5, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: — According to order, the following petition has been 

reviewed and pursuant to rule 11(7) is hereby read and 

received: 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to order SaskPower to facilitate the production of 

non-utility generated power in areas of increased demand. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to introduce to members of the 

Legislative Assembly some very distinguished guests to our 

province and to our Assembly today. 

 

Sitting, Mr. Speaker, in your gallery is the High Commissioner 

of Britain to Canada, His Excellency Sir Nicholas Bayne and 

his spouse Lady Diana Bayne. Perhaps I could get them to 

stand up just very briefly to be acknowledged by the members 

of the House for their visit. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — And accompanying them is Mr. 

Patrick Holdich, the head of the political section of the British 

High Commission. Mr. Holdich, perhaps as well you'll be 

recognized. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, this is His Excellency's 

second visit to Saskatchewan, the last one being about a year 

ago in June of 1992. And as every ambassadorial visit to any 

jurisdiction concerns itself, this one also has been very busy for 

him, meeting with the Lieutenant Governor, various political 

figures, the journalists and editorial boards. I'm going to be 

meeting with His Excellency later this afternoon as is the 

Minister of Economic Development. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like all members of this Assembly to make 

very welcome the British High Commissioner to Canada, Sir 

Nicholas, and his spouse, Lady Diana. We wish you a very 

happy and — how shall I describe it — successful visit to our 

province. Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 

echo the Premier's words of welcome to our distinguished 

guests in the gallery today. On behalf of 

Her Majesty's Loyal Opposition, Your Excellency, it's good to 

see you here. Unfortunately I didn't know that you were in the 

province until just a few minutes ago and would have liked the 

opportunity, but I hope you enjoy the proceedings in the 

legislature today. I know that Saskatchewan is always a place 

of interest to people from Great Britain and we welcome you 

here again, sir. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

would simply like to say I very much enjoyed the meeting this 

morning with Sir Nicholas Bayne as well as Mr. Holdich and it 

was my pleasure to meet with both of you. And it's my second 

occasion to meet with the High Commissioner and my first 

occasion with Mr. Holdich. I look forward to future 

opportunities to meet with you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to other members of the 

Legislative Assembly 49 grade 12 students from Robert Usher 

seated in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker. They're accompanied 

by their teacher, Fred Steininger. It will be my pleasure to be 

meeting with this group on behalf of my colleague, the 

Minister of Labour, the member for Churchill Downs. I will be 

meeting with this group at 3:15 this day, and very much look 

forward to that visit and the pictures and refreshment that will 

take place at that time. 

 

I ask all members to join me in welcoming the group from 

Robert Usher. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 

pleasure today to introduce two school groups visiting from the 

Melville constituency in Regina today and in the Assembly and 

watching the proceedings from your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

First of all, there's 17 students from Grayson School, from 

grade 9 to 12, with teacher Ben Appell, and chaperons Ellen 

Bateman and Cheryl Exner, with their bus driver Clarence 

Rathgeber. 

 

Also in the same gallery, Mr. Speaker, from St. Henry's senior 

elementary school in Melville, 32 grade 8 students who are 

accompanied with their teacher Garth Gleisinger, and their bus 

driver Al Schatz. 

 

I'll be meeting with the two groups right after question period 

for photos and a bit of a visit, and I would just like all members 

of the Assembly to welcome both groups here this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I'd like to 

introduce through you, to you, on behalf of the member for 

Shaunavon, a school group from Eastend, 



1452 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1993 

Saskatchewan. They're in the west gallery. There's 17 grade 12 

students, their teacher Brad Hauber, and bus driver Randy 

Morris. 

 

I have also a special interest in this group, Mr. Speaker. And I 

have not met with them yet, but my second cousin is in the 

class, just a couple of years younger than I, in grade 12. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — So I would like the Assembly to give that 

group a very special welcome. I hope you have a good tour of 

Regina and a very safe trip home. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with pleasure 

to introduce to you and to members of the Assembly a group of 

students sitting in the east gallery. There are 11 grade 8 

students and they are accompanied by their teachers and 

chaperons, Beattie Ledingham, Lorri Ehman, and Evelyn Zehr. 

I'll be meeting with this group at 3 o'clock in room 255 for 

drinks and questions, and out on the steps I believe at about the 

same time for pictures. And it'll be a pleasure to visit with these 

students. 

 

And I want to also say, Mr. Speaker, that in my 15 years of 

representing this here legislature, I think Holdfast has always 

attended here every year more than any other town in my 

constituency. I thank them, and I ask all members to welcome 

my school from Holdfast, Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like to 

extend a warm welcome to the students of Schell School from 

Holdfast, Saskatchewan. Their teacher, Beattie Ledingham, I 

guess is a person that I know fairly well as my brother-in-law, 

who's married to my sister, Lynn, who was also a teacher at 

Holdfast. So I also want to extend a warm welcome to the 

grade 8 class. And I'm also looking forward to visiting Holdfast 

grad this May, to see the graduation of my nephew, Blair. So I 

extend a warm welcome to them, hope they have a good visit, 

and a safe trip home. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Ministerial Assistants Paid by SPMC 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the minister responsible for SPMC 

(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation). Mr. 

Minister, once again your government has been caught saying 

one thing and doing another thing. A short while ago you 

thoroughly condemned the practice of paying ministerial 

assistants through Crown corporations. You made a great deal 

of political hay out of the Provincial Auditor's report, which 

recommended that political staff should be paid, not from 

Crown corporations, but from the Premier's office. Do you 

remember that? 

So after you score your political points, when it comes time to 

act, what do you do? All six of your personal staff — all six are 

now being paid out of the Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation. All six of his personal staff. Do you see the 

duplicity in that, Mr. Minister? Are you trying to shuffle the 

costs involved with having six staff members over to a Crown 

because you have no departmental responsibilities? Is that what 

you're trying to do? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the 

minister responsible for SPMC, I would like to thank the 

member for his question and outline for him that the issue has 

never been whether or not an employee in the minister's office 

was paid for by a Crown, but what was pointed out in the 

auditor's report was that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . but 

your administration was hiding them — $1.2 million worth of 

ministerial assistants hidden in the Crowns. 

 

We have disclosed . . . and this minister is responsible for 

SPMC, which is a Crown corporation and not a line 

department. Therefore it's appropriate that the staff in his office 

who respond to calls from the public and assistance for the 

public with respect to that Crown corporation should be paid 

for by that Crown corporation. And we made it open and 

accountable. That's why you know about it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, we 

all know that members of your government have an extensive 

record of not telling the complete truth; saying one thing and 

doing exactly the opposite — just as you're doing right now, 

Madam Minister. Your record of misleading the public is 

becoming particularly lengthy. 

 

You promise an open government; then you refuse to release 

the security report on GTECH and VLC (Video Lottery 

Consultants), two companies you gave $20 million to. You 

promised to end patronage; then you hired two NDP (New 

Democratic Party) hacks to high-paying jobs in the Gaming 

Commission. 

 

You promised a fair and open accounting tendering process; 

then you institute a practice of opening bids behind closed 

doors. You criticized paying hacks out of Crowns; then you 

pay all six of the ministerial . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Does the member have 

question? I want the member to put his question. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister . . . Madam Minister, would you 

say that the things that you've done in the Gaming Commission 

are inconsistent, dishonest, or illegal? Which one are they? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I believe it was a 



May 5, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1453 

British statesman, Benjamin Disraeli, who said that justice is 

the truth in action. And so let me say that we have told the 

truth. We have made full disclosures. That's why you know; 

that's why you're asking the questions. 

 

So the answer to the member's question is: it's none of the 

above. We're open and honest in our administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — The truth in action, Madam Minister, is just this: 

not only have you hired staff and hid them from the public's 

view, you are currently suing Judy Bellay because you alleged 

she was improperly paid by the Liquor Board while she was 

working for the Liquor Board minister. 

 

Now six of the current minister's personal staff are being paid 

in a similar manner, exactly the same, Mr. Speaker, exactly the 

same as was done before, contrary to the recommendations of 

the auditor. 

 

Madam Minister, do you intend to fire these people and then 

sue them exactly the same way you are suing Judy Bellay? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, these are competent 

staff. We have no intention of changing their status in any way. 

They assist the minister in his duties as the minister responsible 

for that Crown corporation. And I remind the members 

opposite again that the issue has never been how they were 

paid, but that it was disclosed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Well, Mr. Speaker, once again we see the 

government applying one set of rules to one group while 

exempting political appointees of their own from the rules on 

the other hand. 

 

The Provincial Auditor reported that your government has 

made over $700,000 in illegal payments to your appointees. Six 

of the staff of the minister responsible are paying . . . are being 

paid now by SPMC. Why aren't these things the same as the 

way the Judy Bellay situation was? Why are they any different, 

Madam Minister? 

 

Judy Bellay was working for the minister and was being paid 

by the Liquor Commission. Now you say it's different. Can you 

explain to the Legislative Assembly why, Madam Minister, 

that there's any difference in this? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, it doesn't surprise me 

that the members opposite are unable to make these 

distinctions, but I clarify that these people are working in the 

minister's office in support of his ministry. The case to which 

they refer is a case where the employee was working in the 

minister's constituency office — not in the ministry. 

An Hon. Member: — A political office. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — A political office. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Madam 

Minister, if they're being . . . if they're working for the minister, 

why then are they not being paid by that office? Why are they 

not being paid by that minister rather than being paid by the 

SPMC? Can you answer that? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, the minister responsible 

for SPMC, the Liquor Board, and the Gaming Commission is 

not responsible for any line department from which his 

assistants can be paid. So his staff is being paid to support him 

in his role as the minister responsible for that corporation. 

 

This information has been disclosed to you. And again, in the 

Public Accounts Committee and the Crown Corporations 

Committee when the statements and affairs of that corporation 

are reviewed, again it becomes transparent for those who are 

able to see. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, we'll 

go through it one more time with you. On one hand, you're 

suing a former employee of the government, Judy Bellay, for 

working for the minister and being paid by SPMC . . . by the 

Liquor Commission, pardon me. Now you're doing exactly the 

same thing; but it's wrong for us to do it, but it's okay for you to 

do it. 

 

In spite of the fact that you said you wouldn't do it — you 

made great political mileage in doing it — you go on a 

vindictive fling to try and condemn one individual, and yet on 

the other hand, Madam Minister, it's okay for you to do it. 

 

Do you not see the inconsistency in that, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I can see very clearly. 

Let me go over this slowly once more and see if the member 

opposite can hear. There is a difference between the staff in the 

minister's office here in this building working as his support 

staff as opposed to a staff member out in a constituency office 

acting in a political capacity. That's the difference. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, I had 

one question that I'd like to ask further; it's with respect to the 

Gaming Commission as well. Last week the minister 

responsible took notice on a question with respect to one 

appointee, Lisa Thomson. I wonder if you could provide 

information to the Assembly this afternoon on that situation. 



1454 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1993 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, the member did take 

notice, and in due course, as always, the member opposite who 

posed the question will receive a reply. 

 

Ethanol Production 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct my 

question to the Minister of Economic Development. Mr. 

Minister, there's been a great deal of discussion in rural 

Saskatchewan about creating jobs by producing value added 

products like ethanol, and given the number of people losing 

their jobs in hospitals, schools, and small business in rural 

Saskatchewan, quality job creation is more important than ever. 

 

In light of this, Mr. Minister, I'd like to know what your 

government is doing to encourage job creation through ethanol 

production. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, the ethanol 

development or the projects basically fall under the Department 

of Agriculture so I think we can answer that. 

 

There are two ethanol projects out now that are operating under 

a program of a subsidy whereby . . . We have one at Lanigan 

which is attached to a feed lot. We have another one at 

Kerrobert which is developing some technology. There are a 

whole raft of communities who are working on ethanol projects 

and possibilities of ethanol projects. We are assured that their 

technology is being developed that will make these 

economically viable. At the current time we do not feel that we 

want to subsidize any more of these plants at a large subsidy 

rate. We believe that they will become economically viable, 

where government will not have to play a large role in setting 

them up and operating them. 

 

And we think that this is something that will be developed and 

is being developed as, I might add, across the piece is 

beginning to happen in this province. This is being developed 

from the community level up; people are talking about raising 

money, about how to get into it. They're not asking 

governments to fund them; they're just saying, what can you do 

to help us, and they are working forward on that. And I think 

ethanol is one of the possibilities for the future of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Just last week 

the Government of Alberta offered ethanol producers in that 

province a complete exemption from its 9 cent a litre fuel tax. 

In this province, you and your colleagues raised the tax on fuel 

from 10 cents to 13 cents last year, and from 13 cents to 15 

cents a litre this year. 

 

Saskatchewan, in other words, has a 15 cents a litre tax on 

ethanol while Alberta, our largest and strongest competitor of 

this kind of economic development, has zero. Mr. Minister, can 

you say that you are 

encouraging this industry when you're stifling it with taxes 

before it even gets off the ground? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, I assume the 

member opposite would like us to subsidize at the level of 

Alberta is. We do not have the resources to do that. I think if 

you look at the rate at which the Alberta deficit is growing, I 

think they will soon rethink some of their subsidy programs as 

well. 

 

We have a large . . . Right now we are subsidizing the plants 

that are out there at 40 cents a litre, which comes to, at the 

Lanigan plant . . . 10 million litres means $4 million subsidy 

from us, from government. With the large number of plants out 

there, we do not feel at this time that the government can 

subsidize 30 or 40 of these plants at that rate, and therefore we 

work with them to develop the technology that will produce 

products and by-products by which they will become 

economically viable on their own. And at that point we will 

certainly be helping to get them established. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Minister, for many rural communities 

— and I'm talking about communities like Weyburn and 

Lanigan, etc. — ethanol production offers one of the few good 

opportunities to diversify the economy and to create very badly 

needed jobs. 

 

Can you show us the evaluation, the study, that measures the 

tax generated from ethanol versus the economic benefits which 

could be generated from increased production and job creation 

if this tax were re-evaluated? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, undoubtedly, as with 

any industry, there is spin-offs in economic development from 

producing industries. I guess my question to the member 

opposite would be: how much would she spend on this 

subsidy? Would she spend 100 million, or would she spend 150 

million? Would she spend 200 million? Would she take it from 

education? Would she take it from health care, or where would 

she take it from? And that I guess is a question to you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Surely, Mr. Minister, you have done the 

research, and you can tell the people of this province that your 

government is making the proper decision. Today your 

Premier, as well as all of the members of your caucus, received 

a letter from the Saskatchewan business coalition saying that 

they are concerned with the pessimism, the frustration, and the 

anger that has grown throughout this province, that we need to 

visualize a positive, realistic, clear picture of the economic 

future in this province. 

 

And they state that we not only need fiscal responsibility and 

jobs, especially job creation through what they cite as positive 

tax and regulatory environment. I would suggest you read the 

letter that came out today. 



May 5, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1455 

You and your colleagues fail to realize that if this province is 

going to diversify, if its economy is going to recover, it has to 

create an atmosphere which is competitive with other 

jurisdictions. It's been 18 months since you were elected, and 

everyone's been waiting to see evidence of your priorities in the 

economic development strategies of this province. 

 

Is ethanol production a priority in your government's rural 

economic strategy? And if it is not, please tell us what is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the Minister of 

Agriculture for allowing me to answer this question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the Leader of the Liberal Party 

that the letter that she refers to probably has done more to harm 

the confidence, the emerging confidence and optimism in the 

province of Saskatchewan than anything that's been done in the 

last 18 months. This is a letter which does not face up to 

reality. 

 

And if the Leader of the Liberal Party is saying, that in her 

words, following the tone of that letter, there should be a 

proper taxation and regulatory regime into place, namely, 

translated another way, for the mining association, when we're 

closing down hospitals or converting hospitals and going into 

the wellness model and making changes to the education 

system, if that's exactly what the Liberal leader is saying, I say 

that is not the direction the people of Saskatchewan want. 

 

I'd also say, all that the Liberal leader has to do is take into 

account statements which are made by other people in this 

province. For example, Mr. Kehoe from Swift Current, with 

respect to the Spar industries. Quote: Our company sells all 

over North America, and we chose Saskatchewan for the cost 

advantages, the quality of life, and the quality of people. End 

quote. 

 

There are many business people who have the highest degree 

of confidence and optimism. And it's about time the Liberals 

and the Conservatives joined us and the business community. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — You know, in the time that we've been 

waiting for you, Mr. Premier, to implement your economic 

development strategy for Saskatchewan, the province has been 

operating at a net job loss, which is outlined in this letter, 

signed by the head of the Canadian Federation of Independent 

Business, the Prairie Implement Manufacturers Association, 

the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, Saskatchewan 

Construction Association, Saskatchewan Home Builders' 

Association, who are calling upon you, sir, to do what will 

provide a clear, positive vision and restore faith in the province 

so our future, and I quote, "can be bright." 

If you have a reverse economic development strategy, it is 

working, sir. If not, I am asking you today: when is your 

government going to get into the job creation mode? Because 

right now we're at a 16,000 loss — net loss — compared to 

what you had outlined in your budget for what we need in this 

province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 

Liberal Party, picking up the words of the Saskatchewan 

Mining Association, as a typical Liberal Party in parroting it, 

adopts a prediction and a statement which I do not concur in at 

all. 

 

And I want to tell you neither does the business community. If 

you travel around the province of Saskatchewan, individual 

business leaders are telling you that for the first time they have 

begun to feel that we have turned the corner. They feel a sense 

of optimism. We finally got the finances of this province 

finally under control. 

 

We've got a game plan set out in the partnership paper, a 

partnership paper which has been reviewed twice. We've got an 

action committee of business leaders province wide who are 

directing the strategy of growth. And I say that everybody in 

the province who has assessed it, whether it's the Conference 

Board of Canada or the the Royal Bank, predicts modest 

growth and even exceptional growth in the Canadian context 

for the year 1993 — everybody — except these people, some 

of these people, and you, the Leader of the Liberal Party. 

 

An Hon. Member: — And these. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Yes, that's right. You point to those 

people. Those five. And I'm saying that you have to understand 

that those people do not speak for the business communities. 

The ordinary business people, the small-business people have 

hope and confidence for the first time in 10 years, and you 

should join on that bandwagon. 

 

School Closures 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question 

is to the Minister of Education. Madam Minister, your 

government has taken the absolute power to unilaterally cut 

health care in this province and now it appears that education is 

your next target. 

 

Madam Minister, school boards throughout Saskatchewan are 

currently finalizing their budgets for the coming year. And 

because of your cut-backs, this news is very grim. Courses are 

being cut, whole grades in some schools are being dropped, 

and teachers are being laid off. 

 

Madam Minister, your government started the wellness 

program by promising not to close any schools, and we know 

that's not true. In fact even the Premier admits to closing 

hospitals now. Perhaps you could start with a little more 

honesty than your colleague and tell this Assembly how many 

schools have closed under your administration and how many 

are scheduled for closure in the next two years. 



1456 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1993 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, as the member opposite 

knows, that kind of decision is made at the local level by the 

local school boards. This year it is projected that approximately 

13 schools will close. The year of highest school closings in the 

last decade was in the last year of your administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam 

Minister, the last decade was pretty well the entire time that 

this government was in power. How about before that in the 

1950s when the previous CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation) government was in power. There were a lot of 

school closures, Madam Minister. 

 

Madam Minister, according to the SSTA (Saskatchewan 

School Trustees Association) there will be . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. I would ask both 

sides to just tone it down a bit so we can . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — What do you mean, both sides? 

 

The Speaker: — Both sides, and particularly the member from 

Rosthern. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam 

Minister, according to the SSTA, as many as a dozen or more 

schools will be closed, and that's just this year. How many will 

be closed next year, because next year's cuts are going to be 

even more severe? 

 

Madam Minister, all of the areas of government spending, all 

the areas where government is spending money, Canadians 

identify education as being the most important and the most 

vital to this country's future. Yet here in Saskatchewan the 

government seems to have a different set of priorities. Your 

government is content to allow our education system to 

deteriorate and become second class compared to other 

provinces, and you are content to see those young people who 

do receive an education forced to leave because all the good 

jobs and the opportunities will be in other provinces. 

 

What are you doing to address this problem, Madam Minister, 

and why should Saskatchewan parents be content with a 

second-rate education system and limited job opportunities for 

their children? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I would certainly like to 

reinforce for the member opposite that education is a very high 

priority for this government. I think in terms of the future 

funding, the education system for the future leaders of our 

province could have been given more consideration while the 

previous administration was spending money so freely and 

building up the debt that we would have to 

deal with. 

 

I want to say that it's been a continuing trend, as members 

opposite know, for the shift of the demographics and the rural 

population from rural to urban in Saskatchewan. But what we 

have done is this year, for example, we have changed the 

funding formula so that there are approximately 80,000 rural 

students, $78 million additional money goes out to rural 

Saskatchewan because the per pupil grant is higher for . . . if 

they're not interested in the answer. The per pupil grant is 5 per 

cent larger for a rural student. We recognize transportation 

costs fully for bussing. We have the sparsity factor for sparsely 

populated areas and the small schools factor, and a formula that 

cushions the funding when there is an enrolment decline so that 

there is a strong support for the education system in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And when you look . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Madam Minister, the extra funding as 

you described that you were talking about were there in the 

previous decade. But you've cut education by 2 per cent this 

year and 4 per cent for next year. 

 

According to the SSTA, what this amounts to for this year is 

300 less teaching positions and 150 support staff that will be 

eliminated. And next year it will be even worse because the 

cuts will be doubled. 

 

According to Craig Melvin of the SSTA, you are creating two 

classes of citizens in this province, just like your government 

did with health care. And he says, and I quote: we have to offer 

the full service program for children no matter where they are 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Madam Minister, your cuts are making that impossible. 

Why are you telling people in smaller communities that the 

education of their children is less important than the children of 

Saskatoon or Regina? Why is your government so intent on 

creating two classes of citizens when it comes to health care 

and education? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, we do not subscribe to 

the theory of divide and conquer like the previous 

administration did, pitting rural against urban people in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — I have outlined some of the additional 

supports that we are providing for rural schools. The 

cornerstones of our education policy in this province are equal 

opportunity to all students no matter where they live and 

equality in taxation. 



May 5, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1457 

If you will look in the budget for the upcoming year, you will 

see that there has been an emphasis put on distance education 

initiatives so that full courses will be available even to small 

instructional groupings in rural areas, to make sure that when 

they enter the post-secondary system, that rural students are on 

a level playing-field with urban students. 

 

We recognize the value of investing in the future citizens of 

this province through our education system. We wish that you 

had had the same respect when you spent all the money. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 63 — An Act to amend The Fuel Tax Act, 1987 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

amend The Fuel Tax Act be now introduced and read for the 

first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 64 — An Act to amend The Education and Health 

Tax Act 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

amend The Education and Health Tax Act be now introduced 

and read for the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 65 — An Act to amend The Corporation Capital 

Tax Act 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

amend The Corporation Capital Tax Act be now introduced 

and read for the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 66 — An Act to amend The Income Tax Act 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

amend The Income Tax Act be now introduced and read for the 

first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 67 — An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue 

Sharing Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that The Municipal 

Revenue Sharing Amendment Act be now introduced and read 

the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

Bill No. 68 — An Act respecting Financial Arrangements 

for Urban Parks 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that The Urban 

Parks Financial Arrangements Act, 1993 be now introduced 

and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 69 — An Act to amend The Assessment 

Management Agency Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that The 

Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 1993 be 

now introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, 

I rise to ask leave to make a statement of interest to all 

members of the House with respect to teachers. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

National Teacher Appreciation Day 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, during National Teacher 

Appreciation Day we take time to thank those dedicated men 

and women who play such an important role in shaping our 

children's lives. 

 

Today's society presents teachers with many new and 

challenging situations. At one time a teacher's focus was almost 

exclusively on academic instruction; now teachers are often 

called upon to deal with issues related to health and nutrition, 

family violence, neglect, substance abuse, illiteracy, and many 

others. We have come to rely on teachers to address the 

broader needs associated with learning and try to ensure that 

those needs are met. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the Assembly to join me in thanking the 

over 12,000 Saskatchewan teachers who play an integral role in 

the development of today's youth and tomorrow's leaders. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

join with the minister in thanking teachers on Teacher 

Appreciation Day. We realize how important it is that teachers 

provide the future for our children in educating them so that we 

can develop and build this province into the place that we wish 

to have it. 

 

And teachers are very important in this because they instil in 

our youth their knowledge and their values, along with their 

ministers and their parents at home. 



1458 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1993 

And as a group, this is how we build society, Mr. Speaker, and 

I would like to thank the teachers for their contribution to our 

society. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would 

like to join with the hon. member. 

 

A lot of people I think in this Assembly had a profession of 

teaching before coming here. And although a lot of people 

recognize me as a psychologist, I did have a fairly lengthy 

career as a teacher, set up all the self-contained learning 

disability classrooms in the city of Saskatoon as well as the 

learning assistance centre, which is a rural-urban service 

delivery system for children with learning problems and 

behaviour problems, and then a program for chronically truant 

high school students. 

 

All of the people that I worked with as colleagues were 

astonishingly hard-working and committed people, probably 

not dissimilar to yourself, Mr. Speaker, when you were a 

teacher. And I think, too, that we forget what assistance there 

has been from teacher assistants as well as clerical staff in 

schools that really make the place what it is. 

 

So I too would like to congratulate those people who work on 

behalf of not just children in this province, but all of us while 

they're caring for our children. I think we should applaud them. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 58 — An Act to amend The Northern 

Municipalities Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to move 

second reading of Bill No. 58 — An Act to amend The 

Northern Municipalities Act. The Northern Municipalities Act 

is a key Act that provides for independent local governments in 

the North. This Act sets forth the powers and the duties of 

northern towns, villages, hamlets, and settlements. The Act is 

in some ways similar to The Urban Municipality Act, 1984, but 

with changes where necessary to reflect the needs of northern 

communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it has been a number of years since the last major 

package of amendments to The Northern Municipalities Act. In 

this time there have been a number of changes to The Urban 

Municipality Act, 1984. Therefore, the Bill before you contains 

provisions which for the most part are required to restore 

similarities between the two Acts where applicable. 

 

(1445) 

Northerners have asked through resolution passed at SUMA 

(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) that 

corresponding changes be made to The Northern Municipalities 

Act, where appropriate, to keep it up to date. Several of the key 

amendments included in this Bill deal with northern 

settlements petitioning for binding by-law votes and fire 

protection. 

 

Today there are 27 incorporated municipalities in the North. To 

further the establishment of incorporated municipalities, it is 

proposed that new communities initially be formed as hamlets 

rather than northern settlements that have only advisory status. 

This will insure that communities being set up have an 

adequate population and assessment base. Up until now, 

legislation has allowed for the granting of northern settlement 

status to some areas having quite small populations and having 

very limited existing or potential tax base. 

 

For new communities to form as northern hamlets, they will 

have to meet the population and assessment criteria included in 

this Act. This amendment will in no way affect the status of 

current northern settlements. They continue with the same 

function as before. And when the criteria is met, on request 

they may be raised to northern hamlet status. 

 

An amendment respecting petitions will change the number of 

signatures required to force a binding vote on an issue in a 

northern municipality. A similar amendment is being made to 

The Urban Municipality Act, 1984 and the requirement for 

signatures will parallel that required to force a provincial vote 

under The Referendum and Plebiscite Act. 

 

After consultation with northern municipalities we are putting 

in an amendment to clarify that municipal funds are to be used 

for municipal purposes. A few northern municipalities have 

encountered difficulties as a result of making loans for 

non-municipal purpose. With economic times being difficult, it 

is imperative that protection be put in to protect the taxpayer in 

the community from misdirection of revenue needed to provide 

local services. 

 

Amendments are also included that complement the passage of 

The Fire Prevention Act, 1992. They include allowing for the 

issuing of orders to enforce local fire protection by-laws and 

allowing for a wider range of emergency services to be 

provided in conjunction with the fire services. 

 

Other amendments included in this Bill are as follows: 

allowing the use of the term "councillor" interchangeably with 

the term "alderman" for northern municipality council 

members; updating the conflict of interest provisions; 

fine-tuning the dangerous dog provisions; strengthening 

authority to enforce orders; ensuring adequate authority for 

grants to northern municipalities; allowing custom work to be 

done by municipalities; and broadening authority for 

intermunicipal agreements. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in 



May 5, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1459 

supporting second reading of this Bill which updates and 

enhances the legislation respecting northern municipalities. 

 

I move second reading of An Act to amend The Northern 

Municipalities Act. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

followed with interest the comments made by the minister 

regarding the Bill before us, Bill No. 58. And as the minister 

was indicating . . . and certainly we will take a moment just to 

follow up and make certain that indeed the comments and the 

suggestions that have been made by the minister, the fact that 

they have been — I'm not sure if I should use the term lobbied 

— but have been encouraged by northern municipalities to 

initiate some of the changes in The Northern Municipalities 

Act to bring it more into focus with today's age. 

 

What I was thinking as the minister was talking here, the 

minister had indicated that an amendment is going to be 

brought forward that is going to provide some limitations, or if 

I understand it correctly, basically indicating any funds that are 

raised under municipal levies are to be used for municipal 

purposes. 

 

And I can appreciate what the minister and the government are 

looking at there, as certainly many communities over the years 

as they've had funding have possibly indicated or assessed or 

placed funding in other places other than direct municipal 

responsibility, and at times have found themselves on the short 

end looking for more municipal funds. And in a day and age 

when the taxpayers have basically said we've had enough and 

it's time to hold the limit, it's probably appropriate. 

 

And I trust that in bringing forward this amendment, it's an 

amendment that has also been agreed to by groups in the 

northern municipalities or that will be affected by this 

legislation. 

 

I'm sure that no one will argue the point that there shouldn't be 

some guidelines set out. And it almost goes along with the 

same guidelines that have been suggested by taxpayers across 

this province about provincial governments bringing deficit 

financing or budgets . . . or I mean a Bill in that restricts 

governments to operate within their means. 

 

So maybe this is the start of a purpose or a goal in mind down 

the road where governments will all be living within their 

means. So in order to allow my colleague to take a little closer 

look at the Bill, I will move to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 59 — An Act to amend the Education Act (No. 2) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, The Education Act is the single most important statute 

governing Saskatchewan's kindergarten to grade 12 school 

system. It deals with 

the structure, powers, and duties of boards of education. It 

specifies the powers and duties of the minister. It also 

addresses a wide range of matters related to school staff, 

programs, and facilities. 

 

The Act needs to be updated on a regular basis. The current 

version was enacted in 1978. Since then we have seen many 

changes in our school system. 

 

A regular update of the Act serves three purposes. It deletes 

sections which have become obsolete. It allows us to revise 

provisions which are no longer appropriate or accurate. And 

finally, it allows us to include provisions which address 

emerging issues. Mr. Speaker, the Bill before us serves all three 

of these purposes. I'd like to highlight the major items which I 

think would be of interest to the members of the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, home-based education or home schooling, as it is 

often called, has existed in Saskatchewan for many years. 

However there has been no clear legislative basis for this 

practice. In addition, there has been no effective mechanism 

through which public education authorities could approve and 

monitor home-based education programs. 

 

In recent years the absence of an appropriate legal and 

administrative framework has become something of a problem 

for all concerned. These problems have been highlighted by a 

number of court cases. These establish very clearly that in 

Canada parents have a legal right to educate their children at 

home, in accordance with their conscientious beliefs. 

 

In the spring of 1991, Saskatchewan Education established an 

advisory committee on home-based education. This committee 

included representatives from the major public education 

organizations and from home-based educators. The committee 

submitted its report last fall. The report included 

recommendations for a better organized set of laws and 

procedures on home schooling. Despite the widely varying 

perspectives of the committee members, every one of the 

recommendations had unanimous support. 

 

In other words, Mr. Speaker, this report is consistent with the 

way in which we've developed education policy in this 

province since day one. We've done so in the Saskatchewan 

tradition by talking to and listening to those affected, and 

working with them to define common ground that we can all 

comfortably stand on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill includes several new provisions which 

are needed to implement the advisory committee's 

recommendations. A definition is provided of a home-based 

education program, something the Act did not previously 

contain. It is defined as a program initiated and directed by 

parents in the pupil's home. 

 

Provision is made for home-based education programs to be 

registered. This means students 



1460 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1993 

receiving instruction at home can now be given clear legal 

status. 

 

Under the Act, boards of education will now be required to 

establish local policies for the registration and administration 

of home-based education. 

 

The Act has always contained a section listing reasons for 

which students can be exempted from attending school. This is 

being amended to include pupils who are receiving instruction 

in a registered home-based instruction program. 

 

Another section of this Bill will give immunity from liability to 

public education officials who are required to deal with 

home-based education programs. This immunity reflects the 

belief that parents who choose to educate their children at 

home must be responsible for the operation and outcomes of 

the education programs for their children. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, this Bill will give the minister and 

Lieutenant Governor in Council the necessary authority to deal 

with home-based education through policy and regulation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to emphasize that these new measures are 

not intended to promote home-based education. I should also 

emphasize that they do not formally recognize home-based 

education as an equal alternative to school attendance. Rather, 

the new provisions simply recognize that home-based 

education is a fact of life in this province and across Canada. 

Moreover, the existence of home-based education is supported 

by Canada's Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 

 

The amendments reflect the balance of interests between the 

state, parents, and pupils. They mean that each of the main 

parties recognizes the other's right to exist. They give us a 

legislative base for regulating home-based education in an 

organized, constructive way. 

 

I have met, Mr. Speaker, representatives of the organization for 

home-based . . . parents that are teaching their children at 

home. And this is a very difficult job to do. They are very 

dedicated people and their organization is doing an exceptional 

job in representing their interests to us. And I think it's 

reflected in this Bill. 

 

The Education Act was originally drafted — to turn to another 

significant aspect of the Bill — at a time when the federal 

government through the Department of Indian Affairs was 

responsible for virtually all matters relating to education for 

native students. 

 

The current legislation reflects that. It makes no provision for 

direct interaction between Indian bands themselves and 

Saskatchewan school divisions. Clearly this is no longer 

appropriate. More and more Indian bands in the province are 

assuming direct responsibility for the education of Indian 

students. 

 

This Bill includes several amendments which will 

allow Indian bands and boards of education to enter into 

agreements with one another. These agreements could address 

matters such as tuition arrangements, capital agreements, and 

agreements for the joint management of school facilities and 

programs. 

 

In short, these amendments will make it easier for Indian bands 

and local boards to cooperate in delivering programs to Indian 

students. This will benefit everyone — the students, band 

officials, and local board officials. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to mention several other features 

of this Bill that help to bring it more up to date. 

 

A number of sections have been amended to keep their 

terminology consistent with the language associated with the 

core curriculum. This was not previously the case because core 

is a relatively new undertaking. 

 

In addition, several sections have been amended to delete 

references to superintendents. Within the meaning of the Act, 

superintendents were individuals employed by the department 

to oversee school divisions. Every school division now has its 

own locally employed director of education. There is no longer 

a need for the department to employ superintendents or for The 

Education Act to make any mention of them. 

 

A new provision is being added to provide an explicit penalty 

for the illegal operation of an independent school. This is 

needed to complete the legislative and policy framework for 

independent schools which has been put in place over the past 

several years. 

 

A provision has also been added to clarify the status of the 

local board of trustees for a school once the school has closed 

and the local board no longer has a role to play. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I stated at the outset, this Bill serves three 

purposes: it eliminates obsolete provisions; revises those that 

need it; and adds new measure to address the issues of our day. 

The amendments in this Bill will help to ensure that The 

Education Act remains an accurate and up-to-date reflection of 

our provincial school system. 

 

I am therefore pleased to move that Bill No. 59, An Act to 

amend The Education Act, be now read a second time. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 

listening to the minister I'm glad to hear that the government 

has certainly taken the time to look at the recommendations. I 

guess the one major area that most of the people in my area that 

are involved in home-based school programs and other 

individuals I've talked with have strongly indicated is that they 

would like to have some guidelines and some regulations in 

place that they can look at, that they can be involved with, that 

they can be administered 



May 5, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1461 

under. So that at the end of the day as they've educated their 

children, they can feel quite confident that the school program 

they've offered will be acceptable in other jurisdictions, and 

that their children have reached a certain degree of education 

that is not only acceptable but gives them the opportunity to 

move out into the world. 

 

(1500) 

 

As the minister has indicated, I believe the government appears 

to have and the minister has taken the time to take a very close 

look at the recommendations, and we as well would like to take 

a bit of time to review the Bill. 

 

I guess the one other concern that comes up and will continue 

to be raised by individuals who choose to look at private 

schooling for their children or home school-based program is 

the fact of taxation, and most of the individuals in my area 

would certainly be happy to at least have local governments 

and the provincial government take into consideration even just 

the property tax, education component of the property tax and 

whether that can be used as . . . 

 

The fact of even through home-based schooling, it costs some 

money. And securing books and curriculum material, it costs 

them as well, and they have to do it out of their pocket. And I 

think that's an area that has been addressed, will continue to 

rise, and maybe it's an area that we should be taking a closer 

look at. 

 

But at the present time, I would like to give my colleague an 

opportunity to take a closer look at the Bill; therefore I move 

adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 61 — An Act to amend The Vital Statistics Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of The Vital 

Statistics Amendment Act, 1993. 

 

By way of background, Mr. Speaker, the Uniform Law 

Conference of Canada has provided each province in Canada a 

draft of a model vital statistics Act. Provinces in turn were then 

invited to review their own legislation in light of this 

non-binding model Act. With respect to Saskatchewan's vital 

statistics legislation, as a result of the model, two areas were 

recommended for change. 

 

The first amendment, Mr. Speaker, in this Bill removes 

therefore distinctions based upon the marital status of parents 

with respect to the naming of children and the recording of the 

father's particulars on the birth record. Under current 

legislation, if the parents are married to each other, the child is 

given the father's surname or the mother's surname or a 

hyphenated surname comprised of the surnames of both mother 

and the father. Also both parents' particulars are put on the 

birth record automatically. 

However, Mr. Speaker, currently if the parents are not married 

to each other, the child is registered in the name of the mother, 

and the father's particulars are not placed on the birth record. 

The father's particulars will only be placed on the birth record 

if the mother and a person acknowledging himself to be the 

father jointly request this in writing. 

 

Upon receipt of such a request, the child can also then be 

registered either under the name of the mother, surname of the 

father, or a hyphenated surname comprised of the surnames of 

both. And in the circumstance upon the marriage of a child's 

parents subsequent to the birth, the birth record of that child 

then is re-registered to show the parents as being married. 

 

Mr. Speaker, rather than having the marital status of parents as 

the criteria by which a child is registered, the amendment 

before us would remove this distinction. It places primary 

responsibility on the parents to have both of their particulars 

placed on the birth record and then to determine the name 

under which the child will be registered. 

 

The second amendment, Mr. Speaker, deals with the choice of 

names under which a newborn may be registered. At present 

the child can only be registered either under the surname of the 

mother, the surname of the father, or a hyphenated surname 

comprised of the surnames of both mother and the father. This 

amendment would allow the parents to choose virtually any 

appropriate surname for the child, written in the Roman 

alphabet, which could reflect their personal, cultural, or 

religious beliefs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one further amendment will also revise the 

definition of stillbirth to make it consistent with the definition 

that is being used by physicians throughout the province. This 

was a change requested by the College of Physicians and 

Surgeons of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe these amendments are positive because 

they represent decreased intrusiveness into matters that are 

essentially personal. They will also decrease the probability of 

human rights and/or Ombudsman complaints regarding 

discrimination on the basis of marital status. 

 

And lastly, Mr. Speaker, these amendments will bring 

Saskatchewan legislation into line with that of other provinces, 

particularly British Columbia and Nova Scotia, where it has 

been demonstrated to work satisfactorily. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I hereby move second reading of The 

Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 1993. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to give 

my colleague, the member responsible for the health issues, to 

just peruse the Bill and become a little more informed, I would 

move that we adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 



1462 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1993 

Bill No. 62 — An Act to amend The Medical Profession Act, 

1981 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

am pleased now to stand to move second reading of The 

Medical Profession Amendment Act, 1993. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this amendment Act proposes a series of small 

changes to the Act, and these changes will better reflect the 

current practices of the College of Physicians and Surgeons in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the first change is that the college wants to 

increase its council members' terms from two to three years and 

to clarify how council vacancies are filled. The college feels 

that it will manage its responsibilities better with more 

experienced council members. 

 

Two changes are intended to clarify the Act's linkage to the 

by-laws, specifically those by-laws concerned with the 

definition of professional misconduct and how physicians 

change from inactive to active status. For example, while the 

Act has a general definition of professional misconduct, the 

by-laws are more specific. The college wants to make sure that 

someone reading the Act will be aware that there are also 

by-laws on the topic. No changes, Mr. Speaker, are envisioned 

to the current by-laws. 

 

Mr. Speaker, three related amendments will allow the 

executive committee to act on behalf of the council when the 

council cannot meet to handle the referral of discipline matters. 

For example, when an investigation report is completed on a 

physician, the council, or the executive committee in council's 

absence, can refer it on to the discipline committee. This will 

help prevent delays in conducting hearings into misconduct or 

incompetence. 

 

Another change related to improving the efficiency of the 

disciplinary process is to allow the college to operate a number 

of discipline hearing committees at one time. This reflects the 

current practice of the college, as it was not realistic to expect 

one committee to handle all hearings into complaints. It would 

be simply too demanding a workload for one committee which 

would of course result in considerable delay for the 

complainant and the physician. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the college's disciplinary hearings are currently 

open to the public and the media. However, some cases are 

sensitive in that they might deal with allegations of sexual 

misconduct. In such cases the college wants to be able to 

protect the identity of the person or witnesses who might have 

been mistreated or witnessed the misconduct. In these cases the 

college would be able to apply to the court to prevent the media 

from reporting the name of the person or relevant witnesses. It 

will then be up to the court to decide whether the person's name 

or witnesses' names should or should not be reported. 

 

While the situation does not arise very often, it is a positive 

move to protect someone who comes 

forward from being publicly identified and possibly ostracized. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when a decision has been made by a discipline 

hearing committee, the council of the college may assess a 

variety of penalties including the costs related to the 

investigation and hearing. An amendment will be made to 

clarify the costs that can be assessed, consistent with recent 

court decisions on such matters. 

 

A similar change is being made to clarify how notices of 

hearings and such are served. When it is impractical to serve 

documents, the college may apply to the court to rule that the 

documents are served. This might arise when the physician 

attempts to avoid service by leaving the province for a period 

of time. 

 

The final amendment related to the discipline process is to 

require a physician who appeals a discipline matter to pay for 

the transcript of evidence. At the present time the college 

absorbs this cost on behalf of the appealing physician. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a further amendment proposed by this Bill is one 

which will eliminate the automatic recognition of U.S. (United 

States) medical examinations for licensing purposes. This 

amendment recognizes that the U.S. exams referred to in the 

current Act, the federation of medical licensing exams, and the 

National Board medical exams will be phased out later this 

summer and replaced by one new examination, the United 

States Medical Licensure Exam. The change will also prevent 

claims being made against the college that it is favouring 

foreign graduates who happen to have taken the U.S. exams. 

 

So this amendment, Mr. Speaker, will treat all physicians — 

Canadian and foreign — the same. They will all need to pass 

the Medical Council of Canada qualifying examination and 

receive the licentiate of the Medical Council of Canada to 

receive permanent licensure in Saskatchewan. This is 

consistent with the licensure requirements in other provinces. 

 

The licensure change will make it somewhat more difficult for 

U.S. physicians to be licensed in Saskatchewan; however the 

college only receives three or four applications per year from 

these physicians. 

 

Mr. Speaker, provision is contained in the current Act to 

grandfather or to grandmother, in some cases, physicians who 

may have been registered and licensed pursuant to previous 

requirements related to the U.S. exams. The exceptions would 

be physicians who have not paid their fees or who were 

expelled from the college for reasons of misconduct or 

incompetence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the college has been consulted extensively on 

these changes and is supportive of them. Some physicians may 

express reservations about having to pay for transcripts of 

evidence and not 



May 5, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1463 

having physicians' names included in the non-publication order 

amendment; however physicians' names are already able to be 

published and therefore this amendment maintains the current 

situation for physicians. 

 

And so with that, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The 

Medical Profession Amendment Act, 1993. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I listen 

to the minister bringing forward the reasoning for The Medical 

Profession Amendment Act, Bill No. 62, I believe I observed, 

or heard the minister talking about a number of changes that 

will be brought in place, put in place, especially to address 

misconduct by medical professionals. And the minister I think 

indicated that the college was extensively talked to or discussed 

. . . and some of the changes were brought forward. 

 

I'm certain that if the college was talked to and they brought 

forward recommendations on this, that at least the minister and 

the department would have taken time to hear and follow up on 

these recommendations. And certainly a number of the issues 

that were raised by the minister have been concerns that have 

been part of the medical profession over a period of time. 

 

I trust that as the Act moves forward, we're able to alleviate 

some of the concerns out there, as well as providing protection 

for the general public. 

 

At this time, Mr. Speaker, I believe I will just move to adjourn 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1515) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 21 — An Act to amend The Labour-sponsored 

Venture Capital Corporations Act 

 

The Chair: — I would ask the minister to please introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, I would be pleased to 

introduce my staff. First of all, Denise Gustavson to my right 

and Peter Phillips to my left. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, first of 

all, welcome to your staff as well. I guess any time the 

government brings forward a piece of legislation that helps 

people or encourages people to invest in the province of 

Saskatchewan, the official opposition feels that this is the right 

direction and a positive step. 

 

Equity investments in Saskatchewan companies is a step in the 

right direction by the government, any government. Now if we 

could just get you, Mr. 

Minister, to look at all areas for equity investments, like Crown 

corporations. Share offerings really aren't that bad. I think the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan support them. 

 

And I just wondered if you might care to comment on that 

before we allow this to move forward. We don't feel that we 

have any sharp objections to this unless you raise something at 

this time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — No, I think not, Mr. Chairman. I 

think this Bill, as the member from Kindersley expresses, is 

very straightforward. Basically it does, as my staff have 

indicated to me, three main things. One, it harmonizes with 

federal regulations, which is necessary in order for the program 

to work properly; it makes the type A investments more 

feasible; and also adds some compliance features that make the 

program work easier. 

 

The member raises the issue of the role of Crown corporations 

and other investment tools that we may think of. And I want to 

be clear to him that there are advantages obviously within the 

private sector of having tools and instruments for private-sector 

investment, and we've got no qualms with that; in fact we try to 

strengthen at every turn those programs that we believe to be in 

place by the previous government, but at the same time try to 

eliminate the problems that existed in other areas. 

 

And this is not a dogmatic statement; in fact very pragmatic, 

that we believe strongly in the private sector. We believe there 

is a strong role for Crown corporations as we saw the other day 

with SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) expanding 

into Manitoba, and also the cooperative movement where we 

are doing a lot of work with the Wheat Pool and the credit 

union system in order to make the co-op system in the province 

work and generate jobs and generate wealth. 

 

So it's an approach that talks about three main engines of 

economic development and obviously the private sector or 

private investment being an important component of that. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 54 — An Act respecting the Department of 

Economic Development 

 

The Chair: — Order. The minister has been joined by another 

official and I wonder if the minister would introduce his 

official to the committee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairperson, I would like to 

introduce the deputy minister of Economic Development, Mr. 

Frank Hart. 

 

Clauses 1 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 



1464 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1993 

Clause 9 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, we'd 

like to propose an amendment to this clause, clause 9 of the 

printed Bill. And I'll just read the amendment: 

 

 Amend clause 9 of the printed Bill be adding immediately 

after the words "in support of economic development" where 

they appear in clause (f) thereof the following: 

 

 ", provided that no such fee or charge shall be of any effect 

unless and until approved by the Legislative Assembly or any 

committee thereof established for the purpose of reviewing 

such fees or charges". 

 

Mr. Minister, simply what we're asking for here is that the fees, 

any fees that may be attached to this in the future, would be 

approved by the legislature or a legislative committee. I guess 

it goes to the issue of accountability, which I think we all feel 

that a government department should be looked at and involved 

in. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, we feel that this is a very reasonable 

amendment, and we would move it now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I just want to point 

out to the member that the fees and charges referred to here 

would very normally, according to the Department of Justice, 

appear in the regulations that would be attached to the Bill, and 

that it would be in fact very unusual to include them in the 

actual legislation. 

 

And therefore I would just make the argument that we look at 

and consult with those affected ahead of time if any regulation 

changes are going to be made that would affect the fees. But to 

include them in the actual legislation is thought to be just too 

cumbersome and not correct to put them there. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, that would allow the 

fees to be changed or increased without any accountability to 

anyone; no one would know about that — whether they have 

changed or not. And we feel it should be the process of the 

legislative committee or the legislature itself to review all fees, 

or increases of fees, so that the general public is made aware of 

the changes. 

 

So we think that that wouldn't be too cumbersome. There's very 

good reason. People want to know what the fees they're going 

to be charged are and therefore we think that this is reasonable. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I understand what 

the member is trying to achieve here, but I think in many ways 

we have already taken care of that with the announcement as of 

April 1 of the regulatory code of conduct for government 

departments. 

 

And that is that in order for regulations to be changed, that 

there is a grouping of things that have to happen 

before a department can change regulations. And one of them 

is to consult extensively with the stakeholders who will be 

affected. Then after that, of course any regulatory change is 

publicly gazetted and everyone knows it has occurred. 

 

But I think you're right in the sense of letting people know 

ahead of time. And that's why we introduced the code of 

regulatory conduct that makes it necessary for departments, 

before they bring forward regulation changes to cabinet and 

before it's acted on, that a very large degree of consultation has 

to go on in advance. 

 

The other thing that the code of regulatory conduct insists the 

departments do is look at every other option that would avoid 

the changes to the regulation or the increase in fee before they 

come forward to cabinet and have to explain that in advance as 

to what process they went through there. 

 

So I think in many ways we have taken care of the problem that 

you are concerned about, that is that there's consultation and 

the process being made public. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Well, Mr. Minister, while you may feel that, I 

don't share your feelings in that area. I think that the reason 

we're asking for that is so that there is some accountability in 

the legislature or in a legislative committee prior to the fees 

being implemented. 

 

You can consult all you like with whomever you like, but the 

fact remains that if you decide for one reason or another that 

the fees are going to change, increase, there's no accountability 

as far as the legislature is concerned or a legislative committee. 

You will simply go into whomever is affected by this Bill and 

say to them that we are proposing to increase the fees. They 

may say to you, we're not happy about that. And you say, we're 

going to go ahead with it anyway. 

 

So we think that it should be debated on the floor or at the very 

least in a committee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I just want to 

reiterate that we believe that the consultation process that we 

have set in place is much better than what has existed in the 

past. And it would be very unusual for this process to take 

place in the legislature. It hasn't happened in the past, in this 

Act or in other Acts that the previous government brought in. 

 

And what we have done is strengthen the process by 

introducing the regulatory code of conduct. And we will, I'm 

sure, see some very positive results from that, and we've seen 

positive results already. 

 

So I just reiterate that there is a consultative process before 

regulation changes and fees are changed. And following that, 

of course, there's a publication of any of these changes that are 

of necessity gazetted and made public to the population. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 9 agreed to. 



May 5, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1465 

Clause 10 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, we 

have an amendment to clause 10 that I would like to move 

now. We would like to: 

 

 Amend clause 10 of the printed Bill by adding immediately 

after the words "other than an agreement pursuant to section 

6 or 7" where they appear in subsection (2) thereof the 

following: 

 

 "provided that such expenditure has been specifically 

approved by vote in estimates". 

 

I move that now, Mr. Chairman. It again is a call for 

accountability that the spending, any spending that is going to 

be taking place, has to be approved in estimates of spending of 

anything over $10,000. 

 

(1530) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I want to say again 

that the restrictions that the member is trying to inject into this 

Bill would make it very difficult for the government to do 

business or do deals on a regular basis. I mean if you had to 

approve each and every one in the estimates, it would preclude 

the government from doing business for the rest of the year on 

issues that might come up that weren't known about at the time 

the estimates were introduced. 

 

I use the issue of potentially the AECL (Atomic Energy of 

Canada Ltd.) deal between the province and the federal 

government. If it were the case that it had to be debated in 

estimates before it could be approved, obviously that deal then 

would have had to have been put on hold until the next year 

when the estimates could discuss it. 

 

And for that reason there are certain sums of money that 

obviously are included in Economic Development that would 

allow for agreements to be made. And this then is made public 

in the Public Accounts that follow, and so at that point 

members of the legislature have the opportunity to have their 

input. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 10 agreed to. 

 

Clause 11 agreed to. 

 

Clause 12 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I 

would move that clause 12 be amended: 

 

 Amend clause 12 of the printed Bill by adding immediately 

after the words "within or outside Saskatchewan" where they 

appear therein the following: 

 

 "provided that no such grant, loan, guarantee 

or other similar means shall be provided without authority of 

vote in estimates where the grant, loan, guarantee or other 

similar means would have a value greater than $100,000". 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, without getting into 

and repeating words, basically this would do the same thing, 

that is tie the hands of the department or the government in 

making deals that would have a value of greater than $100,000 

in any given year if they had not been discussed in the 

estimates. And obviously there are many such arrangements 

that are made within or outside the province of Saskatchewan 

that would severely restrict economic development in the 

province. 

 

It's fair to say that when these deals are made and 

consummated, they are made public. They would then follow 

in Public Accounts, that the expenditure has to be accounted for 

and made public at that point. So I would make the same 

argument that we will be voting against this amendment. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 12 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 13 and 14 agreed to. 

 

Clause 15 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I am concerned 

about public accountability and disclosure. And while I see that 

under this Act the normal annual report is required, it seems 

that that is all. Mr. Chairman, many people in this province 

have expressed concern with this sort of approach to things 

where the minister can spend millions and only have to give a 

report that tells people very little about how their money is 

spent. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, people in this province as well, in fact 

groups like the Saskatchewan taxpayers' association, want 

better disclosure. They want to know what each agreement, 

each grant, and each example of financial assistance involves 

because it's their money. 

 

Why was there no effort to offer this sort of disclosure in this 

Act so that we can end the speculation and concerns of so 

many people regarding potential waste of government monies? 

And while I realize that there may be some commercial reasons 

for not disclosing everything, there should be better disclosure. 

And I just want to know why there wasn't a better effort made. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to indicate to the hon. 

member that in fact this does greatly enhance the position of 

disclosing what the department is doing. Under the previous 

Act, The Industry and Commerce Act, in fact deals could be 

made with no disclosure. And under the new Act in fact, in 

terms of compliance with the sections of this Bill, in fact 

through order in council or through regulations, complete 

disclosure has to take place. 



1466 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1993 

So in fact what you're referring to here is actually happening. 

And the old Act which would have allowed for a continuation 

of non-disclosure, is being changed here by its replacement 

with this Act, The Department of Economic Development Act. 

And I think what you will see is a much better system of 

disclosure than has been in the Act in previous years. 

 

Clause 15 agreed to. 

 

Clause 16 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I'd 

like to amend clause 16 the following way: 

 

 Amend clause 16 of the printed Bill by adding immediately 

after the words "in support of economic development" where 

they appear in the clause (a) thereof the following: 

 

 ", provided that no such fee or charge shall be of any effect 

unless and until approved by the Legislative Assembly or a 

committee thereof established for the purpose of reviewing 

such fees or charges". 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I want to once 

again tell the hon. member from Kindersley that this goes back 

to our earlier conversation. I think in clause 9 or clause 10 that 

related to fees and the advance notice to people affected by fee 

increases, that under the new regulatory code of conduct that 

applies to all departments including this one, that the 

consultation that you talk about has to take place in advance to 

those changes taking place and coming to cabinet, and then 

upon acceptance by cabinet, then the proper procedure and 

disclosure that takes place. 

 

So this is already happening and it's not needed to put it into 

the Bill. It would make the Bill much more cumbersome. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 16 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 17 to 22 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, before we move on 

to The Heritage Property Amendment Act, I would like to 

thank my officials and members of the opposition for working 

with us quickly and efficiently on these two Bills. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We as well would 

like to thank the officials for coming in and their help this 

afternoon. Thank you. 

 

Bill 31 — An Act to amend The Heritage Property Act 

 

The Chair: — I would ask the Minister of Municipal 

Government to please introduce the officials who are 

with us here today. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Chair, thank you. To my right I have 

Keith Rogers, who is the executive director of the recreation, 

culture division of Municipal Government. Behind me I have 

Frank Korbemaker, and to my left is Dean Clark from the 

heritage branch of the Department of Municipal Government. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 agreed to. 

 

Clause 3 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, we 

wanted to amend clause 3 of the printed Bill: 

 

 by adding immediately after the words "Section 2 is 

amended:" where they appear therein the following 

sub-clause (a): 

 

 "(a) by adding the following clause after clause (d): 

 

 "(d.1) "committee" means such committee of the Legislative 

Assembly as may be established pursuant to the rules and 

procedures of the Legislative Assembly for the purposes of 

scrutinizing and approving proposed non-tax revenues of the 

executive government, or, in the event that no such 

committee is established, means the Standing Committee on 

Public Accounts;"" 

 

and 

 

 (b) by re-lettering existing clauses (a) through (e) as clauses 

(b) through (f). 

 

So moved. 

 

(1545) 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Chair, the amendment is simply not 

compatible with the intent of the Bill. It's hard for us to approve 

this. It simply is out of context completely with the purpose 

and the direction of The Heritage Property Act. We would not 

agree to that amendment. 

 

The Chair: — Order. The amendment as it stands would not 

be accepted by the Chair because it seeks to add things to the 

Bill as opposed to amend things in the Bill. However I am told 

by the opposition that they have further amendments which if 

adopted would then mean that this amendment would be 

consequential and would then conceivably be in order. 

 

So I'm suggesting to the committee — but I'm at the graces of 

the committee — if they will agree to stand consideration of 

this amendment and this clause at this time to move to other 

sections of the Bill and then depending what happens there, we 

may see a need to 



May 5, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1467 

come back to this particular clause. Is that agreed? That's 

agreed. So by agreement then, we'll proceed to Clause 4 of the 

Bill. 

 

Clause 4 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We apologize for the 

confusion on that, Madam Minister. The proposed amendment 

— the first one we proposed — relates to other amendments 

that we are going to be proposing in later clauses. And I'd move 

the first one of those now — clause 4 of the printed Bill: 

 

 Amend clause 4 of the printed Bill by striking out the words 

"for any disposition or class of dispositions that may be made 

pursuant to clause (b), (b.1) or (b.2)" where they appear in 

subclause 3(1)(b.3) as being enacted at clause (a) therein and 

substituting the following: 

 

 "to be proposed for approval by the Legislative Assembly or 

any committee thereof established for the purpose of 

reviewing such fees, royalties or prices, for any disposition or 

class of dispositions that may be made pursuant to clause (b), 

(b.1) or (b.2), and no such fee, royalty or price shall be of any 

effect unless and until so approved". 

 

I move that. 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Chair, this amendment I think 

changes administrative practice across I think the executive 

arm of government considerably. Fees and charges have always 

been set by any department. And these are very minor, 

minuscule fees; they are not of a substantial nature at all. 

 

To come back to the Legislative Assembly every time we 

wanted to know whether we should charge a fee for some 

palaeontological artefact or some minor gemstone, I think 

would result in just a tremendous task on the Legislative 

Assembly. And it would make no sense administratively at all. 

 

We simply feel that that amendment would not enhance at all 

the ability of the branch to perform its duties and we would not 

agree to it. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 4 agreed to. 

 

Clause 5 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, we 

would move to: 

 

 Amend clause 5 of the printed Bill by striking out Section 3.1 

as being enacted therein and substituting the following: 

 

 "3.1(1) Where, in the opinion of the minister, 

 release of information would endanger heritage property or 

interfere with its proper conservation, the minister may, 

pursuant to the provisions of The Freedom of Information 

and Protection of Privacy Act, make a submission to the 

Information and Privacy Commissioner seeking exemption 

from any requirement the minister may otherwise have to 

release such information. 

 

 (2) The Information and Privacy Commissioner shall, in 

considering a submission of the minister made pursuant to 

this section, have due regard for the conservation, 

loss-prevention and protection of heritage property." 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Chairman, on that amendment the 

purpose of that clause is to preserve and protect some of the 

historical sites in Saskatchewan from pillage, I guess, is one 

word that you can use for it. And we want to make sure that 

those sites are maintained for historical purposes. 

 

Anyone wanting to know more information on those sites can 

always go through the freedom of information and access those 

records under due process. But I think it still is a prerogative of 

the minister. If a department in the government perceives that 

it's in the best interest of the people of Saskatchewan to 

preserve those sites, they can say that they will deny public the 

information on the sites. 

 

But it is still the prerogative of those people to go through the 

FOI (freedom of information) to access this information. So we 

would prefer to leave the process that we have in place and 

allow due process to take place under normal affairs and let it 

go through FOI subsequent to the minister's denial. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 5 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 6 to 16 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 3 agreed to. 

 

Clause 17 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — I would like at this time to thank the 

officials from the department for assisting us this afternoon, 

and I would like to thank the opposition for their cooperation. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We too in the 

opposition would like to thank the officials for coming out this 

afternoon and helping to answer the questions. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 52 — An Act respecting Culture and Recreation 



1468 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1993 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Chair, I would like to introduce 

Keith Rogers, our executive director of the culture and 

recreation division of Municipal Government. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, I 

wonder if you could take the time to tell us what problem this 

Bill is trying to address or correct, and are there are any costs 

associated with it to the taxpayer of the province? 

 

The Chair: — I wonder if we might have the cooperation of 

the members. If they want to carry on conversations, they do so 

quietly. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the member 

opposite, the Act had to be changed because The Renewable 

Resources, Recreation and Culture Act under which the 

authority rests now has been repealed. And in that process 

we've reorganized government, and culture and recreation now 

rests within the Department of Municipal Government. 

 

So in that process we had to develop a new Act that would give 

the department and the ministry the authority for programing 

and policy development in the field of recreation and culture. 

There's no cost associated. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

(1615) 

 

Bill No. 27 — An Act to amend The Association of School 

Business Officials of Saskatchewan Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam 

Minister, we realize that the officials that you're dealing with 

here in this Bill want to make these changes. I'm just 

wondering what kind of cost is associated with making this 

name change. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, there wouldn't be any 

cost at all to the taxpayer or the government. I assume the only 

inconsequential costs there would be, would be for their 

association to have new stationery and that type of thing. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Madam Minister, does this association 

receive any government funding whatsoever? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, the answer is no. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

Clauses 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No 21 — An Act to amend The Labour-sponsored 

Venture Capital Corporations Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now 

be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 54 — An Act respecting the Department of 

Economic Development 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move Bill No. 54 

now be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 31 — An Act to amend The Heritage Property Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 

31 be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 52 — An Act respecting Culture and Recreation 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move Bill No. 52 

now be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 27 — An Act to amend The Association of School 

Business Officials of Saskatchewan Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 

27, The Association of School Business Officials of 

Saskatchewan Act, now be read a third time and passed under 

its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 

 

The Chair: — I will ask the minister to introduce the officials 

who are with him here today. 



May 5, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1469 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. The 

members that are here today is my deputy, Clare Kirkland, 

sitting to my left; Myron Herasymiuk, sitting to his immediate 

left; Mr. Anderson, sitting to my immediate right; Don Metz, 

assistant deputy minister; and Colleen Laing, the head of 

finance. 

 

Just a couple things that arose last day that I just want to 

correct . . . not correct, but add. And in going through that 398 

hours of work in compiling the information, I say to the hon. 

member of Maple Creek, the department has indicated that in 

checking it there were three pages in respect to computer 

purchases that should have been included. And so I want to 

send that over to you. 

 

And one other piece of information that the member from 

Rosthern asked for, and that is in respect to the highway count 

in Martensville and beyond. I'll send this over to the hon. 

member from Thunder Creek . . . Morse. I think those are the 

two things that I wanted to add to the information from 

yesterday. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, two 

things I should do to begin with is to pass along a pair of 

compliments. I first of all want to compliment our staff who 

did numerous hours of work preparing the questions and the 

forms that were necessary in order to get the answers that we 

required. And so I want to compliment them on a very 

thorough job in having done all of the work that they did to 

prepare the necessary things that had to be done. 

 

And I also want of course to pass along a compliment to your 

staff for so ably answering the questions and presenting them 

to us. I'm sure that the taxpayers, if they could be aware of 

what all goes into what we're doing here, would be happy to 

know that we have this kind of cooperation and that their 

interests as taxpayers are being looked after in a most judicial 

way. 

 

The questions and the answers that you've provided to us, I've 

gone through them very quickly. There's an awful lot of them 

but I did go through them, and we have picked up a few things 

that we would like to clarify. 

 

The first thing I'd like to ask, Minister, we refer in the 

questionnaire to quite a few manuals that are apparently 

connected. And obviously it appears that there's way too many 

for me to ask you to send them over for me to be able to go 

through them because there just seems like too many volumes 

and too big of an expense. But we wondered if these manuals 

and copies of them are in fact available perhaps in the library 

where everyone who is interested could go in and check, 

myself or anybody else. If not, would it be possible to have 

them put into the library? 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — Yes, that's very true. There are a lot of 

manuals, as you indicated. There is no precise filing in libraries 

or indeed coordinated into a library in Highways as such. Some 

of them are in individuals' departments of it. But I have 

assurance here that if indeed there's a particular manual or 

manual that is 

required, that the department could in fact make it available. 

But we haven't really got a centralized system set up as such, 

and many of the manuals are related to the specific department 

within the department. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. I take it then that what 

you're saying is that you would authorize us to maybe go to a 

department and look through their manual, or perhaps have it 

sent over for a couple of days and then return it so we wouldn't 

have to double the cost of re-manufacturing something that we 

probably wouldn't have to really have for ever or anything like 

that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — I think that if you contact my office with 

a request in respect to a specific manual, then I would 

immediately contact the department. I would appreciate if you 

would come through my office, not for clearance, but just in 

order that I'm apprised of the request. Because then we may 

want to see whether or not we should be making more copies 

available and perhaps making available in libraries. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Well thank you, Minister. That seems like 

fair ball to me. So we'll go along with that commitment and 

check out to see what in fact we may need, as I get a chance to 

peruse these answer sheets a little more closely. 

 

I came upon a list of committees that are listed in the answers. 

And I guess there's four of them that are named. And what I 

wondered was, from my experience, it seems like there would 

be an awful lot more committees that would be than four within 

the department itself. 

 

Now I would like to know why you didn't list the committees 

that work within the department. And could you brief us on 

how many committees would work within the department and 

what the nature of their committee work would be, the 

approximate kinds of time that the employees would be 

spending in these committee meetings, and what types of 

things would they be discussing while they're into that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — Just for clarification there, are you 

asking for a list of all of the internal committees? Our 

expectation, when you asked the question, is those that are 

established by the department outside of . . . essentially outside 

of the department. And that's the information that we were 

giving you. 

 

Yes, there will be a number of internal committees, but I wasn't 

aware that that's information that you wanted. Can you clearly 

indicate what in fact you want? 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. I guess we did have 

one little slip-up in our questions then, because we did want to 

get the internal committees as well as the external. So perhaps 

you could work on delivering them later. If you could commit 

to that, that would serve our needs. 



1470 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1993 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — Yes, that's agreeable. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Okay. Thanks, Minister. In the estimates of 

the costs of things, we have a fair bit of money that we see that 

goes for advertising. We're presuming that most of that 

advertising would be for things like tenders and road weight 

restrictions in the springtime and that kind of thing. 

 

But rather than just having us guess at it, could you clear up, 

you know, where this money is expended? And have you 

reduced those costs at all this year as compared to, say, last 

year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — Yes, I can provide you with that 

particular information. Actually the amount that we are 

spending on communications is relatively the same over the 

years, as I understand. There's some variation. When I take a 

look at the respective years, '85-86 for instance, there's 

850,970; and then it varied to '86-87, there's 788,990. I can 

read all of these right up to the present. But for '92-93 there 

was 642,200; '93-94 the estimate for communications branch is 

596,590, according to my information here. 

 

That is made up of several programs and I'll just itemize a few 

of those for you to indicate the essential costs. The various 

programs in the communication is, for instance, the O Zone, 

and that is the area where there's construction, and getting the 

signing and so on in respect to that, $125,000. 

 

There's another zone, the Snow Zone, $125,000 — this was a 

program that was initiated by the workers under occupational 

safety. The hotline is 2,500; road restrictions, as you indicated, 

6,500. There's a program for salvage of hay of $22,000; ATV 

(all-terrain vehicles), 2,000; other advertising, snowmobile 

safety, 1,000. 

 

And then we have a few others. Official highway map which 

we make out, and I may say that what the department did there 

— there is no expenditure for '93-94 — what they did is really 

produce two years supply and saved a very substantial amount 

of money in doing that. 

 

Annual report is $7,000, and the traffic accident information 

statistics, printing is 20,000. And In Motion, which is sort of a 

internal paper for the department and staff is $12,000. Those 

are the essential make-up of it. 

 

So there's no real large advertising from the standpoint of what 

one ordinary looks at advertising. It's primarily promoting 

those particular specifics that I gave you there. Is that the 

information you wanted? 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Yes, Minister, I understand what you're 

saying. But I do recall that during the election period, members 

of your party went around campaigning on the theory that they 

could reduce advertising in the Department of Highways and 

places like this by up to 80 per cent. And we thought maybe 

you might actually try to prove that you could do that 

somehow by going ahead and bringing out programs where in 

fact you could show some savings. 

 

We never did believe that anybody could accomplish that 

figure. However a target of maybe 30 per cent might have been 

in order. And I think later I will probably move a motion that 

we try to reduce this by 30 per cent, or that in fact we do do 

that. I don't want to do that just now, but I'm going to do it later 

because I think I should put you and your government to the 

test of whether you really mean what you say in the election 

campaign and whether you're willing to go along with trying to 

fulfil your promises to the people of the province. 

 

I want to ask you, Minister, about your own personal travel 

involved with the Department of Highways and the travel of 

your staff members. Where were these monies paid from? Did 

they come out of SPMC, did they come out of somewhere else, 

and could you give us a briefing on where your travels took 

you and what it included. 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — Just in respect to your comments in 

respect to cutting highway advertising costs, certainly we have, 

as I indicated, made a substantial savings in respect to the 

production of maps which was costing something like close to 

100,000. For a two-year supply we got it for $134,000 — very 

substantial. 

 

But when you're thinking of making your motion, I think you 

ought to think as to the various items that I indicated to you in 

the advertising budget. All of them are, I think, fairly essential 

items. And we have, as I indicated, made savings by 

purchasing maps for a two-year period rather than one. 

 

In respect to the question on travel, the minister's expenses, I 

can give you the totals in respect to the in-province travel. And 

it's broken down into accommodation and sustenance, 580.58; 

SPMC air fare is 7,630.35 — that's combined air fare and CVA 

(central vehicle agency). There's a charge in relation to the 

minister's car. Taxi, $7.60; other, 29.29; total, 8,247.82 is the 

total. That is in-province travel. 

 

In respect to out of province: November 16, 17, destination 

Toronto, Ontario — accommodation and sustenance, 169.31; 

travel, 984; total, 1,153.31. That was, by the way, to attend the 

agricultural ministers' meeting with the federal Minister of 

Agriculture in Toronto in November 16, 17. The major 

discussion was the dismantling of the Crow benefit. 

 

February 3 and 4, Victoria, British Columbia: accommodation, 

356.70; travel, 387.71; total, 744.41. That was attending a 

WESTAC (Western Transportation Advisory Council) board of 

directors meeting. 

 

And on March 15, Winnipeg, Manitoba: accommodation and 

sustenance, $40; travel, 496; total, 536. And the Winnipeg 

meeting in Manitoba, I was accompanied by my deputy 

minister, and similarly, I had one member in the Toronto trip. I 

was 



May 5, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1471 

also accompanied by a member of the staff, the assistant deputy 

minister. 

 

The total there then is — for out-of-province — is $2,433.72. 

The Winnipeg meeting was again another meeting of the 

agricultural ministers, western provinces — Manitoba, Alberta, 

and Saskatchewan — along with the federal Minister of 

Agriculture. That was a one-day meeting and again it related to 

the discussion of changing the Crow benefit. 

 

Those are the total . . . for the in-province and out-of-province, 

the total then is 11,319.89 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. I have a question now 

about student hiring and the policy of the Department of 

Highways. I get quite a lot of inquiries from anxious parents 

and anxious students this time of year who are hoping that they 

can find some kind of summer employment that will 

supplement their ability to finance their education again next 

fall. 

 

Do you have a policy in this regard? And if you could briefly 

outline that, and what kind of numbers do you think might be 

available in terms of jobs that people could apply for and who 

would they apply to, those kinds of things. We see a lot of 

students as flag people and that sort of things in the past, and I 

just wonder if you could update people on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — The policy that has been adopted is that 

students are to apply with a Public Service Commission 

application form. And these are available, I take it, at 

universities and technical schools. Those applications, all of 

those applications are then forwarded to the Public Service 

Commission. And what is done there is those names are put 

onto computer and on a random basis they are selected. 

 

If there are positions in the Department of Highways, then 

those are sent over, two or three, three or four names for a 

position . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes. There's usually 

two or three names comes out of the Public Service 

Commission, sent over to the Department of Highways, and 

then a selection is made. They make a selection of the three or 

four that have been randomly sent over to the department. So 

it's completely through the Public Service, over to the 

department, the department then makes the selection of the 

three or four. 

 

I want to say that this gives everybody in the province, every 

student a fair opportunity to get an opportunity to work for the 

Department of Highways or any other departments of 

government. 

 

I think it's commendable that we have put together . . . because 

otherwise there could be political favouritism, and what we 

have tried to do is to remove that and to put it on the basis that 

is fair and equitable to all students. 

 

And I want to say that it has been working fairly well. There 

are several positions each year that the Department of 

Highways make available during the 

construction year for employment for students, and those are in 

the process I guess of being filled at the time now . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, and apparently there's slightly 

more than a hundred positions would be made available. I think 

somewhere in the neighbourhood of 110, when I read it. 

 

But that's the process. The applications go into the Public 

Service and the Public Service then on a random selection — 

they're all put on the computers — in random selection they 

come out, and three or four names are sent over to the 

department and they take a look at them and choose the 

applicant. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Yes, if a student perhaps couldn't find an 

application form, could they phone the Department of 

Highways or something like that? Or is there an easier access? 

Perhaps an out-of-province student might want to apply, or 

something like that. Or do we have them available through our 

MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) office perhaps or 

something? 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — That would be a good idea — to get a 

few application forms into your individual offices. An 

individual can phone to the department. Not to get a job, 

because all you could do is get an application, because it would 

have to go back to the Public Service Commission. Because we 

want this to be fair and give everybody an opportunity to . . . 

not like it has been too often the practice in the past. So that's 

how it would have to work. 

 

But certainly you can contact the Public Service Commission 

and they'll have the application forms. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Well thank you, Minister. I'll congratulate 

you on the program that you've put together, if it in fact works 

as you have explained it. It certainly is commendable that you 

would do it that way. And I know that our students want to be 

treated fairly. 

 

And I think we all know that a man's character and a woman's 

character will never change, but their philosophy often changes 

as life goes by. So those that aren't supporting you today might 

support you some other day. And of course I may not 

necessarily support the same philosophy that my father did. So 

not knowing how people might think in the future, I think that's 

a very commendable way to approach the situation of student 

hiring. 

 

And I will probably just take from Hansard a copy of what 

you've said and send that to some of the folks as an explanation 

of how to go about getting their applications and getting them 

in. That'll be easier than me trying to paraphrase it. 

 

So I thank you for that approach, Minister. And we do 

appreciate it on behalf of the students of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 



1472 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1993 

I have several other questions, but I do want to let some of my 

colleagues in on the questioning. And so I'm going to defer to 

one of my colleagues just for a moment. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I thank my 

colleague, the member from Maple Creek. 

 

Mr. Minister, just recently I sent a letter up to your office. Your 

office staff will be aware of it; possibly the department is aware 

of it as well. It related to hauling or stockpiling gravel for a 

highway project on No. 8, south of Rocanville. That's a paving 

project along that area and a very major concern from the area: 

the fact that the contractor was moving on a grid road — I 

believe it's 601, west of Rocanville — and there were a lot of 

complaints in the area regarding windshield damage. 

 

And I'm not sure, this may not be just an isolated case . . . 

related just to my area, it may happen across the province as 

well. And I appreciate the fact that you took a moment to look 

into it. 

 

But I'm wondering if you could explain what has been done or 

what actions have followed up and what the process is that the 

department takes, or what format the department takes, in 

conferring with contractors when they indeed are forced to 

travel down grid roads. Realizing that these large trucks, with 

the type of rubber they have on, have a tendency to throw 

stones, and certainly vehicles moving by can create a fair bit of 

damage, and that damage also then falls . . . the cost of that 

falls on the taxpayer by SGI. And I'd just like your response on 

that, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — Your specific problem that you brought 

to our attention has been sent to the department. And what the 

department has done is to have a discussion with the contractor 

in respect to that specific concern. 

 

As a further follow-up, because this is a problem that I've had 

in my constituency too, of complaints with respect to that, we 

are now setting up a discussion with the industry to see whether 

we can get a better resolution of problems that develop when 

they're hauling gravel and gravel falls off, flies off, and so on. 

 

So we're working at it. If there's a problem with a specific one, 

let us know; the department will get a hold and contact them, 

see whether or not . . . or what can be done in order to resolve 

if there was damage which was occasioned. 

 

Mr. Toth: — I just wanted to also thank you, Mr. Minister, but 

just remind you and bring to your attention as well the fact that 

as these vehicles are being loaded there's a potential for gravel 

just to sit on the edge of the box and be maybe bounced off and 

what have you. And certainly I think it would be appropriate to 

discuss the movement and the hauling of gravel, and what have 

you, with the industry because they've got tight guidelines. 

 

And I'm sure as they're bidding on some of these 

contracts, probably in a lot of cases because the work has 

significantly decreased over the last few years, contractors out 

there trying to make a living, they're cutting their budgets fairly 

fine, and I'm sure that they want to do everything in their power 

as well to not only honour their contract, but to have the 

general public in mind. 

 

So I think it's only fair and appropriate that we take the time to 

discuss the issue with them and possibly looking at ways . . . 

Tarping will eliminate anything blowing off. It won't quite 

catch what's, say, on the side of a box, but also I guess the 

speed limits is going to have to be something that's discussed, 

especially driving down grid roads. 

 

One other question, Mr. Minister. You did send around a copy 

of projected construction for this year. I took a note of the 

construction projects; unfortunately I didn't see anything on 

Highway 48, Kipling and east. 

 

And I'm wondering where the department is with some of the 

. . . On Highway 48 when you look at it, Mr. Minister, is 

strategically located that it could be a natural means of traffic 

flow from Manitoba, specifically Virden, into the Regina 

market and west, that could alleviate some of the traffic flow 

on Highway No. 1. And I'm wondering if the department has 

taken a long-term view and approach as to how they will be 

looking at further construction on Highway 48. 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — I think the hon. member will recognize 

that we're working under pretty tough financial restraint. And if 

I say so myself, I think you did fairly well in respect to your 

riding. As I look at it: Highway No. 1 resurfacing, Fleming to 

Moosomin; Highway No. 8 resurfacing, Moosomin to 

Rocanville; and Highway No. 9, resurfacing, junction 48 to 

Pipestone Creek, and Highway No 1 seal coat, Moosomin west. 

So we are certainly trying to spread the few dollars around that 

we have. And obviously we are looking constantly at all of the 

highways, and we can't service as much as what we would like. 

 

But what I would encourage you to do . . . and I got into this 

job in September and didn't have the opportunity, but I 

welcome . . . if you send in, in the future, prior to getting into 

the next schedule sort of the essential priority that you have in 

a given riding . . . I know you'll have more than what we can 

facilitate, but sometimes there's an irritant for instance which 

we can correct. I think the member from Wilkie had an irritant 

or one of the farmers, and he contacted me, and we were able 

to resolve it. Sometimes a safety aspect can be corrected. 

 

But all I can say with you is that we constantly are reviewing it. 

It will depend of course on the traffic count and the usage of it, 

and we'd have to take a look at that. So all highways I guess are 

under consideration for the future; we're pretty well set for this 

year. For the future I would ask you to feel free to indicate to 

me early enough so that perhaps we can take a look at the 

priorities in your ridings. 



May 5, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1473 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 

Minister, you have set out a list of different proposals for 

repairing highways or upgrades in bridges, etc., that are all part 

of a federal agreement that you have made. 

 

The people in my area have asked me to talk to you about 

upgrading Highway 13, the Red Coat Trail, which runs through 

this province from the Manitoba border to the Alberta border 

along the very southern edge of this province — actually it runs 

from about Brandon down to Fort Macleod in Alberta — and 

they asked me to approach you to see if there was any 

possibilities of getting some government funding to upgrade 

this road. 

 

They have talked to the MP (Member of Parliament) for the 

area, who has talked to his federal counterparts. The federal 

counterparts said that if the province was prepared to put in 

their 50 per cent of the money, that they would be prepared to 

consider putting in their 50 per cent to do further upgrades on 

this highway at some point. 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — Yes, I know there is a considerable 

amount of determination to improve the Red Coat Trail, No. 13 

Highway. I had the occasion very recently of meeting with the 

association, I believe it was at Eastend, and had a good 

discussion with them. They're a very innovative group in 

attracting tourism. I have to commend them for the effort that 

they're putting into it. 

 

We're very knowledgeable as to where this road goes. They 

also asked me whether or not I could put a little bit of . . . not 

pressure, but at least contact Alberta so that they would at least 

complete that portion of the road so it would take it completely 

to Fort Macleod, I believe it is. So there's a portion that has to 

be upgraded in Alberta. 

 

So that's where that's at. As funds are made available, if we can 

get our finances going, we're trying to do the best as possible. 

We're trying to meet the priorities where the traffic is heaviest. 

Secondly, the federal agreement did really force us to access 

more of our capital funding into the main arteries which they 

consider interprovincial and federal funding, and so to that 

extent. But I can assure the member that we'll take a look at 

that and see what we can do. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. When we talk 

to tourists from across Canada or the U.S. that visit this country 

and they're travelling from east to west through Saskatchewan, 

a large number of them take No. 1 Highway. And yet then they 

turn around and complain that Saskatchewan is boring because 

they've driven No. 1 through here. And it is fairly flat unless 

you take special attention to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . My 

colleague here is disputing the flat part, but when you get west 

further there is a few hills. 

 

When you take 13 Highway, the Red Coat Trail, though, as an 

alternative, you're travelling through a total different geography 

and topography right across the province. You're dealing with 

the Moose 

Mountains in the south-east, Cypress Hills in the west, the Big 

Muddy in the centre, and you go through quite a variety. 

 

And I think that to upgrade this highway would be beneficial to 

our tourist industry to give an alternative to tourists passing 

through this province to take another route that they might find 

a little more scenic than No. 1. The Yellowhead Highway is 

also a good example of a variety of topography. I think we 

need one a little further south, and the Red Coat Trail would fill 

that bill, Mr. Minister. So I would ask that you contact the 

federal people and do enter into negotiations with them on this. 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — I take that under advisement. I will be 

having a meeting in Toronto on May 13 and 14 with the Hon. 

Minister of Transportation. The purpose of it is to further look 

at a real national highway proposal at least, and at that time 

will indicate whether or not they would consider other than 

what they have already in their funding contribution. But so far 

they have only allowed in any of the negotiations or contracts 

is No. 1 Highway, No. 16 Highway, No. 7, and No. 11 from 

Saskatoon to Regina, so that's . . . and a little piece of No. 6 and 

over on 39 to Estevan. That's the extent of what they consider 

the national highway system. 

 

But we can discuss this and to see whether or not there would 

be any assistance that they might give us in that regard. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:02 p.m. 

 

 


