




















































Hansard: March 29, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 687 

 March 29, 1993 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Speaker: -- Yes, why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave I would like 

permission to introduce some guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure this 

evening to introduce to you and through you to members of the 

Assembly a number of Cubs from my constituency.  Seated in 

your gallery, Mr. Speaker, are 24 Cubs from the 87th pack, 

ages 8 to 11 years of age.  They are accompanied by Bev 

Landry, Carl Lazurko, Bob Seiferling, Don Dickson, and 

Martin Bailey. 

 

It's a particular pleasure for me to introduce these Cubs to you 

this evening because I'm an honorary member of this pack.  I 

would look forward to meeting with them after their tour.  And 

as a matter of fact I have their scarf hanging in my constituency 

office.  Some people would like to have my neck in it at the 

moment, but it's very honourably placed on the wall in my 

office. 

 

So I would like to welcome you this evening, and I look 

forward to meeting with you afterwards for some questions.  I 

would ask all members to join with me in welcoming them here 

this evening. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 3 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Simard that Bill No. 3 -- An Act 

respecting Health Districts be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I hear some calls for 

the question.  Mr. Speaker, I respectfully suggest that there's a 

few more words I'd like to say before we do have the question, 

and I'm sure the members want to hear it.  I'm really pleased 

with the gallery that I have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before we stopped for dinner, I was making a few 

remarks about the responsibility that the Health minister seems 

to be abrogating as the Minister of Health and suggesting that 

maybe she should start to take more responsibility for the 

portfolio that she has. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think she needs to stop hiding behind the health 

boards that she is creating and start taking responsibility for 

what the NDP (New Democratic Party) health decisions are. 

Mr. Speaker, further to that, I would say that the big talk of 

community involvement and control is a joke, Mr. Speaker.  

And I would like to enlarge on that just a bit.  I, Mr. Speaker, 

and my colleagues have received letters and phone calls, and 

all of this regarding this very issue we're talking about -- Bill 3, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they're not pleased.  Hospital administrators like 

the boards they already had in place; they're used to working 

with them, and they are worried about losing their facilities.  

Towns and villages who need their health facilities remain 

open . . . to remain open, Mr. Speaker, are also worried.  They 

are worried about which hospitals will close. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they are worried, and I think, Mr. Speaker, for 

good reason.  The Minister of Health makes all of their 

bottom-line decisions, and everyone in this Assembly knows 

that.  That's why she is the minister.  And if she thinks she will 

be able to lay blame everywhere but on herself, Mr. Speaker, I 

suggest that she better think again.  It's time to light the blame 

thrower again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last year, right before the budget, as I mentioned a 

few minutes ago before we went to have dinner, parents outside 

of Beechy high school play were passing out a sheet of paper, 

and I have one with me today, Mr. Speaker.  It's entitled, 

Defend Medicare.  And with your permission, sir, I would like 

to quote another couple of passages from that. 

 

It says . . . and maybe I will read the bottom part of it, Mr. 

Speaker.  It says: 

 

 This leaflet was produced and funded by the members of the 

New Democratic Party. 

 

So this was not partisan on our side of the House, Mr. Speaker.  

These are the NDP talking to their own people.  And part of the 

things they said . . . I read a few into the record, so I won't 

repeat those.  But it says: 

 

 In representations to the Romanow cabinet, NDP federal MPs 

have expressed the party's long-standing opposition to 

medicare premium and user fees, but the Saskatchewan 

government members are refusing to stand by party policies. 

 

Another quote, Mr. Speaker, from the same document: 

 

 There is still time for New Democrats to call the Romanow 

government to order, to insist that the NDP's commitment to 

universal medicare be respected. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, was before the last election.  Here's another 

one: 

 

 To oppose medicare premium and user fees, phone Berny 

Wiens, MLA. 



688 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1993 

And they give the telephone number.  So, Mr. Speaker, the 

reason I wanted to read that into the record is to illustrate that 

it's not just those on this side of House that are opposed to Bill 

3 -- not necessarily the changes, but the way the changes are 

being made, Mr. Speaker.  We hope that with a few words from 

us, the minister will stand up and take responsibility and maybe 

listen to what the people are saying out there. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as I noted, what I quoted there was from 

well-known NDP supporters.  And that is what they think of 

the members opposite, Mr. Speaker.  And those people 

opposite, I think, should take heed.  If they don't want to listen 

to what we have to say, maybe they should listen to their own 

members.  I want to quote again, Mr. Speaker. 

 

 Medicare is under attack, according to news reports.  Premier 

Roy Romanow's government has approved measures that 

undermine the province's medicare system (undermine it) in 

what amounts to increasing taxes on the sick, the news 

reports say.  The Romanow cabinet is proposing that the 125 

drug plan deductible be doubled. 

 

Be doubled, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Speaker, that didn't 

happen.  You know what did happen, Mr. Speaker?  Actually, 

it was tripled.  So these NDP people had reason, they had 

reason to be worried.  And that was a year ago, before this last 

budget.  I want to continue. 

 

 The heaviest burden of this deterrent is felt by the elderly, the 

chronically ill, and young families.  The Romanow 

government is undermining what it took decades to build. 

 

If you notice, Mr. Speaker, in one of the quotes, the NDP took 

the stand that it was their, it was their medicare that they were . 

. . that this New Democratic Party is now destroying.  And that, 

Mr. Speaker, was a year ago before the closure of the children's 

wing in Wascana; before the scrapping of the drug plan; before 

the closing of the Whitespruce youth -- that's questionable yet 

-- before the closure of rural facilities.  That again, Mr. 

Speaker, we don't know. That's causing uneasiness. 

 

Before the NDP really started undermining health care in this 

province, this was all before that.  And it will be interesting to 

see what kind of literature the parents are passing out this year 

after this budget, Mr. Speaker.  We are getting phone calls 

from hospitals. They are wanting to have rallies and 

demonstrations because they do not like the way this Health 

minister is going in the wellness program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm sure the members opposite would rather not 

see it because I don't think they like to hear the truth.  Mr. 

Speaker, this Bill, Bill 3, does not give local communities more 

control.  It will not improve the health care services to the 

people in this province, Mr. Speaker.  It will accomplish only 

one thing; it would allow the Minister of Health to continue to 

betray the Saskatchewan people.  It will also allow her, 

Mr. Speaker, to continue to blame others for what she is 

indirectly doing. 

 

Well I think, Mr. Speaker, the first amendment to this Bill 

should be to change the name by deleting the word 

"respecting".  I say this, Mr. Speaker, because people might get 

the wrong idea.  They might think that the NDP are actually 

beginning to respect the opinion of the public.  Not only does 

Bill 3 not respect the opinion of the people it is affecting, Mr. 

Speaker, this entire government doesn't respect the wishes of 

the public, period. 

 

There are many examples of the members opposite and their 

disregard of the public -- the 60,000 farmers who got their 

contract broken, the crop insurance agents who are the present 

victims of a witch-hunt, the people who are being shut out of 

the so-called post-budget meetings, Mr. Speaker.  The NDP's 

complete disregard of the wishes of SUMA (Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association), not only by refusing to 

repeal The Hospital Revenue Act --  Bill 10 -- but by the 

attempt to blackmail the association into complying with the 

NDP agenda: Mr. Speaker, these are just a couple of examples, 

most of which have surfaced in the last week. 

 

Bill 3, Mr. Speaker, is another example of what we call the 

iceberg budget.  Only 10 per cent shows; 90 per cent is buried.  

Mr. Speaker, letters and phone calls have been pouring in from 

hospital administrators, patients, families, and local officials -- 

all concerned about the wellness plan and the health district 

proposed.  In fact I would like to quote from one right now, 

which was written by a person who says he has been following 

the activity of the current government with some concern.  

Now, Mr. Speaker, this letter isn't from a political supporter; 

it's from a concerned parent, and it says, and I quote: 

 

 The health system is far from perfect, but I don't think 

turning the system upside down is the answer to the current 

problems.  I am inclined to think the NDP have the cart 

before the horse, as they are closing beds in our cities without 

knowing how many of our smaller hospitals will still be 

open.  However, maybe it is only us, the voters and the 

taxpayers of the province, who do not know what the future 

holds. 

 

 The interim super-boards appear to have all sorts of power as 

well as the responsibility for overseeing the allocation of 

funds for health services of all types within the district.  The 

loss of input and financial support are a real problem in my 

mind.  The loss of official representation is also a problem.  

The administrative approach appears to be heavy-handed and 

very dictatorial.  The lack of information is very serious.  I 

thought we still lived in a democratic society with those 

elected responding to the needs of those who elected them. 

 

That is the end of the quotation, Mr. Speaker.  But it points out 

very dramatically, I believe, that the very 



March 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 689 

high level of discontent that's out there.  Mr. Speaker, this is 

exactly how the people of this province are feeling. 

 

Not only are people questioning the heavy-handed decisions 

made by this government, they are wondering if the members 

opposite know the meaning of democracy.  It is pathetic, Mr. 

Speaker, pathetic that because of the actions of the NDP 

government, the public is now questioning democracy in this 

province. 

 

And what is even harder to swallow, Mr. Speaker, is that this 

government has given people just cause to question democracy.  

In a democracy, the majority of the people are listened to, not 

ignored, as this government is doing.  In a democracy, ideas 

and changes are proposed to people, not imposed on people. 

 

And what does the Minister of Health think of democracy and 

listening to the people?  Well, respecting these new health 

districts the Minister of Health said:  if certain towns and 

villages haven't made up their minds, the government will do it 

for them.  Well whether a town wants to be in a district or not 

is not even considered.  They are going to be arbitrarily placed 

in a new health district and that is that.  There is no question.  

Not to mention that the minister will maintain the power to 

appoint new local health boards. 

 

(1915) 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is very interesting coming from the member 

from Regina Hillsdale who in this Assembly only a couple of 

years ago said, and I quote the member from Hillsdale when 

she was in opposition: 

 

 . . . I would like to know, Mr. Minister, how there will be 

more community input by removing boards from rural 

Saskatchewan in small communities and (then) replacing it . . 

. 

 

That was in Hansard, June 5, 1990, on page 1818, Mr. 

Speaker.  Quite the opposite of what is happening today in this 

legislature, Mr. Speaker.  Maybe the member from Hillsdale 

could explain how replacing all the local boards with appointed 

members and a couple of elected members will improve 

community representation. 

 

That's strange, how something that was terrible in opposition is 

all of a sudden acceptable when she is now the Minister of 

Health.  How can things change like that?  She could explain to 

this Assembly how she just didn't like the idea while she was in 

opposition but it's okay now that she's part of government.  

What happened?  What happened to the rules?  The rules were 

good then but they're not good now. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this is likely the case.  Since the NDP 

across the way have gone against almost everything they 

promised while in opposition, that's why these new rules are 

okay now.  The same member, again in opposition, when 

addressing the 

recommendation of the Murray Commission, said, and I quote: 

 

 If it means eliminating large numbers of the community 

boards, then it is reducing community input which is one of 

the things that is so important to our health care system that 

we want to maintain and retain in our health care system . . . 

 

That was in Hansard, June 5, 1990, on page 1819. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I happen to agree with the minister on that 

statement.  The only trouble is she didn't keep her rules.  She 

didn't keep her word.  And it doesn't stop there, Mr. Speaker.  

The member from Riversdale made additional comments that 

are quite relevant to our discussions today on Bill 3.  She said: 

 

 And the small communities are very concerned . . . because 

they believe that the regional board will put the emphasis on 

the regional hospital as opposed to their small hospital . . . 

 

That was in Hansard, June 5, 1990, page 1819.  And I agree 

with the minister there.  That's what'll happen. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that comment hits it right on the head.  It 

hits the nail right on the head what's happening today.  Too 

bad.  Too bad the member from Hillsdale who is now Minister 

of Health has chosen to ignore her previous concerns in this 

matter and ignoring the people who voiced them. 

 

Instead, Mr. Speaker, before us we have Bill 3, the very Act in 

which the minister creates health districts and the next health 

boards.  And then the remainder of the wellness decisions made 

by the members opposite will really be felt  

_- the rest of the iceberg, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As one registered nurse phoning our office this morning from 

Souris Valley facility in Weyburn said, this isn't wellness, this 

is illness.  She said this isn't wellness, Mr. Speaker, this is 

illness.  This plan is sick.  And that's exactly what this 

administration is opposing on the people -- illness. 

 

Not only did the member opposite deliver an iceberg budget, 

Mr. Speaker, where only 10 per cent is visible and 90 per cent 

is hidden, they should be called the iceberg administration 

because only about 10 per cent of what they say and do is 

above-board. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you and to the members that's 

not good enough.  No wonder the people of Saskatchewan feel 

betrayed, deceived, and let down by this government, Mr. 

Speaker.  No wonder hospital administrators and local hospital 

boards are fearing for their facilities.  No wonder they're 

quitting, saying I wouldn't touch this plan with a 10-foot pole. 

 

Doctors are saying, in the smaller hospitals, they're saying, if 

they cut this hospital any more I won't stay here; there's not 

enough beds for me to be here.  No wonder SUMA and SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association 



690 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1993 

of Rural Municipalities) are concerned.  No wonder they're 

concerned about the outcome when these health districts will 

have the authority to levy taxes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

No wonder, no wonder families, especially in rural 

Saskatchewan, are very concerned that their health care 

facilities will cease to exist.  And who could blame them?  I 

can't, Mr. Speaker.  I can't blame them people for worrying 

about that. 

 

Certainly not the member from Hillsdale, because she said 

these things won't happen.  She said in opposition that, and I 

again quote: granting regional health districts authority to levy 

taxes could lead to inferior levels of health and health care in 

poorer parts of the province -- Leader-Post, May 3, 1990.  I 

agree with her, but she never kept her word.  Things have 

changed since she became government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, she is refusing to repeal the Act that will 

allow just that -- Bill 10.  We've made several attempts to give 

the opposition a chance to repeal Bill 10.  And she said that.  

She said that when she was on the opposition benches.  And I 

repeat again; I quote what she said: 

 

 Granting regional health districts authority to level taxes 

could lead to inferior levels of health care in poorer parts of 

the province. 

 

We agreed with her when she said that.  We didn't do it.  Now 

she's doing it.  Now that she's in government she refused to 

repeal an Act that she says she don't need -- Bill 10. 

 

That's why people don't trust this government, Mr. Speaker.  

They got fooled once.  The NDP will not repeal that Act and 

that will allow them to further offload provincial responsibility 

on the backs of the property taxpayers.  That's why they want 

that Bill in there.  They have tried to blackmail SUMA into 

toeing the line.  My question to you, Mr. Speaker:  what's next? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to remind the members opposite that 

the original wellness model, the leaked wellness model, much 

of which has come to fruition, states: 

 

 District boards will have revenue-raising ability to support 

enhanced services or capital projects. 

 

That is what the original document of the Minister of Health . . 

. Now she's saying, don't worry property taxpayers; trust me.  

Well the NDP say, well the boards won't be able to levy taxes; 

it's not going to happen.  And the Premier said so at a SUMA 

convention.  Trust us. 

 

The NDP should also remember that the Premier claims to 

have had his comments misrepresented by Mr. Cholod and 

SUMA when the quotes came right from the transcripts.  And I 

guess, Mr. Speaker, the NDP think the news media -- both 

television and the 

newspapers -- were misrepresenting the Premier as well.  I 

doubt that. 

 

I say the member from Riversdale got caught, once again, 

telling a crowd of people what he thinks they want to hear, not 

what the NDP government is really going to do.  He got caught 

and now he is denying his statements.  Well maybe he should 

request a copy of the transcripts taken from his speech in order 

to prove that his comments were not misrepresented in the 

least, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If the members opposite claim that these district health boards 

will not be the cause of property taxes going up, then they 

should prove it.  They should prove it, Mr. Speaker.  Let us 

repeal Bill 10.  Repeal The Hospital Revenue Act and that will 

be over with, that'll be done.  Just because you and the NDP 

government say trust me, isn't good enough. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan got burned once already, Mr. 

Speaker, at election time.  They will not be prepared to trust 

you again.  When you say, trust me, they just shake their heads 

and said no. 

 

The record of the NDP government proves that there is no 

reason they should be trusted again, and they know it.  They 

know it, Mr. Speaker, and I agree with that point of view. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is no reason that the Minister of Health 

needs to be appointing members on the new health boards.  If 

the NDP were truly serious about health districts and the new 

health board representing, why isn't every board being elected?  

Why do they have to appoint any of them?  These people got 

along fine before.  Why not really, really listen to what the 

people want? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP across the way know full well that these 

health districts will inflict a lot of pain on the people of this 

province, that these districts will cause a lot of grief, but they 

aren't willing to listen.  The NDP is not willing to listen or do 

anything about it, Mr. Speaker.  Unfortunately, this is the kind 

of treatment the people of this province have grown to expect 

from this uncaring government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a lot more to say but I seem to be having a 

little difficulty tonight. So before I close, Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to propose an amendment to this Bill.  Mr. Speaker, I 

move, seconded by the member from Morse: 

 

 That this Bill not be read a second time because the principle 

of this Bill is contrary to the fundamental principles of 

medicare, the delivery of fair and just treatment to all citizens 

of the province. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  I find the amendment in order 

and the debate will continue concurrently. 



March 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 691 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to direct some comments both to the Bill 

and to the amendment at the same time.  I find it a little odd to 

understand how it is, coming from that band opposite, Mr. 

Speaker, that we would find an amendment that opposes this 

Bill because they claim it opposes the fundamental principles 

of medicare. 

 

Now I don't know if there is anyone, if there is anyone who 

does not understand the fundamental principles of medicare 

based on the historic treatment of medicare in this province 

over the last several decades, including the last decade when 

they were in office, it is that group.  And I will stand opposed 

to that ridiculous amendment that has just been brought before 

the House tonight. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Somewhere along, one of my colleagues says 

maybe they'll bring in their good PC (Progressive 

Conservative) colleague, Staff Barootes, and he'll help to clear 

up their position on this amendment and their position on this 

Bill.  Now that would make for some interesting debate, Mr. 

Speaker, because the participation of Senator Barootes -- my 

full respects to the senator -- the participation of Senator 

Barootes, now Senator Barootes, would be very, very 

interesting given the historical position that he took in 

opposition to medicare alongside the forefathers and the 

foremothers of those who are sitting opposite. 

 

And when I say those who are sitting opposite, I speak, Mr. 

Speaker, not only of the Conservatives but of the Liberals, 

because when it comes to medicare in Saskatchewan, a Liberal 

is a Tory is a Liberal as a Tory and you can't trust one of them 

to protect the principles of medicare for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1930) 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- A Lib is a Tory is a Lib is a Tory and listen 

carefully, listen carefully, listen carefully to the debate that 

goes on in this House on this Bill, on this Bill.  I find it 

interesting because we are repeating history, Mr. Speaker.  I 

say we're repeating history: 30 years ago, 30 years ago when 

medicare was introduced in the province of Saskatchewan, we 

saw Libs and Tories opposing the very introduction of 

medicare; 30 years later in 1993 -- yes, here in the province of 

Saskatchewan -- proposed that once again, Mr. Speaker, once 

again by the New Democratic government. 

 

Who is opposing taking the next step, the improvement to 

medicare?  It's the Libs and the Tories and the Libs and the 

Tories. 

 

Once again, history has repeated itself, and they stand 

opposed to progress for health care for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Well the spirit, as my colleague says, the spirit 

of Senator Barootes is alive and well and living here in the 

legislature tonight, Mr. Speaker, living here in the legislature 

tonight. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I would like to comment . . . I didn't come . 

. . I didn't take my place this evening simply because I wish to 

berate the position of the Libs and the Tories in the Assembly 

here.  I find it difficult to understand, a little mind-boggling at 

best.  But, Mr. Speaker, I think it is important as well to put 

this thing into the positive context.  I am very pleased; in fact, 

Mr. Speaker, I would say in all honesty, I consider it to be an 

honour to be able to enter into this debate. 

 

There is not a single one of the 55 government members, Mr. 

Speaker, who would not welcome -- and unfortunately, I 

suspect debate will not provide the opportunity -- there is not 

one of us who would not welcome the opportunity to enter into 

what I think over the decades will be looked back upon, as 

once again for the second time, an historic debate about 

medicare in the province of Saskatchewan, the home of the first 

medicare program in North America. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Everyone of us, everyone of us, Mr. Speaker, on 

this side of the House knows that medicare and health care for 

the people of Saskatchewan goes to the very roots of our 

political existence -- everyone of us.  It is with great pride, with 

great pride that every member on this side of the House 

associates ourselves with the history of our party and of our 

leaders, and most importantly, with the people of 

Saskatchewan, the thousands upon thousands of men and 

women, people with vision and courage; and most importantly, 

Mr. Speaker, an appreciation for what can be done through 

cooperation when people work together in the interest of 

security for their brothers and sisters in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

That's the very root.  It is at the root, at the very core, of what 

brings us here and is essential to my pride -- and I know the 

pride of my colleagues, the political pride of my colleagues -- 

as we come to this Assembly in representative . . . as 

representatives of our constituents and of our province. 

 

So I want to say, Mr. Speaker, it is a privilege to me to be able 

to stand tonight to enter into this debate.  I have thought 

frequently about those who stood with courage in this 

Assembly at these very desks, Mr. Speaker, some 31 years ago, 

at which time here in the province of Saskatchewan was 

introduced, Mr. Speaker, not the first wholly provincially 

funded program, medicare program, health care program, in 

Saskatchewan or in Canada, but on the continent of North 

America.  And I've often thought, Mr. Speaker, back to those 

times. 



692 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1993 

I don't think there is the same level of difficulty in moving 

forward today as existed then.  Now there are some who want 

to be short-sighted and mean-spirited, and we'll hear about that 

over the days ahead.  We've been hearing some already, Mr. 

Speaker.  But first of all, I want to pay tribute to the vision and 

the courage and the caring, the compassion of those who stood 

in these desks in this Chamber some 31 years ago introducing 

North America's first medicare program. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what we're engaged in at this moment as we 

debate Bill 3, a Bill, An Act respecting Health Districts, Mr. 

Speaker, what we are debating is the third stage of Tommy 

Douglas's dream.  Now I've noticed that the members opposite, 

and particularly the former premier, would love -- they would 

love -- to have the privilege of having the people of 

Saskatchewan associate them with Tommy Douglas.  We see 

them borrowing, borrowing that kind of elusive reference on 

occasion, Mr. Speaker, but in vain attempts -- in vain attempts 

-- to establish their credibility or to hope that they have some 

credibility in health care. 

 

What I say, Mr. Speaker, is this: we are engaged here -- and 

make no mistake about it -- we are engaged in debate about 

whether Saskatchewan has the courage as a leader once again 

for the second time in the history of Canada, for the second 

time in North America . . . While our neighbours to the south, 

while the Americans these days, Mr. Speaker, are engaging 

themselves in a debate that was passed in this House 31 years 

ago, we in Saskatchewan are engaging ourselves in a debate 

that is being watched very closely across the nation -- not only 

across the nation, I suggest, Mr. Speaker, but across the 

continent.  Because we are engaged in a debate as to whether 

we have the courage to go forward in the realities of the '90s to 

take the third step towards Tommy Douglas's dream. 

 

And what was that dream?  Tommy Douglas talked about three 

steps to his dream, Mr. Speaker.  He said, first of all, it was the 

objective of the people of Saskatchewan collectively through 

their government to bring health care, first of all in the form of 

hospitalization, so that no man, woman, or child who goes into 

hospital in the province of Saskatchewan would ever be 

rejected from health care treatment in a hospital because of 

their inability to pay.  And in the mid-'40s, 1947 I believe it 

was, three years after coming to office, 14 years after the policy 

had been adopted by, at that time, the Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation, hospitalization was introduced. 

 

In 1962, 1962, 18 years after forming government, Mr. 

Speaker, 18 years . . . We're now 18 months after forming 

government, trying to put the province back together again 

after inheriting the mess of a right-wing government once 

again, 18 months now to move forward to the third step of 

Tommy's dream.  The second step of Tommy's dream, simply 

put, Mr. Speaker, was to eliminate or to remove the financial 

barrier to all health care for the people of Saskatchewan.  It was 

medicare. 

 

Now the members opposite . . . my hon. friend, the hon. 

member for Thunder Creek, he doesn't like some of the things 

that I'm saying.  And I can quite understand why he doesn't like 

some of the things that I'm saying because from his riding, Mr. 

Speaker, from his riding, his ideological soul mate, Ross 

Thatcher, succeeded by a former colleague of his on the 

benches, Ross's son Colin . . . Mr. Speaker, a Lib is a Tory is a 

Lib is a Tory is a Lib is a Tory. 

 

Ross Thatcher, Colin Thatcher -- now we've got the member 

for Thunder Creek.  None of them like it.  None of them like 

moving forward when it comes to health care, Mr. Speaker.  

The hon. member for Morse, the hon. member for Morse, he's 

no happier about it because he represents the other half of the 

constituency that Ross Thatcher represented at one time.  

Kindred spirits, kindred spirits.  We all remember.  We 

remember. 

 

Mr. Speaker, anybody who has any sense of the history of 

medicare in Saskatchewan remembers Ross Thatcher leading 

the parade, keep the doctor committee -- remember when they 

marched on the legislature and he kicked the doors of the 

Assembly? -- because he opposed that socialist program where 

all people were going to have equal access to health care.  Oh, 

oh, he said, no.  He said it's going to take away the freedom of 

the doctors to treat the people of Saskatchewan; they will lose 

their professional freedom. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I ask you, I ask you to keep in mind, I ask 

the people of Saskatchewan to keep in mind, those people who 

were organized for partisan political reasons by the Liberals 

and the Tories -- a Lib is a Tory is a Lib is a Tory.  Mr. 

Speaker, those who organized the doctors . . .  The doctors in 

those days, Mr. Speaker, said they were afraid they would lose 

their professional integrity.  Mr. Speaker, I point out today -- 

today it is the doctors who are leading the support for the move 

to wellness because they have come to appreciate the benefits 

of medicare to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- It is the people of Saskatchewan and the doctors 

of Saskatchewan, the health care workers of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, and the people of Saskatchewan, the ordinary people 

of Saskatchewan who most support and for whom these 

changes are being made that are encompassed, Mr. Speaker, in 

this progressive Bill that will take Saskatchewan, and with 

Saskatchewan leadership for the nation and for the continent, 

into the future in terms of quality of care. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I remind the House that back in 1962 

Tommy Douglas said, well, faced with step 2 and step 3 . . . 

step 3 he said was preventive health care.  And Tommy said at 

that time in 1962, he said we had our choice.  We had to make 

a decision.  We'd 



March 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 693 

instituted hospitalization, but now we had to make a decision as 

to whether we move forward with medicare to eliminate the 

financial impediment to health care or whether we address the 

structure of health care.  And Tommy said they decided to do 

the easy one first.  And so they did. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as history has unfolded I think people, not only in 

this province but across the nation, feel appreciation to the 

wisdom and the courage of those who led that charge back in 

1962, contrary to the opposition, the KOD (Keep our Doctors) 

committee and the Libs and the Tories and the Libs and the 

Tories and the Libs and the Tories. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, here we are.  Here we are today now in 

1993, moving forward with what Tommy said was the difficult 

part, and that's changing the structure.  And that's what this Bill 

is all about, Mr. Speaker -- An Act respecting Health Districts 

-- an attempt by the government whose political roots are tied 

to the formation of the very first medicare program in North 

America, Mr. Speaker, an attempt to move forward into the 

'90s and beyond with a sense of two things, Mr. Speaker:  a 

sense of compassion, a sense of responsibility. 

 

Compassion and concern for the need for health care, Mr. 

Speaker, and a sense of responsibility, understanding that one 

of the essential principles of medicare, Mr. Speaker, is its 

affordability, its accessibility, Mr. Speaker, and in order to 

accomplish that objective as well, changes must be made. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let me just reflect on what gets us into this 

position these days.  I was doing a little research about a year 

ago, Mr. Speaker, when it was my privilege to be addressing a 

graduation class in the city of Moose Jaw, and looking at some 

changes that have been taking place over time and the kind of 

changing world . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I was there.  I was there. 

 

Mr. Hagel -- The member from Thunder Creek says he was 

there, he remembers the speech.  He nods, I'm sure he does.  In 

fact it was a privilege for me to have the member of Thunder 

Creek there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In looking at the kinds of changes, the changing world that 

young people are going into, Mr. Speaker, and doing a little 

research, I learned a startling fact, Mr. Speaker, that we can't 

ignore as much as we may want to in some ways.  The reality 

is, Mr. Speaker, that in 1921, 1921 -- 70 years ago . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- That's when you made that speech? 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- No, that's not when I made the speech, but it has 

the potential to be that memorable, I suspect, maybe in some 

people's minds.  Member for Thunder Creek seems to agree 

with the hon. member for Swift Current.  Mr. Speaker, I divert; 

I don't want to be distracted from my main point here. 

Mr. Speaker, in 1921 the average life expectancy in 

Saskatchewan was 60 years of age -- 60.  Mr. Speaker, in 1991, 

70 years later, the average life expectancy in Saskatchewan has 

now risen to 77 years of age. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think there is some credit to what has 

gone on in terms of progress that's been made in health care 

since then, but also, Mr. Speaker, it raises for us an alarming 

reality.  In the last three and one-half generations, the average 

life expectancy in our province has risen by nearly a full 

generation.  What that means, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

challenges facing our medicare today and its need to address 

the real health care needs of our citizens who are living 17 

years longer on average, Mr. Speaker, those challenges must be 

met by the public purse.  They must also be met, Mr. Speaker, 

in a way that promotes what Tommy dreamed about, promotes 

responsibility of individuals in communities for our health care, 

and that's what this Bill is all about. 

 

(1945) 

 

Mr. Speaker, back in about, I guess it would be about 20 years 

ago now, Tommy Douglas said, and I'd like to quote.  Tommy 

said this, he said: 

 

 The older I get, the more I am convinced that one of the rare 

human virtues is moral courage.  It's easy to express kindly 

sentiments and to profess sympathetic concerns for others if 

one doesn't endeavour to do anything about it.  But to stand 

almost alone in the face of frenzied hate and hysterical 

opposition -- that takes moral courage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Tommy Douglas spoke those words at the funeral 

of Woodrow Lloyd some 20 years ago. 

 

Woodrow Lloyd, who in this province we will remember going 

to meetings of doctors at which it was reported he was literally 

spat upon, who stood with moral courage in the face of 

opposition from self-serving, self-appointed, righteous, 

short-sighted, right-wing people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so I say to the Minister of Health, to the members of the 

government, and to those who have got so much of themselves 

invested in the health care system today, again show that 

courage.  The easy task, the easy task today, Mr. Speaker, 

would be to listen to the arguments of the Libs and the Tories 

and the Libs and the Tories and the Libs and the Tories 

opposite, who say don't change anything. 

 

That would be the easy thing to do, and consequently, Mr. 

Speaker, to just let the system crumble in upon itself.  You 

know I find it kind of interesting as I listen to what I think 

strikes me as wolves in sheep's clothing, Mr. Speaker, that we 

seem to . . . history seems to be repeating itself yet again. 

 

And so as I've listened carefully and tried to understand the 

arguments of the members opposite when they've said is this: 

leave it alone.  Never mind making the changes that have to be 

made with a sense 



694 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1993 

of courage and a sense of vision.  Leave it alone and let it 

crumble in upon itself. 

 

Now they will say this standing there, self-indignant kind of 

posture saying, we are the defenders of medicare.  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I ask the people of Saskatchewan to let history judge 

that.  Let history judge that because in these days in which we 

are living now, Mr. Speaker, you don't have to be, as Don 

Cherry described it, a rocket surgeon, Mr. Speaker.  You don't 

have to be a rocket surgeon to figure this thing out for yourself. 

 

All you have to do, Mr. Speaker, is to talk to people who are 

working in the field and to talk to people who are concerned 

about the future of health care, and to talk to people, thousands 

upon thousands upon thousands around the province of 

Saskatchewan, who will tell you over and over again, changes 

have got to be made. 

 

Now, I don't . . . Gee, I'm not sure that I want changes to be 

made in my backyard.  Not in my backyard.  But changes have 

got to be made.  Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the 

arguments, as I sit and listen, the arguments coming across the 

floor are saying, not in my backyard, in my backyard or your 

backyard or your backyard.  Leave the system alone.  Let it fall 

in on itself because they know, Mr. Speaker, that the 

consequences of that is that medicare will not be able to be 

sustained.  And for that I say shame. 

 

You are demonstrating once again -- history is repeating itself 

-- the same kind of irresponsible attitude towards health care 

and without the compassion that is necessary in order to deliver 

health care to the people of Saskatchewan that you and your 

forefathers and grandfathers delivered back in 1962.  We will 

not allow you to oppose it again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- We must go forward, Mr. Speaker.  We must go 

forward because that is what the system demands.  I sat and 

listened to the member for Souris-Cannington, and he repeated 

an argument that I've heard more than once, and I'd like to 

address it head-on, Mr. Speaker.  He said this change is all 

about an attack on rural Saskatchewan.  He said an attack on 

rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I stand in my place, and I say it is not an 

attack on rural Saskatchewan; it is just the opposite.  This is 

what is required to save medicare in rural Saskatchewan today.  

That's what it's about.  That's what it's about, and you know it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- You know, Mr. Speaker, I found with interest . . 

. I will come in a few minutes.  I want to talk about one of the 

finest examples of people working together in a new spirit of 

cooperation that we're reviving once again and taking 

advantage of in order to cause the health care system to move 

forward -- cooperation and people working together.  I want to 

come in a few minutes to the formation of the Moose 

Jaw-Thunder Creek Health District, Mr. Speaker, and I know 

the member for Thunder Creek and the member from Morse 

will take great interest in that as they did the other night when I 

spoke on the subject because both of them will be personally 

involved.  They will have constituents who will benefit from 

that. 

 

But first of all . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- They'll be on the list anyway. 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Constituents who will benefit.  Well now they . . 

. Mr. Speaker, my hon. friends opposite, the hon. member from 

Morse and the hon. member from Thunder Creek, seem to 

quite freely from their seats admit that their constituents will 

benefit.  But the concern is . . . and I think in that, Mr. Speaker, 

they give away what this is all about.  This is all about partisan 

politics.  This is all about partisan politics, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It's been kind of interesting that in my home constituency, Mr. 

Speaker, of Moose Jaw, we had an announcement just last 

week about progress being made because people were willing 

to sacrifice and rationalize delivery of services through 

cooperation and compromise.  And the hon. member for 

Thunder Creek says, begun by whom?  Well, Mr. Speaker, it's 

a process and I will give credit where credit is due.  

Discussions that began to take place when this province was 

being served -- and I use that word rather loosely, but was 

being served -- by a Tory government.  But, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Speaker, I do point out that there is a difference.  Because you 

see, Mr. Speaker, in the weeks leading up to the 1986 

convention, the former premier -- PC premier -- trotted over to 

Moose Jaw, held a news conference and announced the new 

building.  Well they thought that was pretty exciting.  The 

people of Moose Jaw disappointed, disappointed the members 

opposite and sent a couple of New Democrats to represent 

them in the legislature. 

 

Then what happened after that?  Mr. Speaker, it didn't stand 

still because it works so well -- I guess this is what it was all 

about, partisan politics -- that in the weeks leading up to the 

1991 election, the premier . . . no, it wasn't the premier, sorry, 

my mistake, it was George McLeod, he sat at the meeting with 

the member from Thunder Creek, they trotted over to Moose 

Jaw and they said not only can we announce this once, we'll 

announce it once again. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I am proud to say that because of the work 

of the people, the local people involved in Moose Jaw and rural 

area together, making decisions, making decisions to serve 

their long-term needs to give up, to give up hospital beds and a 

nursing home, Mr. Speaker, there was an announcement that 

took place last week, Mr. Speaker, to build a new geriatric 

centre while giving up a hospital and a nursing home.  But, Mr. 

Speaker, there was a difference.  It was for the first time it was 

an announcement made after the budget and it was there, Mr. 

Speaker. That's the difference between the two. 



March 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 695 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- So the member for Thunder Creek says: who 

started it?  Well you started it, but all you ever did was 

announce it.  Well I say to the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, 

there is nobody in Moose Jaw whose health got any better 

because you made an announcement and there never will be.  

Never.  You can't just announce health. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- It's like the band-aid factory in Swift 

Current. 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Well my good friend and colleague, the member 

from Swift Current, he remembers the band-aid factory they 

announced there.  They made lots of announcements. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, announcements, as we have come to learn, 

announcements don't stimulate an economy.  And more to the 

point, Mr. Speaker, when we're talking about this Bill, 

announcements don't contribute to better health care for the 

people of Saskatchewan unless there is something to them.  

And that's what this is all about. 

 

So the member opposite says, he says, this is an attack on rural 

Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, it is with some interest that a 

good number of people around the province of Saskatchewan 

noticed over the last few years -- and with a particular flurry in 

the months just before an election -- how nursing homes or 

schools or . . . You know, they just kind of -- recreation centres 

or something -- just kind of popped out of the ground. 

 

And you try and reason it through.  You'd say, does it have 

something to do with need?  Does it have to do . . . You know, 

Mr. Speaker, did schools pop out of the ground because there 

were kids?  Well not necessarily, not necessarily. 

 

See things popped out of the ground, Mr. Speaker, had more to 

do with a partisan political agenda in order to get re-elected -- 

that's what it had to do about. 

 

This has to do with planning for the future, Mr. Speaker, where 

real decisions will be made by local people to meet their real 

needs.  And that's what the people of Saskatchewan need in 

order to ensure the security of health care for the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- They need health care decisions made for health 

care reasons.  And so I hear, I hear members opposite playing 

all the partisan political games. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what this Bill will permit is for people in 

Saskatchewan and districts to come together and to look -- yes 

-- to look at their wants.  But as was said at the opening of the 

Providence . . . at the announcement related to Providence 

Place and the formation of the Moose Jaw-Thunder Creek 

Health District the other day, Mr. Speaker, more importantly, 

to look at their needs and to look at the ability within 

the resources available, to provide people across Saskatchewan, 

and most acutely, Mr. Speaker, in rural Saskatchewan, the 

ability to provide for their health care needs. 

 

Now do I pretend that that's an easy task, Mr. Speaker?  I don't.  

It was not an easy task back in 1962 to introduce medicare 

when a lot of doctors, with the encouragement of the Libs and 

the Tories and the Libs and the Tories and the Libs and the 

Tories, opposed it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I guess one of the truths about life is that it seems 

that many of the important things never come easy.  That was 

true back in 1962 with the introduction of medicare and it will 

be true in 1993, although I predict, Mr. Speaker, more easily 

this time because people in Saskatchewan have come to 

appreciate to the core of their souls the importance of health 

care and people pulling together in order to provide for 

themselves, health care through their cumulative tax dollars.  

That's what it's all about. 

 

You see, Mr. Speaker, this Legislative Assembly is nothing 

more than a vehicle.  This Legislative Assembly is a catalyst 

for the people, that's what the role of this Assembly is.  When 

we debate this Bill, let us talk not in terms of trying to create 

fears, but let us talk in terms of vision and care and our 

aspirations for the future of Saskatchewan people.  Let us talk 

in those terms, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What this Bill does is it creates a structure so that people across 

Saskatchewan, and in particular rural Saskatchewan, can come 

together and they can make the decisions that are important to 

them in order to provide for their health care needs. 

 

Now I've been told and I believe there's an element of truth to 

it, that there are a number of hospital beds that in essence are 

going unused in the province of Saskatchewan.  I've been told 

many times, particularly by people in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, that there are some hospitals that people drive by in 

order to go to bigger places, in order to have their children . . . 

or whatever their health care needs might be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm not saying that there will be no change.  But 

what I am saying is that the change will be determined by those 

who are affected by it most closely.  See, I remember with a 

great sense of ownership, a discussion with some Sask Wheat 

Pool folks about a year ago in which we got into a serious 

discussion about the future of Saskatchewan, rural 

Saskatchewan.  And it stays with me. 

 

And I think I remember at long, one of the delegates said, you 

know, maybe in the 1990s what we really have to do is begin to 

change our definition of the word "community".  Perhaps our 

sense of community in Saskatchewan today needs to be defined 

more than just my village or my hamlet or my town or my city.  

Maybe we need to define community in a broader sense so that 

we can ensure for all of us the kind of security and the kinds of 

services that we want for ourselves and for our children and for 

our grandchildren.  And I'd say as well, particularly, Mr. 



696 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1993 

Speaker, for our parents and our grandparents today. 

 

That's what this Bill does, simply put.  It empowers people to 

come together to make decisions collectively about how they 

would like to have themselves served to the delivery of health 

care using the public dollar, their dollars, in order to provide 

security collectively in the health care system.  That's all it's 

about.  And that says to me, Mr. Speaker, that's not an attack on 

rural Saskatchewan.  You want an attack on rural 

Saskatchewan, leave things the way they are. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when there is a structure here that empowers 

people in rural Saskatchewan to come together and can make 

their own decisions about their future and their structure, that is 

empowering the future of Saskatchewan and that is in the 

long-term best interest of rural Saskatchewan and the people 

who live there. 

 

(2000) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to just comment very 

briefly as I promised I would about the formation of I believe it 

was the fifth, sixth now, the fifth health district board, but I'm 

proud to say the first rural-urban health district board which 

was announced in my home city of Moose Jaw last week. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are people together, as the member for 

Thunder Creek correctly points out, who have been working 

together for a long time and have been struggling with the 

desire to meet the long-term health care needs, recognizing that 

there is, as people grow older, there is a limited ability of 

financial resources to serve them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is with great pride that I was able to attend the 

event at which the district officially came into existence with 

the interim board.  And I point out, Mr. Speaker, this is a 

district made up . . . which covers the city of Moose Jaw and I 

believe it was 13 RMs (rural municipality).  And I ask, Mr. 

Speaker, I ask members of the House to note with interest that 

since that announcement was made in fact an additional, at 

least one more rural municipality, has expressed interest in 

joining together in Saskatchewan's first ever rural-urban health 

district board. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- That's cooperation. 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- And as my good friend and colleague, the 

member for Swift Current says, that's cooperation and he's 

right.  That's the key.  That's the key.  It's cooperation.  It's 

people having come together and having said together as we 

look down the road -- not just within the city of Moose Jaw, 

but an area that covers in excess of a population in excess of 

45,000 people with at least 13 RMs and perhaps more by the 

time it's finalized, Mr. Speaker -- people having come together 

and said, as we look down the road what we want to be able to 

do is to better provide for the geriatric care needs of our 

citizens. 

And so as a result, Mr. Speaker, they're willing to sacrifice.  

With a willingness to give up a hospital and a willingness to 

give up a nursing home and consequently, Mr. Speaker, as a 

result of that rationalization, taking two hospitals in Moose Jaw 

and bringing together just the one, Mr. Speaker, freeing up the 

resources to build a new geriatric centre to serve the long-term 

geriatric needs of people for Moose Jaw and area.  Mr. 

Speaker, that's cooperation paying off for the people of the 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that's the kind of example of things that 

we're going to be hearing more and more about in the days 

ahead.  I heard the Minister of Health rise in her place -- I 

believe it was on Friday of last week -- to announce the coming 

into existence of the sixth health care district in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, although I understand insecurity at times when 

people are saying I know what's there now; I know it's got to be 

something different, and I'm not sure what it is, and that causes 

me to feel anxious.  And this government understands that.  

What this Bill does, Mr. Speaker, is it gives a structure.  It 

defines a structure that is legal but, Mr. Speaker, which, just as 

importantly, gives tangible guidelines for the process by which 

people can come together and empower themselves to provide 

health care services within their district.  That's what it's all 

about.  That is what it's all about. 

 

And we have seen evidence already that that can pay off with 

better services for the people of Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, 

as I stand in my place, I stand here firmly convinced -- firmly 

convinced -- that as this Bill is carried and we go forward in 

Saskatchewan to wellness in the health districts that we will be 

leading the way in Canada and North America effectively in 

such a way that history will point back,  not only at 

Saskatchewan, but Saskatchewan as the first once again on the 

continent to lead the direction into the new generation and the 

third step of the third dream of Tommy Douglas for health care 

for our people. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, you know I've heard the members opposite 

say don't raise taxes; keep things the way they are.  The reality 

is, Mr. Speaker, that within the public-funded health care 

system that we have here and that we cherish and that through 

changes in structure we will ensure continue to exist, Mr. 

Speaker, therein lies the security for the future of health care 

for our people. 

 

Now unfortunately that has, in the context of our fiscal 

dilemma . . . not the least of which was contributed to us 

through the actions . . . not entirely, not entirely, I don't blame 

the members opposite for all the woes of Saskatchewan.  If 

anybody was capable of introducing all of the woes for 

Saskatchewan, it's the members opposite.  But even they, Mr. 

Speaker, were not able in 10 years to give us all our problems, 

Mr. Speaker, but they have to claim some responsibility for a 

substantial number.  A substantial amount of the 



March 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 697 

mismanagement and the loss of trust by the people of 

Saskatchewan in their government come as a result of the 

actions of the members opposite. 

 

So I say it strikes me as being somewhat -- let me be kind, Mr. 

Speaker, and say contradictory -- somewhat contradictory 

when the hon. members opposite stand in their place and say 

we're standing for the people of Saskatchewan: don't raise 

taxes; keep things the same. 

 

Good luck, Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, we had 10 years of 

that kind of management and we don't need that any more.  

And this Bill is about moving forward with a structure in order 

to build a future for our children and our grandchildren in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I don't know that I have any more that I 

want to add into this debate.  I've taken longer than I intended 

when I took my place.  I simply want to conclude, Mr. Speaker, 

by saying what a privilege it is for me to enter into what I think 

history will look back upon as an historic debate in the 

province of Saskatchewan, once again leading the way for 

Canada and for North America.  What a privilege it is for me.  I 

know as a New Democrat and being extremely proud of the 

history of my party and the ability of my party to serve as an 

agent for Saskatchewan people to have their will realized, it is 

for me, Mr. Speaker, in a sense a dream come true in order to 

be able to participate in this debate at this time. 

 

So I simply want to say that when we come to the vote on Bill 

No. 3, An Act respecting Health Districts, it is with pride that I 

will stand in the tradition of Tommy Douglas, in the tradition 

of Woodrow Lloyd, in the tradition of Allan Blakeney, but 

most importantly of all, Mr. Speaker, in the tradition of those 

thousands upon thousands upon thousands of women and men 

across this province who saw their government as their agent to 

collectively use their resources, their taxes, to provide security 

for themselves and their families and their children.  Mr. 

Speaker, in that spirit, when it comes to a vote on Bill No. 3, I 

will stand in support. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise tonight to join in the debate as 

many of my colleagues have.  However, I don't wish to dwell 

on the record of the previous Tory government.  In fact it 

would be a treat if we did not have to deal with their record, let 

alone talk about it in this Chamber. 

 

I am pleased to take this opportunity and privilege to speak on 

health care.  Health care debates in this very room have led to 

the development of the number one health care system in the 

western hemisphere.  With the passage of this Bill, another 

great step forward in wellness will be complete in 

Saskatchewan.  I would like to compliment the Minister of 

Health on the plan she has supported to introduce the health 

boards throughout Saskatchewan.  When you consider that 

health programs have been administered by over 400 boards 

province-wide, it is a wonder that our system has worked as 

well as it has. 

 

My own interest in community-based health service started as a 

child.  I remember many stories my paternal grandmother told 

me of early nursing, as she had become a registered nurse in 

1900.  Coming west, she often assisted Doc Scratch of 

Maymont.  Also for many years she functioned as a midwife, 

which not only cared for the mother and baby, but provided the 

required child care as well as a role very similar to that of 

present-day home care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I listen to many seniors, in particular, they 

very much like the emphasis on being assisted to stay in their 

own home as long as they can.  That's a key objective of our 

Saskatchewan wellness model.  We in Redberry did a 

preliminary assessment over a year ago.  At that time we found 

extensive interest in reforming the health care system.  After 

the wellness assessment was done, we in Redberry were ready 

to take part in the second step in health care -- the second step 

that was identified as necessary so long ago by Tommy 

Douglas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to say the community 

representatives are making the necessary decisions to form the 

new health districts.  We are going to have 20 to 30 health 

districts caring for health services in Saskatchewan, which I am 

sure will be a lot more effective than hoping that over 400 

different boards would be expected to work together without 

someone falling through the cracks.  Yes, we are part and 

parcel to a great step forward in wellness for Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I hear the criticism from the opposition 

benches, I wonder where some of the older members were in 

1962, or if the younger opposition members ever listened to the 

old-timers of this province.  Because if they  did not listen as 

they should, they would not know that the lines they are using 

would have fit very well into the KOD -- yes, the KOD of the 

early sixties.  Not many today would admit that they were part 

of that movement.  KOD, for those of you who do not 

remember, were the initials that were used, were a short way to 

identify the Keep Our Doctors campaign which was a 

well-organized collection of reactionary people from the 

Liberal and Conservative circles whose only goal it was to 

destroy socialized medicine through fearmongering. 

 

Those of you who are out there, much the same as the old 

KOD, trying to destroy the second great step in health care in 

Saskatchewan: don't expect us to lay down and play dead.  

Guess again.  You're in for a fight and you better be prepared to 

lose because Saskatchewan people are going to win.  Yes, 

Saskatchewan people are going to beat you and once again lead 

North America in health care. 

 

Yes, Saskatchewan people will do it.  They'll do it for Tommy, 

they'll do it for Woodrow, they'll do it for all of those who led 

the fight for medicare and against such as the KOD over 30 

years ago.  But more 



698 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1993 

importantly, we'll do it for ourselves.  We'll do it for our 

children, and we'll do it for our grandchildren, those that are 

going to be accepting health care over 30 years in the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess: -- Mr. Speaker, I am looking down the road to future 

elections where we will have to fight challenges from the right 

wing. As the Tories have disgraced themselves, both 

provincially and federally, to the point that we should be shed 

of them until the next time that people have forgotten just how 

bad they can be, I would like to go on to the Liberal threat to 

health or other matters, either real and imagined.  We would be 

amused, if it wasn't so ridiculous, when the Liberal leader gets 

on her feet and takes the holier-than-thou approach.  I am not 

questioning your motives, but my memory of the Liberal Party 

goes back to the tuckered-out days of the Liberals of the 1950s. 

 

(2015) 

 

I can remember as a kid the frustration of my father and his 

generation, dealing with the way things were jemmied up in 

agriculture at the federal level.  We don't wish to have health 

care jemmied up that way.  I wonder how the provincial 

Liberal leader justifies such a sanctimonious approach.  Does 

she think that the people of Saskatchewan have short 

memories?  If she does, I would like to remind her that not all 

that long ago there was a Liberal prime minister that told us 

there would never be a change to the Crow rate agreement 

unless of course there was a consensus to do so by the farmers 

of western Canada.  That turned out not to be true but Trudeau . 

. . The Crow's Nest Pass Agreement was one of the most 

important Acts to Western Canada that was ever on the books.  

The Liberals mortally wounded the Crow; now the Tories are 

going to snuff the life out completely. 

 

I would like to draw the attention of the Liberal leader to the 

fact that Saskatchewan people have, on many occasions, not 

shared your obvious opinion that somehow the Liberals of this 

province and this country are pure as the driven snow.  And if 

you had taken an interest in politics when the Liberals were the 

big players on the right wing, you would realize that they 

attracted the same kind of individuals that have been attracted 

to the Tories in later years, the same people whose aim it is to 

destroy medicare. 

 

However I have to admit that the former Liberal prime minister 

was the only prime minister that we ever had that lifted a finger 

for us in the West.  Was it really for us or to us?  I would also 

like to draw the attention of this Assembly and of the Liberal 

leader in particular to a very important matter: the usury Act.  

Yes it was a federal Liberal government that changed the usury 

Act.  I believe that this one very conservative move by a 

Liberal government created a situation that caused the present 

depression.  This single move resulted in millions in increased 

cost in our health budget, for example.  The federal Liberal 

changes allowed the interest rates to sky-rocket.  Prior to that 

move, it was a 

criminal offence to charge over 12 per cent interest.  That 

group of Liberals allowed the financial institutions to charge in 

some cases as high as twenty-four and a half per cent.  That, in 

my opinion, is indeed criminal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Greystone talks about our 

budget being a budget of choice.  If the federal Liberals had not 

catered to their banker friends, perhaps we would have had 

more choices.  It would be almost criminal of us to allow the 

Liberal leader to lead Saskatchewan people down the garden 

path as she portrays the holier-than-thou image that is so often 

portrayed in this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many people in Saskatchewan remember the 

Liberal role in the medicare debate of the early '60s.  I sincerely 

hope the Liberal leader of today would not be as negative as 

the Tory opposition or the former Liberals of this province 

when they joined the KOD rallies of that period.  Now it is a 

little difficult to be accepted as Mrs. Clean with all the garbage 

that the Liberal Party has collected over the years. 

 

Future elections, as all elections in Saskatchewan, will be 

interesting, whether the reactionary forces are united under the 

leadership of the present Liberal leader or by whoever winds 

up leading the Tories as they go through their death throes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would however also like to compliment the 

Liberal leader on many of the political positions she and her 

party have supported from time to time.  As I have noticed over 

the years, the Liberal policies are quite acceptable while they 

are in opposition.  It is just when they form the government that 

they become more right-wing than the Tories, if possible.  That 

kind of approach is not consistent with wellness for the people 

of this great province. 

 

When we first sat in this House as a newly elected government 

and chose to deal with the mess that the previous Tory 

government had left us, I was pleased to see how the Liberal 

leader would vote with us.  I was not surprised by that 

responsible position on her behalf as I had heard her on 

previous occasions in her role dealing with farm stress.  

However more recently I have seen the Liberal leader taking a 

more traditional Liberal role that is more and more difficult to 

separate from the other Tories in this Chamber. 

 

Returning to the subject at hand, Mr. Speaker, I believe that the 

new wellness model is the greatest step forward in health care 

anywhere in North America since the introduction of medicare 

over 30 years ago.  In spite of the debt that the Tories left us, 

we are still going to be able to provide the best health care in 

Canada for the people of Saskatchewan.  It is unfortunate that 

the previous government's abuse of Saskatchewan finances 

impact negatively on everything we attempt to do for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I sat through the recent budget debate, it came 

to mind as we were forced to increase the E&H (education and 

health) tax by 1 per cent, if that E&H 



March 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 699 

tax was at 12 per cent -- yes, not at 8 per cent or 9 per cent but 

12 per cent -- and if the whole 12 per cent, considering no 

change in the number of goods purchased and if that 12 per 

cent was directed towards public debt, it would just pay the 

interest on the public debt that was left us by the Tories. 

 

In conclusion, I would like to congratulate the Minister of 

Health, the Associate Minister of Health and in fact the whole 

government caucus for having the intestinal fortitude to take 

such a progressive step forward in wellness for our people.  

The stamina of Saskatchewan people will once again overcome 

the devastation of a Tory government.  We must do our part to 

make sure that Saskatchewan never again falls victim to the 

reactionary forces, to those reactionary forces, be they under 

the name of the Conservative or the Liberal Party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I appreciate this opportunity to rise and speak 

once again in this Assembly.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to enter this 

debate today and I want to outline for the Assembly and for 

those people here who perhaps maybe don't know some of the 

history as it relates to the kinds of things that were done in the 

south-west part of the province, and I want to talk a little bit 

about where the people are at today and how they perceive the 

responsibilities of this government.  I want to also touch on a 

few items that were raised by some members as they addressed 

this Bill in support of it.  The NDP members have risen and 

said that they agree with this.  And I just want to put in 

perspective some of the things that they have said. 

 

I believe that the thrust and the theme of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, 

is this:  the government, with this Bill and the policies that go 

with it, has chosen to address funding by picking off the most 

politically vulnerable group, knocking them out of medicare 

and offloading the funding burden onto the property tax.  That 

in a nutshell is exactly what this Bill does.  It takes the most 

vulnerable group and takes them out of medicare and puts the 

tax onto the property tax.  And that's what this Bill does.  And I 

think it is significant to the people of this province that they 

understand exactly what that is and how it relates to the people 

of this province. 

 

I want to outline a couple . . . or review a couple of points that 

were made by the member from Moose Jaw.  One of the things 

that he mentioned was that the very essence of Tommy 

Douglas was kind of enshrined in this Bill.  Mr. Speaker, the 

essence of Tommy Douglas isn't even a figment of the 

imagination and the creativity of the people that made this Bill 

nor the people who are promoting it.  There is absolutely 

nothing about Tommy Douglas in this Bill.  And I'll tell you 

why, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The reason that there is nothing about Tommy Douglas in this 

Bill and the content that he provided in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is that he was a builder of 

hospitals, not a shutter downer of 

hospitals in the province of Saskatchewan.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is the fundamental difference between this group of 

New Democrats and the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation) led by Tommy Douglas in the '50s and the '60s.  

That is the fundamental difference between this group of 

elected individuals on behalf of labour and that group who 

were there to serve the needs of the people.  And, Mr. Speaker, 

this NDP government should go back in history and learn some 

things about what made Tommy Douglas do the things he did. 

 

As a matter of fact, if you would take a date of the hospitals 

that you're going to close down in this province, you would 

find that the majority of them had been built by the one that 

you're saying that you're supporting.  Tommy Douglas built 

most of those hospitals, Mr. Speaker.  In my constituency 

Tommy Douglas built those hospitals, except the last one.  And 

that was built by the former government, the Conservative 

government that is now the opposition on this side of the 

House. 

 

That's a fact, Mr. Speaker, and if you went across this province, 

from end to end, that is exactly what you would find out.  

Check the dates on your hospitals in your constituencies and 

you'll find Tommy Douglas probably built them.  Tommy 

Douglas put the power in there so that they could use the power 

to deal with the kinds of things that they had to deal with, 

whether it was having babies born or performing 

tonsillectomies or any of those kinds of things.  That's the kind 

of thing that Tommy Douglas put in there.  And who's taking it 

out today?  Who's taking it out of those hospitals across the 

province?  And we only have to look at the actions over the 

weekend to see, Mr. Speaker, that in fact the people are starting 

to rebel. 

 

The people are saying, this is it; I don't want to have my 

hospital gone.  And in fact, I want to point out to the people of 

this Assembly that the incident that occurred on Friday evening 

in Leader is just a small, small view of the sentiment of the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan, where 500 people 

turned out in a community to say no, we don't want these health 

boards in here because we know exactly what the minister is 

going to do.  The minister is going to offload the cost of this 

hospital on the property taxpayers in that community.  Count 

on it.  You just have to add it up.  And they are starting to add 

it up, Mr. Speaker.  If you take Leader and Maple Creek and 

Eastend -- I think they have 115 beds. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the conclusion of the bed allocation in those 

communities takes place, they will have less than 20, by the 

very factor that the Minister of Health is using to determine 

that the beds will be shut down.  That is a fact, Mr. Speaker.  I 

didn't make that decision; the Minister of Health did.  And in 

that decision she put forward she said, how many beds are 

going to be in Leader and Maple Creek and Eastend all 

together -- 30?  No, it'll be somewhere in the neighbourhood of 

18 to 23. 

 

(2030) 



700 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1993 

That, Mr. Speaker, where are they going to put that?  If you go 

from the south . . . the very south-west corner to Leader, it's 

probably 200 miles.  How many people are going to drive to 

the hospital in Leader?  Check that out.  But how many will go 

to Medicine Hat instead? 

 

And it goes back to that same observation I made in speeches 

earlier about people going where they get the service.  They go 

to the place where they get the service that's the least amount of 

cost and the most convenient.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is not 

going to be in Leader, it's not going to be in Maple Creek, and 

it's not going to be in Eastend.  It will be in Medicine Hat. 

 

And this government will turn around and have empty beds in 

those hospitals and deliver the health care out of Medicine Hat.  

That's what's going to happen.  That's going to happen over and 

over and over again. 

 

I just want to relate to you, Mr. Speaker, an incident that 

occurred in Medicine Hat about 1986.  Medicine Hat had a 

nursing home strike and all of the nursing homes in Medicine 

Hat had to move their patients out, and 11 of them, Mr. 

Speaker, were delivered to the health care facility in Cabri, 

Saskatchewan.  In Cabri, Saskatchewan, they said okay, we 

will take these level 4 care patients and put them into the 

hospital here and we will look after them. 

 

Well they did an assessment on those people before they 

moved in and they did an assessment on them after they moved 

out, and this is what the assessment read, Mr. Speaker.  That 

little hospital with 11 beds provided better health care to those 

patients than they had been receiving in Medicine Hat.  That 

was the comment that was made by the individuals who did the 

assessment on these patients that came in there. 

 

Why, Mr. Speaker, why?  Because they had . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Better service. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Better service, that's exactly right, whoever 

said it over there.  They had better service.  They had 

reasonable attention that could be paid to these individuals. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, was the reason why they were better 

off.  Their health condition was better.  Their response 

conditions were way better.  And the reason is they were better 

off in the health care facility in Saskatchewan than they had 

been in the one in Medicine Hat.  That, Mr. Speaker, is an 

opportunity for the people of the province. 

 

Now just take a look at what's going to happen here to the 

health care system as I've described it and as the Minister of 

Health has described it.  Those people on the west side of the 

province, they'll just go to Medicine Hat, get their doctoring 

services there.  They'll get their optometric services there.  

They'll get their teeth fixed there.  They'll get all of those 

services.  And, Mr. Speaker, where has the opportunity for 

people to live in the province gone?  It's gone to Alberta. 

And, Mr. Speaker, as I stand here today, we not only miss an 

opportunity in health care, we miss an opportunity in providing 

that fundamental service to the people of Saskatchewan within 

the framework of the people of Saskatchewan.  Are there going 

to be doctors on the west side?  Well there's a Dr. Holmes who 

lives in Leader who has an opportunity to have a hospital with 

something like three or four beds.  That's what's going to 

happen in Leader.  Is the doctor going to stay there for three or 

four health care patients in acute care in the town of Leader?  

No sir, Mr. Speaker.  And he said that too at the meeting.  That, 

Mr. Speaker, was his exact words.  He said, I'm out of here. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, for the members opposite to say that 

Tommy Douglas would have had it this way is exactly the 

wrong thing to say.  It flies in his face, Mr. Speaker, and I don't 

understand how the people can put this together, saying this is 

Tommy Douglas.  This is Tommy Douglas.  This is Tommy 

Douglas. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Speaker, Ed Whelan is right.  Ed Whelan is 

right.  The people that put this budget together had mud for 

brains.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why.  That's the 

reason why.  Tommy Douglas would not stand here and say, 

you fellows and gals are just doing the right thing.  No, Mr. 

Speaker, he would not.  He would say to you, you better go 

back to the drawing board.  If he were sitting in the Premier's 

chair, Mr. Speaker, if he were sitting in the Premier's chair, he 

would tell you, go back to the drawing board.  That's not what 

we're going to do, and as a matter of fact, that's what he did. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- His wife says so. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, they say that his wife says 

so.  Well let her go to Leader, Saskatchewan, and close the 

door on the hospital that he put there himself.  You tell those 

people in Leader, Saskatchewan, that she should shut the door 

and she will tell you, I have a heart and I will not.  That, Mr. 

Speaker, and to the members opposite, is the truth. And you 

need to listen to that and you need to follow that far more 

closely than you have. 

 

What does this Minister of Health do in relation to health care 

and her responsibility in dealing with other people?  This 

minister, Mr. Speaker, this minister has decided on a course of 

action that I believe will absolutely, thoroughly throw all of 

rural health care into chaos.  And I'm not sure whether she's 

doing it deliberately.  I have a sneaking suspicion that she is. 

 

But in the areas that my constituency lie is an area surrounding 

Swift Current and I thought for a while, you know, the city of 

Swift Current is going to get all of the benefits, all of the 

benefits of this regionalization.  And the places like Cabri, 

Herbert, Gull Lake, Vanguard, Kincaid, Mankota, Ponteix -- all 

of these -- Shaunavon, Eastend, Maple Creek, Leader, all of 

these communities would move to Swift Current with their 

health care. 

 

But no, what did they do?  What did they do in Swift Current?  

They took a million and a half dollars out of 



March 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 701 

the Palliser health care centre and they're going to have to 

close, Mr. Speaker, 30 to 35 beds in that heavy level 4 care 

facility.  Mr. Speaker, they're going to feel the effects of that 

kind of a delivery of health care. 

 

We had that same process gone through here down at 

Weyburn.  The Souris Valley health centre had the same 

problem evolve.  What happens, Mr. Speaker?  Those larger 

communities are going to get cut to pieces the same way that 

the other health communities in this province are.  There isn't 

anyone who is going to be disregarded.  Everybody is going to 

have a problem. 

 

And why is it extremely important that the people of 

Saskatchewan become involved in this discussion?  Why is it 

important for the people in Carlyle to become involved in this 

discussion? 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, it's important from the perspective of a 

number of things.  The people in Carlyle, Assiniboia, Eastend, 

Melfort, Meadow Lake, Nipawin, all of these communities 

need to get involved, Mr. Speaker, and the reason I say that is 

because they're all going to be impacted on this cut in health 

care.  The patient is going to lose. 

 

There is one thing that Tommy Douglas would never have 

allowed, Mr. Speaker.  The disheartening aspect of this whole 

discussion is that Tommy Douglas would not have allowed 

people to suffer like this government is going to allow them to 

suffer.  That is exactly . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to point 

this out because I want to point out a couple things, as I go 

along, to the members opposite who may not know the history 

of the south-west part of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

You may not know that health region no. 1 began in Swift 

Current and the south-west part of the province.  They maybe 

don't know that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You didn't know it till we told you. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, the member from 

Rosemont, who has not very pointedly defended this health 

care district board program, says that I didn't know it until he 

told me.  Well, Mr. Speaker, I go back in history a lot longer 

than he does, and when I moved into the Swift Current health 

care district was in 1945, Mr. Speaker, and I moved in there, 

and in 1947 it was established.  And that, Mr. Speaker, began 

the health care, health region no. 1 in the province of 

Saskatchewan that began there, and this government, under a 

different form, under Woodrow Lloyd, is the one that took it 

away, Mr. Speaker.  Tommy Douglas didn't take it away.  This 

group of people here under the leadership of Woodrow Lloyd 

took it away.  That's the people who took it away.  And then 

the people under the direction of Mr. Blakeney, they totally 

eliminated it.  And that, Mr. Speaker, was health region 

number 1. 

 

I want to point out a number of things, how the whole health 

region no. 1 was organized.  All of the 

municipalities from Leader to roughly in the area of Cadillac 

and Ponteix, that all the municipalities in that area, all of the 

small urban communities and all of the cities, all were allowed 

to have representation on that committee.  The municipality, 

urban or rural, provided the delegates to that executive that ran 

that health region no. 1.  Was it run out of Regina?  No, Mr. 

Speaker, it wasn't run out of Regina.  Was it run out of 

Saskatoon?  No, it wasn't run out of Saskatoon.  Was it run out 

of the Minister of Health's office?  No, Mr. Speaker, it was not.  

It was totally autonomous and independent and had its capacity 

to deal with its own governance within itself.  That, Mr. 

Speaker, is the reason why it's important to talk about it in 

relationship to the kinds of things that are going on here. 

 

These health care boards that the minister is going to appoint, 

and some of them have been appointed already, they are . . . I'll 

take Prince Albert as an example.  There was a reeve or a 

councillor from the municipality just outside the city of Prince 

Albert, wrote in the Rural Councillor, he wrote about how he 

perceived the whole of the process evolving around the P.A. 

(Prince Albert) Health Board and its responsibility.  And he 

said one of the things that struck him was that there were no 

representatives -- 18 municipalities, I believe in that health care 

unit in that district -- not one, Mr. Speaker, not one single 

person from a rural municipality was appointed to the board -- 

not one.  He said it is wrong for us to be involved in this kind 

of a program when not one of them is appointed by the . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Okay, how many are?  How many 

are?  The member from P.A. said that there was a whole lot of 

them appointed from the rural part of the . . . from that 

community.  Mr. Speaker, the member from P.A. says two.  

Okay so there's two.  Is that proportional to the property tax 

that the urban and the rural will pay?  I bet you it isn't. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to know how many people in the rural 

community from the small towns were appointed.  And that, 

Mr. Speaker, is another question that these people need to have.  

Oh they want to justify it all by saying there's an aboriginal on 

there.  Well fine.  Let that be; let that be.  Three women -- let 

that be too.  But you should be able to find somebody that you 

can appoint that would be part of the rural communities.  That's 

a part that you ignore. 

 

I want to point this out because the individual who wrote the 

article in the Rural Councillor said this.  He said the people in 

the rural community will have to bear the majority of the cost 

through property tax.  That's what he said.  That's exactly what 

he said.  The rural councillors will have to carry the cost of this 

health care facilities and the district boards.  That, Mr. Speaker, 

is the problem. 

 

Subsequent to that, Mr. Speaker, they're resigning.  Why?  

Why?  Because they don't want to be involved in having to 

close the hospitals.  Mr. Speaker, they don't want to shut the 

hospitals down.  They know it's wrong.  They've always 

thought it was wrong but here they were told, well it's going to 

be kind of a neat kind of a deal.  You'll be 



702 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1993 

able to have health care.  You'll be able to decide on your own 

where the money is going to go.  But nobody told them it 

wasn't going to be enough to cover the bills. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the fundamental problem.  And that is 

why what was done in health region no. 1 as compared to what 

these people are doing is totally different.  That minister is 

going to decide to appoint, and those people were elected from 

within the framework of their communities -- all of them.  In 

fact, Mr. Speaker, I believe there were 95 of them, towns and 

villages.  The city of Swift Current had a proportional 

representation on that board and they had a proportional 

representation on that executive.  And what did they decide to 

do through the history of that, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Somewhere in the early '50s the doctors, together with the 

municipalities, put together a bond.  And the bond, Mr. 

Speaker, was worth 200,000.  And in those days, Mr. Speaker, 

and even today, that's a lot of hay.  And that, Mr. Speaker, was 

put together by the municipalities and the doctors in the 

community. 

 

(2045) 

 

How did this work?  The health region provided the 

administration focus of all of the medical services within that 

framework.  They did the billing.  They then would turn around 

and bill health services for their refunds.  The doctors would 

get 85 per cent of the schedule.  The doctors were willing to 

work under that and the health region would retain the 15 per 

cent.  The doctors were comfortable with that.  In fact there 

were some doctors who said, I think I can live without this. 

 

And I believe it was in the '60s they said, well I think I'm going 

to go out there and see if I can bill on my own and collect it 

and have these people collect it.  Well you know what 

happened, Mr. Speaker?  It didn't take more than six months 

and those doctors were back on the stream taking 85 per cent of 

the schedule and allowing the health region to have the 15.  

And that, Mr. Speaker, was what happened. 

 

So the doctors in the community and the municipalities, both 

urban and rural, put together health region no. 1.  That was the 

beginning of it.  And in order to sustain that they took that 15 

per cent and said, we will put that against providing additional 

services.  And, Mr. Speaker, you know what they did?  They 

provided dental services for children.  Way before this 

government ever thought of it, they provided a dental service.  

And this is supposed to be the right-wing group of people who, 

those people over there say, oh they never did those kinds of 

things.  They didn't care. 

 

But this comes from the right-wing part of the province, Mr. 

Speaker, and that, Mr. Speaker, . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the former member from Shaunavon says 

I'm stupid.  Well I'll tell you the former member from 

Shaunavon should go back to his old constituency and find out 

how they voted for him.  They threw him out, Mr. 

Speaker.  They threw him out.  They said he was no good and 

that, Mr. Speaker, is a fact. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the very fact that these guys get 

irritated shows me that they are further from the truth than they 

ever thought they were.  And I want to point this out, Mr. 

Speaker, that Mr. Ross Thatcher represented that part of the 

province . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  What's the member's point of 

order? 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Mr. Speaker, my grandmother, who represented 

Maple Creek from '44 to '48, would be very offended. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- I think the member from Regina Albert North 

knows well that that is not a point of order.  It is not a point of 

order. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say that the 

individuals opposite get fairly exercised when you start talking 

about the truthful things that happened during the period of 

time from 1947. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the 

member from Swift Current is nattering from his chair, and I 

think that he needs to think about the kinds of things that he 

talked about when he was a councillor on the city council in 

Swift Current; he needs to think about some of those things. 

 

I will say, Mr. Speaker, that the people in the south-west part of 

the province had a concern about health care, they had a 

concern about dental care, and they provided it, Mr. Speaker, 

through the services that were provided by the people in the 

province.  That, Mr. Speaker, is exactly the reason why those 

people said I want to have a health care system, one, that is 

going to provide medical care.  I want a health service in this 

part of the province to provide health care that is going to be 

for emergencies.  I want to have health care that will provide 

some stability if there is an emergency. 

 

I want to have a health care system that is going to provide 

some stability to maintain a consistent wellness, as the member 

has called this new program.  It's a wellness . . . Well, it isn't 

wellness, it's getting sick.  But those people had a wellness 

program and it was entirely different than anything you have 

here. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, and that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why 

those people wanted it.  That, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why 

they developed health region no. 1. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you something 

about history.  Madam Minister, in 1977, Mr. Smishek, who 

was the minister of Health, Mr. Smishek, the minister of 

Health, decided that he was going to disband, he was going to 

disband health region no. 1.  He was going to take and throw it 

out. 

 

And what did he do, Mr. Speaker?  What did he do?  He 

decided to take those reserves that were put together 



March 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 703 

by the municipalities, he took those reserves and said, oh, I'm 

going to put them in the Consolidated Fund.  I'm going to put 

them in the Consolidated Fund for all the people to spend, and 

that, Mr. Speaker, is a fact. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I will say this, that the only reason that it 

was prevented from happening the first time that it was 

involved, Mr. Speaker, the first time that Mr. Smishek tried to 

come down and do it, do you know who stopped it? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Who? 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. E.I. Wood.  He said . . . and I'll give you 

exactly what happened.  They were in a meeting with these 95, 

Mr. Speaker, with these 95 delegates from all the way across 

the south-west part of the province.  They were in a meeting 

together with Mr. Smishek and Mr. Wood.  And Mr. Wood 

said to Mr. Smishek, come with me; we'll go outside for a 

while.  And as they were going out, Mr. Wood said to the 

delegates, he said, we'll get it, we'll get it.  And that's exactly 

what happened, Mr. Speaker.  That is exactly what happened. 

 

And as he went out, he convinced Mr. Smishek to leave the 

money in the program in the south-west and they came and 

then it was left in there.  But you know what happened just 

shortly after that?  It was taken out.  Mr. Speaker, the health 

region no. 1 had almost 9 . . . well it was more than $900,000 

in that surplus.  That $900,000, do you know what the health 

region wanted to do with it?  They wanted to put some extra 

services into Leader.  They wanted to put some extra services 

into Maple Creek and into Gull Lake.  Well they did.  They 

spent about $400,000 of that in those hospitals.  And do you 

know what happened then, Mr. Speaker?  The minister of 

Health said, I want the other $400,000. 

 

So the health region no. 1 said, well let's put it into the Swift 

Current Union Hospital.  Let's put it into the Swift Current 

Union Hospital and then we'll be able to protect the money 

that's been collected by the people in the municipal taxes.  You 

know what they told them?  You couldn't use that because it 

would be taken off of the money that was allocated to them on 

the basis of a general overall allocation.  That, Mr. Speaker, 

was exactly what they said.  You give them the $400,000 and 

we'll take it out of the grant. 

 

That's the kind of thing, Mr. Speaker, these people decided to 

do with health region no. 1 when they thought it was in their 

personal best interest to get rid of it.  Do you know why?  

Because it showed some efficiencies in the system.  It showed 

a capacity to have local people, elected local people, do the 

kinds of things that they were supposed to do in the 

communities involving health care.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is a 

fact. 

 

If you go to those communities in the south-west part and you 

talk to some of those old reeves and councillors, that's exactly 

what you'll find out.  Go talk to the old administrators in the 

municipalities.  Go talk to the older people in the city of Swift 

Current who 

were involved in the kinds of things that were going on at that 

time.  That is exactly what happened, Mr. Speaker. And you'll 

find that this government today is not of the same mode that 

Tommy Douglas was.  And even when in 1970 when these 

people were a part of the government, these people were not 

like Tommy Douglas.  Because that's when they took it away, 

Mr. Speaker -- they took it away.  And these people glibly say, 

well that was different in those days. 

 

But we're here on a whole new basis, Mr. Speaker.  And you're 

right, Mr. Speaker, it is a whole new basis.  These people are 

going to have appointed boards, people will be chosen, 

probably more for their political backing than their capacity to 

lead in health care.  That's the kind of choices these people are 

going to make.  And that's the choices they've been making 

across the province as they've put together these health care 

boards. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these people have clearly, in my opinion, not only 

desecrated the health care system, but they're in the process of 

dealing it a crippling blow in the province of Saskatchewan.  

That is what's going to happen. 

 

I want to say a couple of other things too.  And I've been 

involved in politics in the south-west for 20 years.  And one of 

the things that I have consistently listened to is what those 

people who run against me say about various kinds of things.  

And I want to point a couple of things out to the people of 

Saskatchewan I think they need to think about. 

 

In the area from 1986 till 1991 there was a consistent volume 

of support for establishing a new health care, level 4 health 

care facility in Swift Current.  And, Mr. Speaker, it was a good 

idea.  It was a good idea.  So what would make the Swift 

Current region want to have an opportunity for providing 

health care in an area that is . . . area like Swift Current.  And, 

Mr. Speaker, I thought it was a good idea.  I still think it's a 

good idea. 

 

But what have we had happen today?  Last week it was 

announced that there was going to be at least 30 beds cut out of 

the health care facility of the Palliser.  That, Mr. Speaker, is 

what the reality is in terms of what the people here have said 

and what the people wanted to have.  And I can recall the 

member from Swift Current in many occasions saying that he 

would personally see to it that there was a facility put into the 

city of Swift Current. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, what has . . . All through the city 

council, when the member was on city council, Mr. Speaker, he 

said that over and over again -- and in many other places.  I 

want to point out too, Mr. Speaker, that that is the member that 

shut down 30 beds in the city of Swift Current, in the Palliser 

hospital. 

 

It is going to mean that people will have a very, very serious 

problem in relating to their families because they will have to 

either move them out or deliver the health care in another way.  

But the families are going 



704 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1993 

to be held responsible for that, and that is very serious, Mr. 

Speaker. And I say to those people across, this government 

who are going to do that to the people in the province of 

Saskatchewan, think again.  Because some of those people will 

be your mothers, some of those people will be your aunts and 

uncles, and some of them will be your fathers.  That, Mr. 

Speaker, is the essence of what they're doing. 

 

They're saying, we don't care any more.  And they've said that 

over and over again.  The essence of this Bill is that the 

government, with this Bill and the policies that go with, has 

chosen to address funding by picking off the most politically 

vulnerable group, knocking them out of medicare, and 

offloading the funding burden on the property tax.  That, Mr. 

Speaker, is the reason why, for example, they don't want to 

move forward on Bill No. 10.  Bill No. 10 would take away the 

capacity of this government and the minister -- and the minister 

-- to tax property with an order from the minister.  That, Mr. 

Speaker, is the reason why they don't want to get rid of it, 

because what they're planning on doing is taking these 

communities, eliminating the responsibility of provincial 

funding, and saying to those small communities like Cabri and 

Leader and Maple Creek, Vanguard, and Herbert, you don't get 

funding from the province any more.  You're going to have to 

pick it up and take it from the property tax. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they can't do that any more.  The people with 

property cannot pay those taxes any longer.  They're more and 

more becoming unable to deliver, even on the school taxes that 

they have to pay, and the rural municipal taxes that they have 

to pay.  And now this government is going to unload, unload 

on the property tax the burden of health care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my view this has to do with priorities.  Mr. 

Speaker, in my view this has to do with priorities. And the 

member behind me said, it's purely speculation.  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, there's more and more people agreeing with me than 

there are with you, and that, Mr. Speaker, is a fact.  And they're 

beginning to see through what's going on. 

 

It's a matter of choices, Mr. Speaker.  It's a matter of choices, 

Mr. Speaker. The choices are being made every day by 

individuals who are in government, choices about, should I 

fund video lottery terminals for $23 million as a part of the 

budget, or should I not?  The essence of the fact is, Mr. 

Speaker, that you have to make choices when you're in 

leadership, and I think some of these choices are wrong.  I 

think they have been wrong from the very beginning. 

 

(2100) 

 

And the reason they're wrong is because they haven't got a 

balance.  There's some very fundamental things that they 

haven't done.  They're making choices, Mr. Speaker, between 

$23 million for gaming in your budget, Mr. Minister of Justice 

-- there are $23 million allocated for the Gaming Commission 

-- and what's allocated for chiropractic care?  Twenty-three 

million allocated for video lottery terminals in the province of 

Saskatchewan, and what's allocated for optometric 

services? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice asked me the question, 

what's the revenue?  And, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan, it isn't in the book.  

That, Mr. Speaker, is the kind of things that they've done.  And 

when we come to the Gaming Commission, we'll ask where 

that profit is and where it went, Mr. Speaker.  That's a part of 

these guys fudging the books like they've done for years and 

years, even in the Blakeney administration. 

 

Mr. Speaker, $23 million for the Gaming Commission to buy 

video lottery terminals and there's going to be 30 beds lost in 

the Palliser health care.  I don't know how many beds in the 

Souris Valley health care system.  How many beds are going to 

be lost in P.A.?  How many beds are going to be lost in Moose 

Jaw?  How many beds are going to be lost in Regina?  How 

many beds are going to be lost in Kindersley?  Twenty-three 

million dollars, Mr. Speaker, going to video lottery terminals 

and, Mr. Speaker, what's going to be used to buy optometric 

care?  What's going to be used to buy chiropractic care?  

Nothing, Mr. Speaker.  What's going to be used to buy dental 

services for children?  Twenty-three million -- where's that 

going to go?  That's going to buy video lottery terminals and 

we're not even sure, Mr. Speaker, we're not even sure whether 

in fact the businesses that are trying to do business have a 

legitimate and legal problem in United States.  That's the 

question we raise today. 

 

These government have choices.  And, Mr. Speaker, the 

member from Last Mountain-Touchwood, he's got some 

observations to make about how we spent money in health 

care.  Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to point . . . that raises a point 

that I want all of you to consider. 

 

One of the things that motivated, Mr. Speaker, one of the 

things that motivated one of the individuals from Cabri, 

Saskatchewan, to nominate me in the last election, was the fact 

. . . was this very fact, Mr. Speaker, that in 1977 when he was 

going around the province looking for an opportunity to 

establish a senior citizens' home and a nursing home in the 

town of Cabri, he was told by the then minister of Social 

Services that we have a moratorium on those kinds of facilities 

in the province of Saskatchewan.  That, Mr. Speaker, is a fact.  

And that individual, since that time has supported me on every 

occasion.  And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a fact. 

 

And since that happened, what has happened to the town of 

Cabri?  Mr. Speaker, they have a new hospital with level 4 

facilities attached to it.  And that, Mr. Speaker, was needed, 

was needed in that community.  Mr. Speaker, as absolutely as I 

stand here, that was needed in that community, and I fought for 

that community to get it.  And I worked hard. 

 

And now what's going to happen, Mr. Speaker?  The member 

from Shaunavon, the member from Swift Current, the member 

from Rosetown-Elrose, they're going to shut these down.  

They're going to shut them 



March 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 705 

down, Mr. Speaker.  Close them down, that's the best thing to 

do for these facilities. 

 

Now I want to point out to the people of this province, those 

people and those communities will not allow that to happen, 

Mr. Speaker.  And you know what they're playing off here?  

The Minister of Health is playing off the very fact that she 

says, if I cut and reduce the spending, they are going to take 

and put it on the property tax.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is wrong 

for this government to do that.  It's absolutely, totally wrong. 

 

The town of Vanguard has a hospital and health care services.  

And when I asked the Minister of Health to stand in her place 

during estimates last year, what did she tell me?  She said there 

is one acute care bed in that hospital, and that's absolutely, 

totally wrong -- absolutely, totally wrong.  Mr. Speaker, there 

is four and a half acute care beds on an average daily census in 

that hospital and have been for years.  That's a fact.  And she 

had the lack of presence of mind to stand in this Assembly and 

say there's only one in that hospital.  It's wrong. 

 

I went and phoned the director of care in that hospital and 

there's four and a half, Mr. Speaker, the average daily census 

on acute care.  The average daily census in that hospital is 11, 

Mr. Speaker.  And when you take and include all of the value 

to that community, that, Mr. Speaker, is an exceptional value, 

and I put it to them this way.  They have asked, they have 

pleaded, they have begged for an opportunity to have a level 4 

care facility attached to the hospital, and health care will not 

provide it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the people in this Assembly that I 

have represented that community, and I have represented it 

well, and they have voted for me, Mr. Speaker.  And I'll go 

even further to say that the community that Mr. Gross 

represented didn't vote for him the last time around either.  

They voted for me, and that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why 

those people want to have me represent them rather than those 

people there.  That, Mr. Speaker, is a fact. 

 

I want to raise some issues that I think have some significance 

as it relates to the discussion here because I want to deal with 

how these people are attacking this on a practical basis.  When 

we initiated a major program in rural Saskatchewan or in urban 

Saskatchewan, we went and visited the people.  We went . . . I 

recall, Mr. Speaker, that when the discussion on GRIP (gross 

revenue insurance program) was taking place that there was 

about 110 meetings across this province where ministers of the 

Crown went to visit these communities.  I think there was eight 

ministers in all went, visited wherever the people wanted to 

have a meeting.  Now that dealt with a major initiative on the 

part of a government. 

 

What has this government done on a major initiative like 

wellness in the province of Saskatchewan?  Have they been in 

Kindersley?  Have they been in Rosetown?  Have they been in 

Biggar?  Have they been in Nipawin?  Have they been 

anywhere?  And probably 

the answer is no. 

 

And the real question, Mr. Speaker, is probably, have they been 

in Eastend when the member from Shaunavon said that they 

were going to be?  And the answer to that question is no.  Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the answer to the question has the Minister of 

Health been in Eastend, Saskatchewan, and the answer is no. 

 

Has the Minister of Health been in Leader?  Was she in P.A.?  

Was she there on Saturday when the member from P.A. turned 

his back on the people?  Was she in P.A., as the Minister of 

Health in Prince Albert, when the one of the members from 

P.A. turned his back on the people?  That, Mr. Speaker, that's 

why this government has lost touch because they don't go out 

and see the people. 

 

They say people want to have a rationalization in the health 

care system.  People want to have a rationalization in the health 

care system but they want it to be done fairly, ladies and 

gentlemen of this Assembly.  They want to have it done fairly, 

and what I see as represented in this Assembly through Bill No. 

3 is not doing it fairly.  Mr. Speaker, it is as unfair as you can 

possibly make it. 

 

The member from Moose Jaw said that he likened this thing to 

the third stage of Tommy Douglas's evolution and what his 

belief was for the people of this province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, it contradicts itself.  It 

contradicts itself by the very arguments he raised to pretend 

that he was making an argument on the case on behalf of 

Tommy Douglas.  He contradicted himself, Mr. Speaker.  He 

contradicted himself on the basis that the individual who deals 

with health care in any sort of fashion will always . . . if it 

comes from the NDP Party, will always deal with it from the 

function of being right.  Mr. Speaker, that's what they said.  

That's what they said. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- And they're applauding, Mr. Speaker, they're 

applauding the closing of the hospital in Leader.  They're 

applauding the closing the hospital in Leader; they're 

applauding closing the hospital in Maple Creek; they're 

applauding closing the hospital in Eastend, Carlyle, Eston, 

Eatonia, Kyle, Beechy, all across the province.  They're just 

going to close the door and go away.  And they contradict 

themselves because it probably was Mr. Tommy Douglas who 

built them there in the first place.  Mr. Speaker, the member 

from Moose Jaw contradicted the very essence of his argument 

when he said this was Tommy Douglas's deal.  That, Mr. 

Speaker, is absolutely false. 

 

This minister has said that local communities will have control, 

Mr. Speaker, that they will be able to put their boards together, 

that they will have control of the agenda.  That's not a fact, Mr. 

Speaker.  They contradict themselves in relation to that.  The 



706 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1993 

communities will not have local control.  It will be run from 

Regina and that will be the end of it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then they have . . . in the Act it says that the board will be 

appointed from Regina and then there will be a certain amount 

that will be elected.  Well, Mr. Speaker, as the world turns, the 

election will probably turn up some NDP people who believe 

in the same philosophy as this Minister of Health and then she 

has to appoint five, six, or eight people to that board, and what 

will they do?  What will they do, Mr. Speaker? 

 

They will . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh yes, that's a broad, 

broad statement to make, the member from Elphinstone has 

just said.  They will have the best for the community, Mr. 

Speaker, and is the best for the community . . . clap again.  Is 

the best for the community that they close down 34 beds in the 

Palliser hospital?  Is that the reason . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . Oh, when are they going to be shut down?  When are they 

going to be shut down?  How many are going to be closed 

down in the Palliser hospital, Mr. Speaker?  A one and a half 

million dollar cut in the budget and what are they going to do 

with it?  They're closing it down -- one thirty-bed wing.  And 

that is a fact.  Mr. Speaker, that's the problem with these 

people.  They talk about one thing and do another.  That's the 

contradictory part of their whole argument and that's the part 

that really is beginning to irritate the people, and that's a fact. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if these people wanted to do something that 

would be revolutionary, that would be to say to those people in 

those communities, you go elect all of your boards.  Why don't 

you go elect all of your boards and allow the people in the 

province to decide exactly what they wanted to have.  And that, 

Mr. Speaker, is the difference between health region no. 1 and 

what these people are doing.  Health region no. 1 will not have 

an elected board.  They will not have an elected board just like 

they did in . . . from the '40s, '50s, and the '60s.  They will have 

an appointed board by this Health minister. 

 

What is of significance to the people in my constituency is that 

these people will be able to take and unilaterally decide exactly 

what they want to do.  They'll cut, just as they did in the 

Palliser hospital, 30 beds off.  Thirty beds gone, Mr. Speaker, 

and that's a very, very serious thing to consider. 

 

(2115) 

 

All of this responsibility for appointments will be done out of 

the cabinet or the minister.  And why shouldn't the people, why 

shouldn't the people who have elected health care boards for 

years and years determine that they have a responsible attitude 

about doing it.  Why couldn't they do that, Mr. Speaker?  That's 

the question that I raise here tonight. 

 

Ask the optometrist, Mr. Speaker, whether there was any 

consultation as it relates to optometric care in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  Go ask the pharmacists whether there was any 

consultation as it related to the new drug plan.  Go ask the 

chiropractors whether 

there was consultation in anything related to the chiropractic 

care.  And, Mr. Speaker, you find over and over again that 

there was no involvement by the people in this government to 

deal with any of that.  That's a fact, Mr. Speaker, and I want to 

point that out to this Assembly tonight. 

 

Why doesn't this government go and ask the diabetics about 

how much it costs individuals who are diabetics in the province 

of Saskatchewan to sustain themselves.  And I got a letter from 

a lady in Swift Current who works on the regional health . . . 

regional health group that deals with diabetics and how to do 

the diets for diabetics.  And this lady is a diabetic herself.  And 

it will cost her, Mr. Speaker, it will cost her $4,000 a year to 

provide herself a life support so that she can do her normal 

day's work and so that she can live.  It will cost her $4,000, Mr. 

Speaker, and that, Mr. Speaker, is very, very, significant.  How 

many days will she have to work in order to provide that 

$4,000 for herself.  How many days will she have to work for 

all of the other medical expenses that will occur in the two 

children that she has? 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why she wrote me a letter 

and said, this is what the costs are.  I believe that she was frank, 

open, and honest and if she . . . and by the way, Mr. Speaker, 

she wrote a letter to the Minister of Health as well, and said, 

what has your drug program done to wellness for me?  And I 

pay $4,000 a year to have insulin and the things that go with 

the diabetic problem.  They say, well that's fine. 

 

But did they consult anybody?  No, Mr. Speaker, they did not.  

They haven't consulted anybody on Bill No. 3 either and that's 

a fact.  Have they consulted with the elderly, Mr. Speaker?  

Have they looked and said to these senior people in the 

province of Saskatchewan, have they asked them whether they 

should reduce the number of beds in level 4 care in the 

province of Saskatchewan?  Have they asked them whether 

they should reduce the funding so that more and more of the 

cost is borne by the individuals who are residents in level 2 and 

level 3 and level 4 care facilities.  Have they asked them?  No, 

Mr. Speaker, they have not. 

 

They have gone around and said, oh it isn't going to bother you 

much.  It isn't going to impact you much, you just elect this 

board and put it all together and then you're going to have a 

whole lot better program and this is going to be wellness.  Mr. 

Speaker, this will be wellness.  Well, Mr. Speaker, people who 

live in those communities don't think it's wellness. 

 

The mayor of Vanguard sitting in this Assembly on the day that 

the budget speech was delivered, Mr. Speaker, was not very 

impressed with the Minister of Health's and the Minister of 

Finance's wellness model.  She said, that is the death not only 

of wellness, but it's the death of our community.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, that's the part that bothers people when you talk 

about, oh this is good for you, take this Buckley's medicine and 

it'll do you good.  Well, Mr. Speaker, the people say no.  They 

said no in P.A., and they're going to say no in Rosetown, and 

they're going to say no in Assiniboia, and they're going to say 

no in 



March 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 707 

Gravelbourg, and throughout the province. 

 

And what you're going to do is just you're going to unilaterally 

say, okay that doesn't matter what folks say in the province of 

Saskatchewan; you're going to do away with it.  That's what 

your intention is. 

 

Your attack on seniors . . . 1982 to 1991 there was an extensive 

cost carried by the people of the province of Saskatchewan in 

building nursing home beds for people in the province who 

needed it.  Mr. Speaker, those people needed it.  There was no 

saying to the people like was said in 1977, we're going to have 

a moratorium on nursing home beds in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  That's what was said.  And from 1982 to 1991 

there was a significant change.  And, Mr. Speaker, if the people 

of this province go into their local community, they will see a 

nursing home facility.  And will it have one bed empty, two 

beds empty, any beds empty?  And I grant you, Mr. Speaker, 

that there will be absolutely no beds empty, and there's 

probably a waiting-list.  And that waiting-list, Mr. Speaker, is 

as important to consider on the basis of seniors as it is for 

individuals needing health care services and acute care 

facilities in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Individuals have called me when their family have serious 

illness, as heart patients.  On one occasion, an individual 

phoned me, and he said, my wife is going to have this 

procedure where they put a ball in an artery in your leg, and 

they put it up through the artery and expand the artery so that 

the person can have better circulation in the system and deal 

with the cholesterol problems that occur and the shrinking and 

the hardening of the arteries.  That, Mr. Speaker, was during a 

time when there was significant risk because the doctors were 

talking about not signing the agreement too, on the health care 

side of the ledger.  What happened, Mr. Speaker?  This 

individual phoned me up and he said, get those people to work.  

Get them to work.  Make them sign that agreement so that they 

go to work so that my wife can have that operation. 

 

You see, Mr. Speaker, what these people have done is they 

have distanced themselves from the problem.  They have 

distanced themselves from the problem so that they don't have 

to watch it, so they don't have to see these old people struggling 

to survive on a minimum income when -- as we've heard 

people say in this Assembly over and over again in former 

years -- you put on a $50 fee for a drug program as a measure 

to offset some of the cost and they say, well it's drugs or food. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, these same people who said that are 

going to put an $850 ticket on these senior citizens.  That, Mr. 

Speaker, is horrendous and that's every six months.  And that, 

Mr. Speaker, is a part of the reason why I say to the members 

of this Assembly . . . that's why I say to the members of this 

Assembly that this Bill and the policies that go with it, and this 

government, has chosen to address funding by picking off the 

most politically vulnerable group, knocking them out of 

medicare and offloading the funding burden onto the property 

taxes. 

That's the essence of what they're doing, Mr. Speaker.  They're 

taking the people that Tommy Douglas would have cared for, 

they're taking the people that Tommy Douglas would have 

said, I really feel for you; would have gone out and stood 

alongside those people and said, we're going to do this for you . 

. . And these people say no, I'm not even going to visit.  I'm not 

even going to go out and say how would I rationalize this 

health care system in a way that would provide adequate 

funding for everyone to get the benefit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this group of people in 1977-78 imposed a 

moratorium on nursing homes.  And I will never, ever 

apologize to anyone for building those nursing homes in my 

constituency and in any constituency, Mr. Speaker, because the 

people in the province of Saskatchewan knew there was a need, 

they accepted the responsibility, and they even helped to build 

some of those themselves, Mr. Speaker.  The municipalities 

provided funding so that these facilities could be built.  And it 

relieved the capital cost to the province considerable amount. 

 

And that leads me to a point, Mr. Speaker.  The town of 

Vanguard has considered building a level 4 facility adjacent to 

the hospital.  They've considered this for a long time. 

 

One of the things that they did, Mr. Speaker, is they went to the 

municipality and said -- to the municipalities -- could you put 

together the funding that is required as your share of the cost in 

building this facility?  And, Mr. Speaker, they did.  They went 

and in three years they had all the funds available to construct 

that level 4 care facility. 

 

Why?  Because the people knew that they needed it in that 

community.  They needed it in that community in order for 

those people who grew up in that community to live there and 

be visited by family, visited by friends, people that they had 

grown up with. 

 

That's the kind of thing that is always available in those 

communities for the people who earned their living there.  

They played their hockey there.  They did all of the things.  

They raised their families.  They taught school.  They educated 

their children. 

 

And in those communities, Mr. Speaker, now what's happened?  

Now they're closing the door on them.  Systematically going 

around the province and saying, sorry, can't have this acute 

care facility here, can't have that one there.  Your beds are 

going to be apportioned one and a half . . . 1.1 to one and a half 

beds per thousand. 

 

Well that might lead to some efficiencies in major urban 

centres where you're only half an hour away from the hospital 

health care facility where you live, but that's not the case in the 

communities where I live. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reason I guess that this becomes a very 

personal matter to me, Mr. Speaker, and has been for a long 

time, is that in 1959 I was a part . . . I became involved in an 

accident that caused me a considerable 



708 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1993 

amount of concern and that rather seriously altered a lot of 

things that I did in my life.  And that, Mr. Speaker, was the day 

that I became aware of the health care facility in health region 

no. 1 providing me the service so that I could recuperate from 

the accident. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, set a tone for me.  And what do we do 

when people help me and get established . . . and I've had 

numerous operations in various hospitals since then, Mr. 

Speaker, in Regina and Saskatoon, in Swift Current, in Kyle, 

and a lot of different places -- and that, Mr. Speaker, has led 

me to  believe this: that when there is a need to help someone 

out, the people in the province of Saskatchewan are prepared to 

assist.  They are prepared to assist.  They did it for me; I'm 

prepared to assist them.  We have that attitude.  We have that 

belief in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And now what we have, Mr. Speaker, this group of people who 

think they know everything, they are going to take and 

systematically reduce that opportunity for emergency services, 

acute care services in rural Saskatchewan, systematically cut it 

to pieces.  And, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to this 

Assembly that the people in the province do not believe in that.  

The people in the province don't believe in that.  And they 

never have, Mr. Speaker.  That's why they wanted medicare in 

the first place.  The people in this province don't believe that 

what you're doing is right. 

 

And that's why I say to you, why don't you reconsider?  If you 

believe that you can convince the people of Saskatchewan that 

you are doing the right thing, then go to Leader, go to Prince 

Albert and talk to those people.  Go there, and ask them.  And 

what are they telling you?  That you're doing the right thing?  I 

highly suspect that they're not.  Whether it's in the health care 

delivery, the individuals in the health care delivery system, 

nurses, doctors, therapists, chiropractors, all of them.  Are you 

delivering what the people of Saskatchewan want to have?  No, 

Mr. Speaker, they're not. 

 

(2130) 

 

And I say to you, it's a matter of choices.  You're making some 

choices that are very serious.  And when I see these people who 

are in need of serious health care, and they're in need of it, and 

there's no place for them to go . . . What are we going to do 

when we have a list of a hundred people wanting to get into 

level 4 care facilities in Swift Current?  What are we going to 

do when we have 10 of them in Cabri?  What are we going to 

do when we have 25 of them in Herbert?  What are we going to 

do with all these people?  You've got some bright ideas?  Why 

don't you come forward with it? 

 

You haven't got a solution.  You say that your solution is 

building a board, building a district.  Oh yes, they'll be able to 

rationalize it.  How will they be able to rationalize it, Mr. 

Speaker?  They won't be able to.  They will weigh the care that 

the people in this province believe in against money.  These 

people do that.  They say, should we care about people, or 

should we cut the budget?  And, Mr. Speaker, I say that they're 

misdirected in how they spent their money. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I say that this government is mismanaging 

more than I have ever seen in my life before.  Mr. Speaker, 

they are mismanaging their opportunity for investment in this 

province.  And they are mismanaging their opportunity for 

delivering health care.  And that is why, Mr. Speaker, that is 

why I say to these people, do you really care?  And the people 

in the province have a right to ask that question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood 

raises a very important point.  He raises an important point 

because yes, Mr. Member, I did care when they asked me in 

Cabri, Saskatchewan, to put a nursing home in there.  I did care 

when at Herbert they asked me to change it around so that we 

could add additional beds and provide a better service.  Mr. 

Speaker, those people asked for it, and we delivered it.  And 

that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, nursing home 

beds didn't cost 15 billion. 

 

And as a matter of fact, as a matter of fact, let's take choices 

into perspective, Mr. Minister, let's take choices into 

perspective.  In 1977 when those members opposite were in 

government, they decided to buy holes in the ground and 

potash mines instead of building nursing homes, Mr. Speaker.  

That's what they decided to do.  That is exactly what they 

decided to do. 

 

And what have you got, Mr. Speaker?  They cared more about 

the economic things as it dealt with buying the socialist agenda 

than it did with buying health care facilities and opportunities 

in the province of Saskatchewan.  And that, Mr. Minister, is a 

fact. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people in the province of Saskatchewan want 

to know, they want to know why you're prepared to put $64 

million in a pipeline coming down to deliver natural gas -- $64 

million they want to know -- when the private industry in the 

province of Saskatchewan would be gladly prepared to do that.  

That, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why these people are going 

down and sliding down in the polls. 

 

They have made the choices, Mr. Speaker -- $64 million they're 

prepared to put into pipelines when the private sector could 

easily do that.  They're making choices every day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as I said before, they're making choices about other things 

as it relates to video lottery terminals.  They're making choices 

-- $23 million they plan on spending.  They're making choices, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, $64 million in the budget is going to go to buy a 

big steel pipeline in the province of Saskatchewan.  And as 

taxpayers, they're going to pay for it.  That's where the choices 

are all wrong, Mr. Speaker.  And that's what the people of the 

province are saying.  Let the private industry who has the 

capacity to do it, and who can probably deliver it a lot 



March 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 709 

better than the government can, let them become involved in it, 

let them do it.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is what we need to have. 

 

There's another point I want to make.  People in the province of 

Saskatchewan are asking me what kind of choices are these 

people making.  And I want to say . . . there are a couple of 

places I want to point this out in.  They're making choices, Mr. 

Speaker, to own about 350-plus-million dollars worth of shares 

in Cameco.  They're saying, okay, we'll own those.  Why don't 

we sell them and invest the money in health care or invest the 

money in reducing our deficit.  But no, Mr. Speaker, no, let's 

just keep pushing these taxes down people's throat.  Let's push 

the 9 per cent down people's throat, build the 64 million on the 

basis of one point in that E&H tax, build that $64 million worth 

of pipeline when the private sector could do it.  Mr. Speaker, 

these people make choices every day, and in my community, 

it's going to impact.  That's what we're talking about. 

 

The health care facility in the community that serves me is 

going to cut a million and a half dollars out of the budget of a 

level 4 care facility.  They're making choices, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You made choices too . . . 

 

Mr. Martens: -- You're right, Mr. Speaker.  I made choices 

over and over again, and health care in Herbert, Saskatchewan, 

is better served today than it's ever been served before because 

this member stood up for rural Saskatchewan.  The member 

from Last Mountain-Touchwood doesn't even know what 

happens in his community today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we made choices about people in their homes.  

We made choices about people in the hospital.  We made 

choices with people in health care.  Mr. Speaker, when this 

Conservative Party was the government of the province of 

Saskatchewan, there was a significant concern raised by the 

people who were in opposition at the time, Mr. Speaker, about 

the waiting-list in the University, St. Paul's and City Hospital in 

Saskatoon.  And, Mr. Speaker, when this party was the 

government in the province of Saskatchewan, we responded 

because we cared. 

 

And what did we do, Mr. Speaker?  We lowered the volume of 

people waiting on the waitings list.  And that, Mr. Speaker, was 

a choice that we made.  You're right; it was a choice we made.  

And, Mr. Speaker, it was made because we cared.  It was made 

because we had a concern for these people.  And what do you 

do?  Oh you just say, oh that was waste and mismanagement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have the minister of laws in this province of 

Saskatchewan commenting on $15 billion worth of debt.  Well, 

Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . it's not 16 billion; it 

was 13 billion when we left office.  And it is now 15 billion, 

and that is a fact. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hear the member from Saskatoon, or a 

member from Saskatoon saying, well am I proud of that.  Well, 

Mr. Speaker, in my constituency, there is significant benefit 

from that money that we spent in schools and in hospitals. 

 

As a matter of fact, I too have a school, Mr. Speaker.  I too 

have a school that has a fire warden's commitment to it.  And 

that, Mr. Speaker, is little children going into a basement for 

kindergarten when the Fire Marshall has said they shouldn't be 

there at all.  That's the kind of thing that you left in the '70s 

when you decided to make a choice of putting money into a 

potash mine rather than into the people in the communities in 

the province of Saskatchewan and you put millions and 

hundreds of millions of dollars into that. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why you again are going 

to lose the next election.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is the 

fundamental belief in the people of the province; that you have 

not looked after them or cared for what they did.  You have 

your own personal agenda that is not accurate and is not 

correct. 

 

I want to point something out to the people that are perhaps 

listening.  And, Mr. Speaker, I want to point this out . . . 

(inaudible) . . . A lot of people have considered what the 

members opposite have said, and that being that the majority of 

the waste in health care is consumed by the people in rural 

Saskatchewan -- that is not a fact, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The fact of the matter is that 20 per cent of the health care 

costs, 20 per cent of the health care costs in the province of 

Saskatchewan are in rural Saskatchewan -- 20 per cent; 80 per 

cent occur in Saskatoon and Regina -- 80 per cent of the health 

care costs occur in the city of Regina and Saskatoon. 

 

Then you'll have people say well, there are people from the 

rural part of Saskatchewan that go have health care services in 

Regina and Saskatoon.  Well yes, sir, you're right. 

 

But don't, don't mess with the numbers when you're talking 

about the savings in health care in rural Saskatchewan by 

cutting out these hospitals and health care facilities.  You're 

going to cut them out and what is going to happen, Mr. 

Speaker?  It's going to happen as I've seen it in rail line 

abandonment, abandonment of various kinds of businesses, of 

elevator closures, all of those things. I've seen it all happen in 

rural Saskatchewan.  And, Mr. Speaker, this government is 

going to do exactly the same with rural base hospitals. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is a fact.  They're going to cut them out 

there and they're not going to save a nickel in the long run. 

 

And they will have additional costs, Mr. Speaker, additional 

costs.  They will have costs.  Why?  They'll have costs on costs 

because of delays in operations that should have taken place 

earlier rather than later.  And that, Mr. Speaker . . . they will 

have additional costs. 



710 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1993 

The Minister of Health has said that the people of the province 

of Saskatchewan have a wellness program here.  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, it's like saying that chiropractic care isn't a part of 

wellness, or a diabetic going to the optometrist to get his eyes 

checked because there isn't a direct relationship between 

diabetics and optometric care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a part to wellness that is very fundamental 

that says if I do the things right -- I live well; I practise a 

good-quality lifestyle -- that I will have a longer life.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, that is going to see the optometrist for a diabetic; that 

is going to the chiropractor with a person with back spasms.  

That is doing all of those things. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker . . . these people don't have any way to 

rationalize the thinking that they've done behind this wellness 

model.  It doesn't make sense.  And the people of the province 

are saying over and over again, it doesn't make sense. 

 

I want to go through some of the news items that have been 

dealing with health care costs.  Mr. Speaker, the minister of 

laws -- and I'm not sure of Justice -- is chirping from his seat.  

The role of P.A. hospitals to be spelled out.  It says here: while 

the consultants report did not contain specific 

recommendations, it did imply preference for a Victoria Union 

as the most viable and least expensive choice for an acute care 

facility. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- And what did the people of P.A. think? 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Yes, right.  What did the people of P.A. say 

last Friday or Saturday?  Saturday.  Mr. Speaker, the people in 

the province of Saskatchewan and in Prince Albert said no, I 

don't think you're right.  I don't think you're right.  Turn 

Victoria into a single acute-care facility with long-term care at 

Holy Family.  Make Holy Family the acute care facility with 

long-term care at Victoria Union.  Focus medicine, surgery, 

intensive care, psychiatric, emergency service at the Victoria 

Union, with obstetrics, pediatrics and long-term care at the 

Holy Family.  That's what the deal was in P.A. 

 

What happened in P.A.?  Did the people really like that in 

Prince Albert?  No.  They're finally figuring this thing out.  

They're finally figuring out the Minister of Health.  The 

wellness that she continually talks about, Mr. Speaker, is not 

wellness in the health care system, it's wellness in the Minister 

of Finance's budget. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this party on this side of the House is as 

committed to balancing the books as those people are.  We're 

as committed to financial responsibility as those people are.  

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that the people of P.A. 

have said they're not interested in this wellness model.  The 

people at Leader on Friday night said, we're not interested in 

this wellness model.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is what people in 

the province of Saskatchewan really feel. 

The hospital closers said: up to the board.  And I quote from 

the Regina Leader-Post, Thursday, March 25: 

 

 Saskatchewan Health Minister Louise Simard says the 

government is not responsible for any decision that may lead 

to the closure of the Weyburn hospital. 

 

(2145) 

 

Well when was it the responsibility of property tax to pay for 

the health care system in the province of Saskatchewan?  That's 

the question people are asking.  When did that change from a 

publicly funded, publicly taxed program, so that the people in 

the province have universal care on the basis of universal tax.  

That's been there a long time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

 Workers at the Souris Valley Regional Centre say they have 

been told the facility will close within five years. 

 

Five years, Mr. Speaker.  Do these people care?  Are there 

going to be people on a waiting-list that are going to go to the 

member from Weyburn and say, my father needs to get into a 

nursing home, where can you put him in a nursing home?  My 

mother needs to go to a nursing home.  Where can I put her in a 

nursing home?  Is it going to be in Regina? 

 

Mr. Speaker, home care.  Well I believe in home care, Mr. 

Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I believe in home care, but when a 

person reaches the point of having to have four or five hours of 

special care, then, Mr. Speaker, that person cannot be served by 

home care. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is the problem that we . . . Mr. Speaker, 

that's the problem we ran into in the '70s, and that's a problem 

that existed as it moved into the '80s.  Those people in the '70s 

said home care can do it.  Provide the care in homes. 

 

But what happened, Mr. Speaker?  Wellness and home care 

made the problem even worse in the 1980s.  The problem 

became far more acute in the 1980s because this is a 

progressive kind of a decline.  It's a progressive decline in a 

person's capacity to take care of himself, and when you reach 

that point, Mr. Speaker, it becomes a point when you have to 

say, these individuals must be looked after in a facility.  I can 

no longer do it. 

 

Souris Valley Regional Care Centre says in five years they'll be 

closed.  Mr. Speaker, what we have to think about when we 

talk about the Souris Valley Centre, when we talk about the 

Palliser Health Care Centre, what we have to think about, Mr. 

Speaker, is the very fact that these beds will be closed, and as 

they shut down, where are we going to put the new ones that 

come along, the people that need health care?  Where are we 

going to put them?  Where are we going to put them, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

Will those people on that side of the House, will they take and 

put them into their own homes to look after them when they 

can't do that any more?  Are they 



March 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 711 

going to do that?  Mr. Speaker, the answer very likely is no.  

The answer very likely is no and that, Mr. Speaker, creates all 

kinds of problems. 

 

And then here in January, we even have some individuals who 

are going to say to the government, I'm not sure about this 

wellness concern.  And I have a statement in the Leader-Post 

dated January 20: health board under fire; MLA wants elected 

body.  Well there is some reason on that side of the House.  

There is some reason.  They want an elected body and, Mr. 

Speaker, maybe they should have an elected body.  And the 

reason, Mr. Speaker . . . I want to point out the reason that I 

believe that this individual said that he wanted an elected body 

is because at one time he was a city councillor in the city of 

Regina and he understands what these elected people stand for.  

He understands what they're capable of doing. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health doesn't understand 

any of that because she has never been involved in it and 

therefore disqualifies all of the people in the same broad sweep 

of the brush. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Victoria is right, 

and why does he understand it?  He understands it because he 

himself was an elected official in the community of Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's a perspective from the city of Regina.  Let's 

go to small-town Saskatchewan. 

 

Now this is a letter from Kincaid, Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 

addressed to the Minister of Health:  In regards to your 

wellness approach to health care, the idea of promoting a 

healthier lifestyle, reducing stress, reducing depression and 

suicides in order to reduce our health care needs may sound 

like a good idea, but here in the real world, in our small 

community people still get into car accidents, farming 

accidents, have heart attacks, strokes, just simply get sick and 

die, regardless of their lifestyles. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Kindersley took the time to go 

to Leader on Friday and in the process of the discussion a 

gentleman got up and went to the mike and said, if I had had to 

drive from where I live to Medicine Hat, I would have not 

survived the heart attack.  And he was standing there and 

saying that.  The nurse who looked after and stabilized him and 

the doctor who stabilized him in Leader, Saskatchewan, 

verified that very comment, Mr. Speaker.  If they hadn't 

stabilized him in Leader, Saskatchewan, he wouldn't have 

made it to Medicine Hat.  Mr. Speaker, I can point out time 

after time, and every one of us would be able to dig up people 

who have had those kinds of experiences.  We would be able to 

relate to them.  And, Mr. Speaker, I know people in my 

community and my community is only 25 miles away from . . . 

away from the major hospitals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to . . . Mr. Speaker, I want to provide this 

information.  There was a young fellow, who was a person who 

went to the camp that is just on our property, Mr. Speaker.  

And he didn't tell anybody that he was an asthmatic, Mr. 

Speaker.  And they went 

on a trail ride and when they were 20 miles out of . . . away 

from the camp, he said he started having seizures.  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, my nephew, who has CPR (cardiopulmonary 

resuscitation) training and various other . . . he's a lifeguard, 

has all of the badges required to be a lifeguard, and has 

lifeguarded in various pools in the region -- he was there.  And 

they, at least three times, Mr. Speaker, resuscitated this 

individual. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was made aware of to the people in the Swift 

Current Union Hospital and they said, they asked him whether 

he would be a guest of the Saskatchewan Roughriders here in 

Regina for a football game.  Mr. Speaker, if they had to drive 

50 miles, that individual today would not be living.  And you 

can name people after people who are in exactly those same 

circumstances where people who have the capacity to help 

other individuals and help them out under severe 

circumstances, those people in the province of Saskatchewan 

will have to drive twice and three times as far in order to 

deliver that health care service. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can name you an individual who had his little 

girl drink gasoline out of a bottle in his car shed that was a 

Coke bottle.  Mr. Speaker, she drank that, and immediately her 

whole lungs burnt from the inside because of the oxygen inside 

there.  Mr. Speaker, they took that girl and rushed her to the 

hospital, giving her artificial respiration all the way, and today, 

Mr. Speaker, she is alive and well.  If she had to go 50 miles 

further, Mr. Speaker, she wouldn't have made it.  Today, Mr. 

Speaker, today, Mr. Speaker . . . And the member from 

Rosemont says I can't say that.  Well, Mr. Speaker, I can get 

you the name of the father who helped that little girl all the way 

to the hospital, Mr. Speaker, and I will tell you that there are 

many, many people who are in exactly that same circumstance. 

 

I will say, the members in this Assembly who are from major 

centres who have never, ever experienced those kinds of things 

in those communities, should just take the time to be there one 

day.  That, Mr. Speaker, is a fact.  And if we take and close 

down Leader, we close down Maple Creek, we close down 

Cabri for acute care services, Mr. Speaker, and there is no 

doctor there . . . What doctor is going to stay in a facility that 

has two beds?  Nobody is going to stay there.  The nurses are 

going to have reduced service load because of the very fact that 

they have less quality care to provide. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these people haven't first of all begun to 

understand what they're doing.  They don't go out and talk to 

people about what the problems are.  They don't have the 

courage to go out there and talk to those people.  Mr. Speaker, I 

think it's appalling, and I want to point this last thing out about 

how these people respond. 

 

These people, through this Bill and this government and the 

policies that they have chosen, has chosen to address funding 

by picking off the most politically vulnerable group: the sick, 

the seniors, the diabetics, 



712 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1993 

the people requiring chiropractic care, the people requiring 

optometric care.  They've chosen.  They've made choices.  

They've made choices -- 23 million for a lottery terminal, 64 

million for a pipeline that the public in the province of 

Saskatchewan would support on a private basis.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, these people say, we don't care; we don't care. 

 

And then they have the audacity, Mr. Speaker, they have the 

audacity in the throne speech and in the budget speech to say 

we're doing this as a third step for T.C. Douglas.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, that makes me positively ill.  That's like the health 

care system in the province of Saskatchewan.  They are 

crippling it, Mr. Speaker, crippling it over and over in every 

way imaginable.  Why, Mr. Speaker?  Because they don't care, 

they don't care. 

 

The government, with this Bill and the policies that go with it, 

has chosen to address funding by picking off the most 

politically vulnerable group, and they're doing this on the backs 

of the sick, Mr. Speaker.  They're doing it on the backs of the 

sick in rural Saskatchewan where only 20 per cent of the costs 

occur.  And that, Mr. Speaker, when they get finished 

eliminating all of the health care in rural Saskatchewan, what 

are they going to have for a reduced cost?  Nothing, Mr. 

Speaker, nothing.  And I have heard people in this Assembly 

say over and over again, and it's irony that these words will 

come back to haunt individuals, but I have heard individuals in 

this Assembly say that waiting-lists provide efficiencies in the 

health care system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the people of this Assembly that 

that is absolutely, totally wrong.  It is absolutely, totally wrong 

and, Mr. Speaker, individuals in this Assembly have the same 

motive in dealing with that issue as that individual had.  And 

that, Mr. Speaker, was the minister of Health at the time.  And 

that, Mr. Speaker, was wrong then; it's wrong today. 

 

And this government is on the same track.  They're picking . . . 

has chosen to address funding by picking off the most 

politically vulnerable people in the process.  That, Mr. Speaker, 

is what this government is doing.  And I don't believe it's fair.  

It's not fair for anyone in the public to at least to be considered. 

 

It says here you cannot legislate people into being healthy in a 

free country.  It is a personal choice.  Money that is now being 

spent on hospitals, jobs, doctors, and medications will now be 

spent on promoting a healthier lifestyle to people who will 

ultimately make up their own minds anyway. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the end you will be purchasing absolutely 

nothing.  This is what the people from Kincaid wrote to the 

Minister of Health saying over and over again: you're making 

choices.  On 20 per cent of the budget in health care you're 

making choices to cut rural Saskatchewan right out of the 

business.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what the problem 

is.  That's what has been evidenced by the conduct of this 

government since the very first day 

they were elected.  Mr. Speaker, it has nothing to do with the 

deficit.  This has to do with eliminating people in rural 

Saskatchewan.  That's what this has to do with.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is their agenda on the basis of fiscal . . . on the basis 

of doing it for the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has chosen to address funding by 

picking off the most politically vulnerable group of people 

there is.  It's a matter of funding that the people of this 

government have decided that we'll do with wellness, cut out 

rural Saskatchewan which only costs 20 per cent of the health 

budget, and then deliver what, Mr. Speaker?  They will reduce 

the population in rural Saskatchewan and will they have 

eliminated the deficit?  No, Mr. Speaker.  They will never have 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  Order.  I'm sure the 

Minister of Justice will get his turn.  It now being 10 o'clock . . 

. Order.  It now being 10 o'clock, this House stands adjourned 

until tomorrow at 2 p.m. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 

 

 


