


















































Hansard: May 11, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1603 

 May 11, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

 

Deputy Clerk: -- Mr. Martens, chair of the Standing 

Committee on Public Accounts, presents that committee's 

fourth report. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will go through 

this report and read it into the record, and then at the conclusion 

of my remarks I'll move a motion. 

 

 

Your Committee (Mr. Speaker) considered the following 

Order Of Reference from the Legislative Assembly, dated 

May 4, 1993: 

 

That the Special Report to the Legislative Assembly by the 

Provincial Auditor on Bill 42, The Crown Corporations 

Act, 1993 be referred to the Standing Committee on Public 

Accounts. 

 

Your Committee agreed to present an Interim Report with 

respect to Recommendations Nos. 1 and 2 of the Special 

Report which read as follows: 

 

1) Subsection 33(2) of Bill 42 should be amended to state 

-- The Provincial Auditor shall audit the records, 

Accounts and financial statements of CIC; 

 

2) Subsection 33(4) of Bill 42 should be deleted. 

 

Recommendation (no. 1) 

Your Committee does not concur in Recommendation No. 1 

of the Provincial Auditor's Special Report. 

 

Recommendation (no. 2) 

Your Committee concurs in Recommendation No. 2 of the 

Provincial Auditor's Special Report. 

 

Recommendation (no. 3, Mr. Speaker) 

Your Committee recommends that its Fourth Report to the 

Legislative Assembly be taken into consideration by the 

Standing Committee on Crown Corporations during that 

Committee's deliberations on Bill 42, The Crown 

Corporations Act, 1993. 

 

Your Committee will present a further report after it has 

considered Recommendations Nos. 3 and 4 of the Special 

Report and the relationship between the Provincial Auditor 

and appointed auditors (is what items 3 and 4 deal with). 

 

 

Your Committee (also) notes that the Provincial Auditor is 

presently the Auditor for the Crown Investments Corporation 

(which is CIC).  CIC has indicated that it is prepared to 

continue this appointment for a specified period of time 

subject to further review at the end of the term. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to add to this report a number of items.  I 

want to thank the Provincial Auditor for his contribution, both 

in viewing and providing his view of The Crown Corporations 

Act, Bill 42.  I want to thank him for his involvement in the 

discussion today in the Public Accounts Committee meeting.  I 

also want to thank the Clerk for his assistance in the protocol 

for the committee and the work the committee did. 

 

I guess one of the things that was resolved, Mr. Speaker, was 

the items that I mentioned.  However, I want to point out to the 

members of the Assembly that there was very heated debate 

about what will be in the future in items 3 and 4, and I'm sure 

that the committee members will be honing their debating skills 

in relation to those two items as they deal with them.  And we 

will provide to this Assembly an interim report that deals with 

that. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member 

from Saskatoon Idylwyld: 

 

 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on Public 

Accounts be now concurred in. 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I just want to add a few 

brief remarks to what the member from Morse has said.  As the 

member said, this is an interim report of the committee 

designed to facilitate the passage through the process of Bill 42, 

The Crown Corporations Act, 1993.  So we've dealt with the 

first two recommendations in the Provincial Auditor's special 

report related to that Bill, and we've adopted one and not 

adopted the other. 

 

With respect to recommendation 1 of the Provincial Auditor, 

which we have not adopted, I'd just like to point out that the 

main issue that it really deals with I think, the relationship 

between the Provincial Auditor and appointed auditors, remains 

to be dealt with by the committee and will be dealt with by the 

committee in due course when the committee deals with 

recommendations 3 and 4 of the Provincial Auditor's special 

report, which really bring that issue, bring that issue up in a 

more substantive way or more general way. 

 

And I can also report, as indicated in the report, that the 

non-adoption of the first recommendation of the auditor does 

not affect the fact that the Provincial Auditor is now the 

appointed auditor, in effect, for the Crown Investments 

Corporation, and that will continue. 



1604 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1993 

I think I speak for the majority of the members on the 

committee when I say that we believe the mandate of the 

Provincial Auditor is best dealt with within the confines of The 

Provincial Auditor Act, as he himself has indicated in his 

special report.  We do not therefore feel that the Crown 

Investments . . . or The Crown Corporations Act should specify 

that the Provincial Auditor will be necessarily the auditor for 

CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan).  We 

feel there is a broader issue involved which will be properly 

dealt with and addressed when we deal with recommendations 

3 and 4 of the special report. 

 

I want to join with the member from Morse in thanking the 

auditor and the officials from CIC and the staff of the 

committee who were very helpful to us in facilitating 

consideration of the recommendations germane to Bill 42 in a 

very timely fashion. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I just 

want to take a few moments to touch on the concurrence 

motion.  To start with, I also want to thank the Provincial 

Auditor, an officer of this Assembly, for the fine job he is 

doing on our behalf.  I also want to thank the chairman for the 

restraint he has shown and the great sense of fairness he 

displayed on the committee. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I must also report to the Assembly some 

profoundly disturbing events that occurred in the Standing 

Committee on Public Accounts this very morning.  And I must 

say that reading the verbatims of the committee, while giving a 

strong indication of what happened, cannot convey the 

emotional, personal, and vitriolic nature of what occurred. 

 

Specifically, Mr. Speaker, the members of the Assembly must 

be informed that a government appointee this morning 

launched into a blistering and completely unacceptable attack 

on an officer of this Assembly, the Provincial Auditor.  The 

president of Crown Investments Corporation, Mr. Donald 

Ching, this morning went far beyond legitimate discussion and 

entered into what can only be characterized as a frontal assault 

on the Provincial Auditor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the day this Assembly tolerates an appointee of 

the Premier dressing down one of our officers is the day we 

must shut this place down and let them rule by decree. 

 

Mr. Ching must be reprimanded, and knowing that the Premier 

will not do it, let the record show at least that this behaviour 

has not gone unnoticed.  Mr. Ching should receive a message 

through the debate that the next time he appears before any 

committee of this legislature he should not conduct himself as 

if he is amongst buddies in a bar-room brawl debate just 

because members of the committee are made up by the 

majority of NDP (New Democratic Party) 

members. 

 

As one member, I fully intend on demanding proper behaviour 

from government appointees, and government appointees had 

better be prepared to account to our officers with decency and 

respect for which they are entitled.  Mr. Speaker, that did not 

happen this morning.  It was said, Mr. Speaker, by the Leader 

of the Opposition while he was chairman of Public Accounts 

that there is only one person, one institution in this system of 

government that has no other agenda, that is truly accountable, 

and that is the Provincial Auditor. 

 

Members need to go back to Hansard and reflect on those 

remarks of the Leader of the Opposition, and I just want to 

reiterate them here, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I for one will be 

voting against this motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

thought I had attended the Standing Committee on Public 

Accounts meeting . . . Public Accounts, their meeting this 

morning to deal with the questions that . . . or the issues that are 

referred to in this special report.  But now listening to the 

member for Kindersley, I'm wondering if we were at the same 

meeting. 

 

The member for Kindersley now in the House accuses one of 

the witnesses that was called before the committee of launching 

an attack on the auditor and uses words like frontal assault.  But 

not once -- and I'll certainly concede that both the auditor and 

the officials from CIC were given an opportunity to present 

their opinions on the issues that we dealt with, and both parties 

did so frankly and completely -- I never once, never once heard 

the member for Kindersley in the committee, Mr. Speaker, or 

for that matter any other member of the committee, evince 

concerns about the manner in which those opinions were 

expressed. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Grandstanding. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- I don't want to use the word 

grandstanding, Mr. Speaker.  I'll leave that to others to do so.  

But not once, not once did we hear, not once, and the record 

will show, not once did we hear from the member for 

Kindersley during the course of the committee expressing any 

kind of concern whatsoever about what it is that the CIC had to 

say. 

 

Now the rules of this Assembly, the rules of this Assembly 

certainly provide that if questions of privilege, questions of 

privilege arise in committees, that the committees should deal 

with that and make some appropriate recommendation to the 

Legislative Assembly, that it's not incumbent on the member to 

get up in the Assembly to make comments that, in my opinion, 

have no bearing in reality.  He could have done so in the 

committee.  And I can only question why the member didn't do 

that. 



May 11, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1605 

Others have used the word grandstanding; I wouldn't want to 

do that. 

 

I also want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that differences of 

opinion between CIC and provincial auditors go back some 

years and were especially strong and noticeable during the 

course of the last administration.  Differences of opinion I 

guess will continue to be there.  The question really is: how 

does the committee choose to deal with that? 

 

I think the recommendations that we have before you, at least 

in these limited questions, are reasonable ones and agreed to by 

all the members of the committee, I guess, except for the 

member for Kindersley, who said he's not going to agree with it 

even though one of those recommendations is something that 

the auditor is asking for in his report.  And now he chooses to 

disagree with, and saying that we should go along with the 

auditor.  I can't quite figure out the logic of the member's 

comments in this regard, but my guess is it may not be the first 

time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I agree, I agree with the comments that the 

member for Morse has had to make in moving the adoption of 

the report and the member for Idylwyld has made in seconding 

the report.  I'm really at a loss to understand the comments 

from the member for Kindersley because again we both 

attended the same meeting, I thought, until I heard his remarks, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 2:15 p.m. until 2:19 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 

Romanow Lautermilch 

Van Mulligen Calvert 

Thompson Hamilton 

Tchorzewski Johnson 

Lingenfelter Draper 

Teichrob Whitmore 

Shillington Sonntag 

Koskie Flavel 

Solomon Cline 

Atkinson McPherson 

Kowalsky Wormsbecker 

Carson Crofford 

MacKinnon Stanger 

Penner Knezacek 

Cunningham Harper 

Upshall Keeping 

Hagel Carlson 

Bradley Jess 

Lorje Haverstock 

Pringle  

-- 39 

Nays 

Swenson Toth 

Devine Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

Boyd  

-- 9 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To you and 

through you, Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce guests 

today that are in your west gallery, that being 30 grade 8 

students from Rosetown Central High School.  I am 

representing them today on behalf the Hon. Berny Wiens. 

 

The teachers today in attendance with them are Mr. J. Wiebe, 

Mr. Norman Cline, and I will be meeting with them at 3 o'clock 

for photos and drinks and discuss the activities that have gone 

on this afternoon in the House.  So I call on the Legislative 

Assembly to welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Before I recognize the member from 

Kindersley, I would like to remind the member from Biggar 

that he is not to use the personal names of members in the 

House but their constituency or the portfolio that they 

represent. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you to members of the Legislative Assembly I'd 

like to introduce three Christian academy schools seated in 

your gallery, Mr. Speaker.  One of them is from my 

constituency, a community called D'Arcy -- the Wordshop 

Christian Academy at D'Arcy, the Swift Current Christian 

Academy at Swift Current, the Cottonwood Christian Academy 

at Regina Beach.  There are 31 students, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the folks from my constituency at D'Arcy are . . . 

the principal is Marion Wallis.  And I see her husband Don is 

also with us this afternoon and also the children from that 

school as well as I notice a good friend, Loriann Thompson, 

from that school and community as well.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like 

everyone to welcome those folks here this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

join with the member from Kindersley in welcoming these 

students to the Assembly this afternoon.  One of the schools, as 

the member mentioned, is from Swift Current, and I'd like to 

welcome those members here this afternoon.  And I plan to 

meet with them right after the Assembly . . . after question 

period.  Please welcome them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Economic Growth Predictions 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, more evidence of your 

government's failed economic policies are starting to come 

forward.  Your doom-and-gloom message is beginning to bear 

fruit. 

 

The Conference Board of Canada has revised its 



1606 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1993 

economic growth prediction for Saskatchewan for 1993.  The 

Conference Board is now predicting that our economy will 

grow by only 1.8 per cent this year -- the second lowest growth 

rate in all of Canada.  And they attribute this reduction 

primarily to the effects of your budget, Mr. Premier. 

 

Mr. Premier, just last week you stood in this House and boasted 

about the exceptional growth the Conference Board was 

predicting for Saskatchewan.  Mr. Premier, now that the 

Conference Board has drastically reduced its growth 

predictions for our province, will you admit that your policies 

are failing to create economic growth and jobs in this province?  

And will you also begin to work with the business community 

in this province as well? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

Mr. Speaker, the hon. member's question is clearly not rooted 

in a proper reading of the Conference Board's latest predictions. 

 

If the Conference Board predictions are read carefully and 

closely, it will be noted by the hon. members that the 

Saskatchewan economy tracks a very positive trajectory, 

whether it's either on the Conference Board or on the 

Saskatchewan Department of Finance figures. 

 

The average growth in the period assessed is 2.1 per cent under 

the Conference Board and 2.3 per cent under the Saskatchewan 

Department of Finance.  Moreover the Conference Board 

predicts, for example, there are slight variations, but it predicts 

that by the year 1995-96 that there'll be 14,000 more new jobs 

as opposed to the Department of Saskatchewan Finance 

forecast of only 5,000.  This, Mr. Speaker, indicates a positive 

trajectory. 

 

But moreover while I'm on my feet I should also tell the 

members of the House that we have just today been informed 

that Moody's of New York has confirmed Saskatchewan's A3 

debt rating upon a completion of their credit review.  And it 

says it has confirmed it because, quote -- the government has: 

 

 

Demonstrated efforts by the current government to implement a 

comprehensive multi-year fiscal plan to stabilize and improve 

the financial performance of its budgetary accounts, as well 

as manage the accumulated exposure to numerous Crown and 

commercial venture investments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's positive evidence that we are on the right 

track. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, just last 

week you were bragging about the exceptional growth 

predicted by the Conference Board of Canada.  And now that 

they've reduced that growth figure, you no longer seem to value 

their 

opinion. 

 

Mr. Premier, it's just like the Saskatchewan business coalition.  

If you don't agree with the Premier in this province, he sticks 

his fingers in his ears and said their opinion doesn't count for 

anything any more. 

 

It's time, Mr. Premier, you started facing reality.  It's time you 

started to admit your economic policies are failing 

Saskatchewan.  It's time for you to sit down with business in 

this province, rethink some of your destructive taxation 

policies, rethink your plan to impose a further $200 million 

payroll tax on business in this province, and find a new 

direction that would create jobs rather than driving them away. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you do that?  Will you sit down with the 

business community of this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I think I have said this 

on many, many occasions in previous question periods, as my 

colleagues, the Deputy Leader and the Minister of Economic 

Development, have said -- I'll repeat it again one more time -- 

we are not fighting with the Conference Board.  The 

Conference Board projections of today have downscaled the 

projections that they had earlier for all the provinces and the 

federal government. 

 

In fact, I said in my first answer that the Conference Board 

projections show a positive trajectory which is very close to the 

Department of Saskatchewan Finance.  That was my 

proposition. 

 

My second proposition is the one that my colleagues have been 

making and I have been making, and I repeat again:  we 

continue to work with business.  The fact that we have received 

a confirmation of this credit rating, given the very precarious 

situation fiscally that we were left in, the very fact that the 

Moody's rating agency says we're on the right track, on the 

right track fiscally and economically, the very fact the 

Conference Board predicts 14,000 more new jobs by '95-96 -- I 

hope they're right; I hope they're wrong actually; I hope there 

are more than 14,000 -- all of these are indicators that the 

course that we have adopted and have chosen is the right one. 

 

Now we didn't get into this mess overnight.  We got into it over 

nine and a half years of waste and mismanagement.  We need a 

little more time to turn it around.  But I tell you, Mr. Member, 

we are in the right direction and on the right path. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, but it isn't turning 

around.  Your prediction of growth in this province -- and the 

Conference Board -- has been revised once again.  They go on 

to say that their prediction of . . . Down.  They go on to say that 

their prediction of 1.8 per cent growth is probably too 

optimistic because of your budget. 



May 11, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1607 

They say, and I quote:  Since the full impact of the budget 

measures has not been included in this outlook, growth will 

probably be somewhat lower. 

 

That's what they said, Mr. Premier.  They're predicting the 

second worst growth rate in the country, and you're trying to 

pull us down even further. 

 

Mr. Premier, over the weekend StatsCan came out with 

economic growth figures as well for 1992.  Mr. Speaker, the 

Premier likes to say that we've turned the corner, but the graph 

shows, Mr. Speaker, the graph shows -- and I draw Mr. 

Premier's attention to it -- Saskatchewan is the only province 

that is not expected to have any growth at all.  And that's a 

result, a direct result of your policies, sir, you and your budget. 

 

We are the only province with a decrease in personal income 

and the only province with a negative growth rate, according to 

StatsCan.  Will you now admit, Mr. Premier, that your policies 

are failing and that you will try and do something to turn it 

around in this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member 

hopscotches around in his facts and preface on the question 

about as badly as the caucus hopscotches around on whether or 

not there's a motion to adopt the report of the Public Accounts 

Committee.  It's very confusing and contradictory. 

 

We're talking about the Conference Board's updated figures.  

They say that the real GDP (gross domestic product) for 1993 

is going to be 1.8, as compared to the Department of Finance's 

prediction of 2.8.  So they are lower than we are.  But next year 

they predict a GDP of 2.3.  Our prediction is 1.6.  They're 

higher than we are. 

 

The point is, if you take a look at the entire trend line, it is on 

the same positive trajectory.  There are differences, but it's 

going in the right direction.  And when you get a confirmation 

of the credit rating of the province of Saskatchewan, given the 

dire straits in which we have been left, the huge bungles of 

financial mismanagement, the huge hole of debt and lack of 

economic activity that you and your colleagues left us, I only 

can say what I've said before.  We have turned the corner.  We 

are making progress.  Is it good enough?  Of course it's not 

good enough.  Do we have to work harder to make it better?  

Of course we have to work harder to make it better.  Do we 

listen to business as we do to labour?  Of course we shall. 

 

But please, Mr. Member, don't fly in the face of the facts.  

Accept what the facts indicate -- that we have turned the 

corner.  The Conference Board of Canada says we are going to 

post growth.  And with a little bit of luck we're going to post a 

lot of growth. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well, Mr. Premier, I think the people of 

Saskatchewan are hoping for more than just a little luck. 

 

The Conference Board says growth is going down.  StatsCan 

says growth is going down.  And you like to try and twist the 

figures around to say that you have turned the corner in this 

province. 

 

Well, Mr. Premier, the corner has not been turned.  In this 

province right now, there are 11,000 less jobs in Saskatchewan 

than there were in April of 1991 -- 11,000 less jobs than in 

1991.  And that's a significant shortfall -- 7,000 jobs alone in 

the manufacturing sector.  And the Premier puts out a news 

release entitled: Premier pleased with increased employment.  

Unbelievable, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Premier, when are you going to take some responsibility 

for your policies?  When are you going to take some 

responsibility for the fact that the corner has not been turned, 

and your policies are failing Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I am perfectly prepared, 

as I must and as I am willing to do, to accept the responsibility 

of the government's policies because I say the government's 

policies are headed in the right direction. 

 

What I've not heard from the Leader of the Opposition and the 

opposition group is an acceptance of responsibility of what you 

people have done to this province over nine and one-half years 

previously.  And what you did is you brought this province to 

the point where the per capita debt is $15,500; where the 

cumulative debt is $15.5 billion; where we have the lowest 

credit rating of any province in the history of Canada. 

 

We are staving off a huge fiscal crisis.  And here we've come 

down with a budget which happens to gain the approval of the 

international business community, the majority of the business 

community in this province and in Canada, and we have a job 

boost according to StatsCanada in April of '93 compared to 

March of '93 by 4,000; and year end to year end, April of '93 to 

April '92 by 2,000. 

 

Now the hon. member says that's not good enough.  Well I 

agree with him.  It is not good enough.  But I tell the hon. 

member that it is one heck of a lot better than you people ever 

have had, given the waste and the profligacy that you've had in 

this province over the nine and a half years.  And it is 

indicative of the fact that we have turned the corner. 

 

Stop the doom and gloom.  Join the people of Saskatchewan 

and this government in building again -- building a brand-new 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, the Premier likes to talk about the 

record of the previous administration.  And 



1608 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1993 

he says that nothing was happening under the previous 

administration. 

 

And yet, Mr. Speaker, while in New York, the Premier 

delivered this speech and I'll quote just one paragraph from it: 

 

 

And, many other national and international companies -- 

Cargill, Hitachi, IBM, Northern Telecom and Weyerhaeuser, 

to name a few -- all have substantial projects in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So while in New York the Premier likes to take credit for what 

was being done in this province by the previous administration, 

but the moment you land home here, sir, you say that there was 

nothing going on by the previous administration for economic 

growth in this province. 

 

Which way is it, Mr. Premier?  Is it that there is growth in this 

province as a result of previous policies and previous initiatives 

by the previous administration or, Mr. Premier, are there no 

growth initiatives under you? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the facts speak for 

themselves about growth initiatives.  The Statistics Canada has 

indicated that there is growth in the job sector.  And the A3 

confirmation rating today by Moody's is something which is 

totally contrary, Mr. Member, to what your government had for 

nine years. 

 

For the nine years that the member from Estevan was the 

premier, do you know that there never was a maintenance of a 

credit rating of the province of Saskatchewan?  I'm not talking 

even an upgrade, I'm talking a maintenance.  You took seven 

reductions of credit rating as a result of all of these 

mismanagement and misadventures which you've launched. 

 

Now you mentioned some companies being located in 

Saskatchewan.  Of course they're located in Saskatchewan, and 

they do have major investments.  That is a fact, and that is a 

truthful statement in New York and in here. 

 

The reality is, however, that a lot of those investments involve 

huge, huge dollar sums of the taxpayers; produce few 

permanent jobs which tax dollars now we have to manage as 

part of the overall debt, which tax dollar situation relates and 

necessitates us to get the direction that we pursued.  Of course 

that's the situation. 

 

So I say to the hon. member opposite: you may not like the fact 

that Moody's has given us an A3 rating, but I want to tell you, 

what we've done in 18 months is twice better than what you 

have done in nine and a half years when you virtually brought 

this province on the edge of bankruptcy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, 

Moody's believed your speech.  The only thing is, is when you 

come home to Saskatchewan, you give an entirely different 

version of what you gave down in New York.  You say that the 

job creation record of the previous administration, with things 

like Cargill and Weyerhaeuser was bad, but when you get down 

to New York, all of a sudden it becomes good news for the 

province of Saskatchewan and the investment dealers like 

Moody's down there. 

 

Mr. Premier, prior to the election you said that higher taxes are 

the silent killer of jobs.  Higher taxes do not create jobs; higher 

taxes take jobs out of the economy of Saskatchewan.  This is 

significant, Mr. Premier, because it's about the only thing you 

said prior to the election that has actually come to pass. 

 

Mr. Premier, we have seen two consecutive budgets chock full 

of massive tax increases and now we are seeing the results of 

that policy.  Mr. Premier, taxes are indeed the silent killer of 

jobs in Saskatchewan and you are, sir, the grim reaper when it 

comes to job creation in this province. 

 

Mr. Premier, can you tell us how many more jobs will be killed 

by your taxation policies before you admit that you are leading 

this province in the wrong direction? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, there are, I think, I'm 

trying to discern, but two themes of that question, if it's 

possible to discern the themes.  One is what I said in New 

York.  I'll tell you what I said in New York, but they know this.  

I said in New York that we have accumulated a $15.5 billion 

debt over the last nine and a half years.  They knew that.  That's 

what I said to them, and they knew that. 

 

But I'll tell you something else that I did not say in New York.  

I did not say in New York that Saskatchewan is so rich that you 

could afford to mismanage it and you still wouldn't bankrupt it.  

I didn't say that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- That was the member from Estevan 

who said that.  Now the member asks a second question.  He 

says how many more jobs are going to be lost.  Well I hope not 

many more. 

 

All that I can tell the hon. member is what StatsCanada has told 

the hon. member: that in April of 1993 compared to April of 

1992, we've had 2,000 more jobs; that April of 1993 compared 

to March, 1993, we have 4,000 more jobs.  The member cannot 

deny those figures.  That is after our budgets. 

 

I say that we have turned the corner and we fervently hope and 

believe that we're going to be heading in that direction.  Join us 

instead of to continue talking doom and gloom. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 11, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1609 

Crown Corporation Debt 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Minister of Finance.  Madam Minister, could you tell me 

what proportion of the accumulated debt is Crown corporation 

debt? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 

for that question.  The Crown corporation debt is a static 

number; it is not the majority of the debt.  I can get you the 

precise figure.  But the problem that the province of 

Saskatchewan has is the vast majority of our debt is 

tax-supported debt, which is like credit card debt.  The only 

thing that underpins it is revenues. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To the same 

minister: Madam Minister, according to the blue book as of 

March 31, '93, approximately $6 billion of the total 

accumulated debt is in Crown Investments Corporation.  Matter 

of fact, that is close to about 43 per cent of the total debt of the 

province. 

 

Madam Minister, you and your partner, the Premier, have been 

preaching since winning political power about how significant 

the province's debt is, which is almost half Crown corporation 

debt.  Madam Minister, the Associate Minister of Finance 

yesterday in this House and again on April 22, when the 

member of Souris-Cannington originally brought the issue to 

the Assembly, said that reducing the debt in CIC by selling 

$350 million worth of Cameco shares wouldn't have any 

impact on the accumulated deficit because the proceeds would 

go toward reducing CIC debt. 

 

Madam Minister, as usual you and your colleagues are saying 

two different things when it suits you politically.  You and the 

Premier travel around on your doom-and-gloom tour saying 

that the accumulated debt is $14 billion, which includes CIC 

debt. 

 

Now your assistant says no, the two can't be combined.  Paying 

down CIC debt will have no effect on the accumulated debt. 

 

Madam Minister, I think what your associate says is absolute 

hypocrisy.  Which is it?  Will reducing the Crown debt reduce 

the accumulated debt or not?  Which is it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I think that question 

illustrates the kind of problem we had here in the 1980s.  First 

of all, $6 billion is not half of $15 billion, okay?  That's number 

one. 

 

Number two, what credit rating agencies ask us is what is the 

total debt of the province?  They say, you had somewhere near 

$2 billion in loan guarantees.  That's debt -- the same as Crown 

corporation debt is debt, the same as Consolidated Fund is debt. 

 

Now with respect to CIC, the problem with the Crown 

Investments Corporation is the bad deals that we inherited from 

the members opposite.  So if . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'm sure the members want to 

hear the answer, otherwise they wouldn't have asked the 

question.  Please, let the minister answer the question. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My point 

is this: with respect to the Crown Investments Corporation, any 

gain that occurs in the Crown Investments Corporation has to 

be applied to the negatives there.  And the negatives in the 

Crown Investments Corporation aren't the Crown corporations 

themselves, they are the bad deals which we inherited from the 

members opposite and which the taxpayers of this province, 

through CIC, are still paying for. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- To the same minister, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Madam Minister, when it came time to account for your loan 

guarantees, you threw them in with the accumulated debt right 

away.  Crown Life, Saskferco, people that are paying you 

commercial rates to have those loan guarantees, were quickly 

brought forward into CIC and added to the total provincial debt 

even though they're paying commercial rates on those 

guarantees. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, I'd say it's fairly transparent.  When it's 

politically expedient for you and the Premier, the Crown debt 

and the operational debt are inseparable.  So you say the total 

debt of the province today, as the Premier said earlier, is over 

$15 billion. 

 

Now the tables are turned it's a different story.  It's no longer 

politically smart to say the two are together, says the Associate 

Minister of Finance.  Now your Associate Minister of Finance 

says you can't reduce the accumulated deficit by reducing the 

Crown accumulated deficit, which is absolute political 

duplicity, Madam Minister. 

 

You have an opportunity to reduce the accumulated debt, as 

you define it when it's politically correct, by at least $350 

million.  That represents 5 per cent of the total Crown debt out 

there, Madam Minister. 

 

Madam Minister, why don't you take the opportunity to reduce 

the total Crown debt by 5 per cent?  Madam Minister, take the 

opportunity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, it's difficult to know 

exactly where the member is heading here.  I guess what I 

would say is that the government inherited debt on all sides.  

Not only did the members opposite in the 1980s on average 

overspend a billion dollars every year with respect to the 

Consolidated Fund debt, they also saddled the Crown sector 

with a number of bad deals.  They did it across the piece. 



1610 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1993 

Now the member opposite . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Would you like a list?  Bi-Provincial, NewGrade, Cargill, and 

the list goes on -- GigaText.  Is the member opposite, in 

disputing these figures, suggesting that Saskatchewan does not 

have a debt problem?  Because if he is suggesting that, I will 

get out a folder and read here for about the next hour and a half 

about different agencies saying we have a debt problem which 

was created by the members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, 

no one said you didn't have a debt problem.  What we are 

saying to you is there is ways to address that, and you refuse to 

look at them, Madam Minister.  It's politics. It's politics that's 

the real answer here, Madam Minister. 

 

You could reduce the deficit by $350 million with the stroke of 

a pen.  But once again, Madam Minister, you and your Premier 

want to do what's politically correct, which means that that 

stroke of a pen can occur a lot closer to the . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Will the members please come 

to order so we can hear the member put his question. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's obvious that the 

government doesn't want to hear the question because it's 

embarrassing.  Madam Minister, what I am saying is that I 

suggest that this probably will happen, the stroke of your pen 

on Cameco shares will happen a lot closer to the election in 

1995. 

 

Don't you think, Madam Minister, when you and the Premier 

were in New York enjoying yourselves and the Premier was 

making this speech about Cargill and Hitachi and IBM and 

Northern Telecom and Weyerhaeuser, if he had said, and I'm 

adding Cameco to it and the government is selling its shares, 

maybe Moody's would have bumped it another notch, Mr. 

Premier, because you could have added a good privatization to 

the group that's already here, Mr. Premier. 

 

Madam Minister, take the opportunity and show the people in 

New York that you're serious about reducing the deficit -- sell 

the shares in Cameco, Madam Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I can assure the 

member opposite that we did not say in New York that we're 

taking advice on how to reduce the deficit from the members 

opposite.  I can assure you of that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- In fact as my colleague said, we 

promised we wouldn't take advice on reducing the deficit from 

the members opposite. 

 

I can also assure you that in New York we did not say 

that we're taking advice on how to privatize from the members 

opposite, because they managed to privatize the Potash 

Corporation and lose for the taxpayers of Saskatchewan in the 

neighbourhood of $400 million. 

 

And you know, the nature of that last question shows the nature 

of the problem.  Imagine if we were planning on selling some 

Cameco shares, imagine the intelligence of going out and 

telling the world that we're going to do that so that the price 

could go down and we could lose more money.  That would not 

be sound business sense.  We are running this province in a 

businesslike fashion and an orderly fashion and we're turning 

around the finances of the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 74 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Farm 

Security Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I move a Bill to 

amend The Saskatchewan Farm Security Act be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I ask 

leave of the Assembly to make a short member's statement on 

National Nurses Week. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

National Nurses Week 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and thank 

you to all members of the House for this opportunity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to recognize a group of men and 

women who make up a very important segment of our 

population, Mr. Speaker, namely, the nurses.  This week is 

National Nurses Week and I'm sure that everyone in this 

Assembly will agree when I say that nurses are among the 

hardest working, most respected, and perhaps even revered 

members of our society, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, nursing is not a new profession.  Instead, it is one 

rich in tradition and heritage.  Marie Rollet Hébert has been 

credited with being the first person in Canada to provide 

nursing care to the sick.  Coming to Canada, as she did, way 

back in 1617, Marie cared for the sick alongside her husband 

Louis.  And the tradition, Mr. Speaker, has continued for 

almost 400 years since. 

 

I'm sure that I can speak for all members, Mr. Speaker, when I 

say that each and every one of us has a memory of being in 

hospital or visiting a patient or a loved one in the hospital.  And 

along with those memories we are 



May 11, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1611 

reminded of the nurses who kept us comfortable, who 

encouraged us, who helped us in many more ways than just 

giving medication or changing IV (intravenous). 

 

And I want, Mr. Speaker, to honour all nurses today and to give 

a sincere thank you for all of their hard work and for all of their 

dedication.  And I would especially like to pass along my 

heartfelt thanks to those nurses in Saskatchewan, some 200 or 

so, who have lost their jobs, the nurses of many rural health 

facilities who are targeted for closure.  And the many here in 

the city of Regina have, Mr. Speaker, put in years of service to 

the people of this province and they should not simply be cast 

aside.  And these men and women should not be forgotten, and 

I wish them, and indeed all nurses in the province, well.  And I 

offer any assistance I can be to them. 

 

And I thank you for the time and the members for their time, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

join with the member from Rosthern, the official opposition 

Health critic, in recognizing this as National Nurses Week in 

Canada, and with him and all members, I'm sure, in this House, 

of congratulating and thanking all of those men and women 

who in our province and in all of our communities serve 

through the profession of nursing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had a wonderful opportunity not too many 

weeks ago of visiting a seniors' residence here in Regina.  And 

at that time I met a woman who is now in her 92nd year who 

served many years ago as a rural public health nurse out of 

Gravelbourg.  Nurses have provided health care in our province 

for a century and longer.  They have been integral to health 

care in our province and that remains true today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Indeed as we move through the process of health care reform, 

working with nurses' organizations like the SRNA 

(Saskatchewan Registered Nurses' Association) and the 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, SUN, Mr. Speaker, working 

with nurses themselves, we can foresee -- and it's happening 

already -- an expanded role for the profession of nursing in our 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased today to be able to stand in the 

House and announce that a new program has just been initiated 

through SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology) of advanced clinical nurses training that will 

provide new skills for nurses to adapt to new realities, 

particularly in the north part of our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to be able to say in the House today 

that as a result of the budgetary process this year we have seen 

some shift of funding into the area of home care and 

community-based services.  And we know that there will be 

expanding roles and new opportunities for nurses to go to work 

in that field. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I simply do want to join  

opposite and with all members in thanking and congratulating 

those men and women of the nursing profession in our province 

who on a daily basis serve the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' MOTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 7 -- Future Strategy for Saskatchewan 

Agriculture 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, again it 

is a pleasure for me to get up in this Assembly and move a 

motion along the following lines: 

 

 

That this Assembly commend the provincial government for having 

the foresight to develop a comprehensive strategy for 

Saskatchewan agriculture for the future, and that the 

provincial government be further commended for its 

excellent consultation strategy and public relations process 

which has involved eight regional meetings around the 

province with farmers, communities, and the agriculture and 

food industry who will help develop the agricultural plan for 

the future. 

 

I will be moving that motion later on, Mr. Speaker.  But I want 

to make a few comments first. 

 

Mr. Speaker, farmers in Saskatchewan are today facing the 

realities of the '80s.  What I mean by that, Mr. Speaker, is that 

up until 1988 this province was supported by a federal treasury 

that every person in Saskatchewan contributed to.  And because 

agriculture is an industry that benefits the national picture -- 

because the majority of the product is exported, especially in 

the grain sector, and much of the red meat industry provides a 

lot of activities and jobs in this province and right across 

Canada -- the federal government provided the funding in the 

crisis situations right up until 1988. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what happened in 1988 was the wisdom of 

the government of the day.  I can remember very well the many 

trips to Ottawa that the former premier took, and every time he 

went down to Ottawa he came back with a little bigger share of 

the Bill. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Stay home, please. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- That's exactly right.  We kept telling the 

former premier, please stay home and save us some money. 

 

The point, Mr. Speaker, is that now Saskatchewan farmers and 

taxpayers provide 60 per cent, 60 per cent, Mr. Member, just 

listen; 60 per cent of the funding comes from within the walls 

of Saskatchewan, and 40 per cent comes from the federal 

government.  And in crop insurance now, 75 per cent of the 

funding comes from within Saskatchewan, and 25 per cent 

comes from Ottawa. 



1612 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1993 

And now we are facing that reality. 

 

We've come through periods of farm programs that have not 

addressed the problem.  And with this motion, Mr. Speaker, 

what we are saying is that the present Minister of Agriculture, 

the former minister of Agriculture, have started a process, and 

this process involves consultation with the people of 

Saskatchewan to try to develop, to look at, the strategies that 

we need for the 1990s and the year 2000. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it won't be a strategy of allowing the federal 

government to offload on the backs of Saskatchewan taxpayers, 

farmers, and others.  But we've seen the strategy, and now the 

reality hits.  Mr. Speaker, the members opposite stand in their 

places day after day, and I think it was on day 47 asked a 

question on agriculture.  While we have gone around this 

province for the last year or more, 18 months, consulting, 

working with the federal government, the members opposite 

have been woefully silent. 

 

(1500) 

 

And I want to talk about a couple of very, very important issues 

to the future of this province, Mr. Speaker.  One of those 

issues, Mr. Speaker, is the current barley issue.  Have we heard 

a positive word on behalf of the numerous . . . In fact I think 

just about every group in Saskatchewan, barring a couple, who 

want to see the authority of the Wheat Board maintained and 

have barley retained under the sole marketing power of the 

board. 

 

Our Minister of Agriculture just a couple of days ago just got 

up in his place and tried to introduce a motion, an emergency 

motion that would unanimously send the message from this 

legislature to Ottawa saying to Mr. Mayer, leave barley alone; 

don't remove it.  And what did the members opposite do, Mr. 

Speaker?  The members opposite denied leave to move the 

motion.  When the overwhelming majority of the people . . . 

one survey showed 90 per cent of the people in this province 

want the Wheat Board to be the sales agent.  On the recent 

issue of barley, over 70 per cent of the people or 80 per cent of 

the people said there should be a plebiscite at least, and over 70 

per cent, Mr. Speaker, said that they did not want barley 

removed from the board. 

 

And as we went around the province, as the Minister of 

Agriculture and others went around the province consulting 

with people, with the regional meetings to shape a strategy, 

that's what we heard time and time and time again.  Don't let 

the board go.  Removing barley just weakens it again. 

 

But the members opposite and their cousins in Ottawa -- and I 

must add, the 11th member of the opposition, the Liberal leader 

. . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I thought she was on your side. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Again, well we're not sure about the member 

from -- where is he from? 

An Hon. Member: -- Maple Creek. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Maple Creek.  He says he thought she was on 

our side.  Well we never know what side she's on, that's the 

problem.  Because I can recall reading a clipping about 10 

months ago where the 11th member of the opposition, the 

Liberal leader, said the board has too much power.  The 

Canadian Wheat Board has too much power.  It's got a 

monopoly; we got to get rid of it.  And then the other day she 

seemed to indicate, well, maybe she was on the right side of the 

barley issue. 

 

I don't know what side she's on but I know what side you're on, 

and I don't know which is worse.  One may be smarter than the 

other. 

 

But I know why the member from Maple Creek wants barley 

out of the board, because he's fairly close to the U.S. (United 

States) border, and the studies show that some of the farmers 

on the south side who can access a market in the U.S. can . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Sixty miles. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Sixty miles, he said, and access a market, a 

spot market in the U.S.  Might be able to get more for their 

barley. 

 

And the member who is elected from Maple Creek is 

wholeheartedly agreeing with me, Mr. Speaker, and what he's 

saying to the people, the rest of the farmers in this province 

basically who aren't within 60 or 100 miles of the U.S. border, 

you can go you know where.  That is the self-centred, 

right-wing ideological greed that drove this province into 

despair, and now we're trying to maintain and retain and 

reverse the process, and we hear in question period the silly 

questions of you're not doing enough. 

 

Basically what they're saying is you're not fixing up the mess 

we made quick enough.  Basically that's what they're saying, 

and trying to defend the record.  Well I tell the member from 

Maple Creek as I tell the member from Kindersley, who I'm 

sure will be licking his wounds from the smacking he took 

today in question period, I tell them that they were represented 

not only to represent your constituencies, but also to represent 

the people, all the people of this province, to make sure that we 

have systems in place to market our grain, such as the Canadian 

Wheat Board. 

 

Mr. Speaker, major farm organizations -- Saskatchewan wheat 

board, Canadian Wheat Board Advisory Committee, even 

Keystone Agriculture Producers in Manitoba, the Prairie Pools 

Incorporated, the malting industry . . . now there's a curious 

point.  The malting industry saying, don't let the barley go.  

They don't want barley to go, Mr. Speaker, for one reason: they 

want assurances of supply.  And once we get on a dual system, 

basically an open market system, they then know they won't 

have assuredness of supply. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on on that issue much longer, 



May 11, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1613 

but in the time that I have I want to move on.  But I just want to 

end up by saying, the members opposite even in opposition 

haven't learned the lesson they should have learned in 

government.  You don't govern on ideology and greed and 

self-centred symbolisms.  And that's what they're continuing to 

do.  Exactly like the transportation issue. 

 

When we went around the province, Mr. Speaker, the meetings 

around the province that were held with the farmers of this 

province, the other major issue was transportation.  Mr. 

Speaker, I want to start talking about transportation by 

acknowledging one fact and congratulating the Minister of 

Agriculture of Saskatchewan and the Minister of Highways -- 

and I defy anyone to say this is wrong -- of single-handedly, if I 

might use that term for two people, stopping the federal 

government from changing the method of payment. 

 

They were at meetings and the government has been at 

meetings, several meetings, in the last 18 months and 

everybody in the room and all the provinces basically were 

saying, change the method of payment.  The Saskatchewan 

government, Minister of Agriculture, Minister of 

Transportation said no, and fought hard -- as we in this 

Assembly fought hard -- as we tried to move motions about 

transportation to retain the method of payment the way it is and 

have the members opposite deny or speak against. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we've succeeded again.  I hear people saying, 

especially the opposition members, well it's going to go 

anyway; we may as well get something else going.  It's going to 

go anyway. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I started farming in 1974.  The first issue, 

the first issue that I started working on and have continued to 

work to this day was the method of payment . . . first of all the 

Crow rate and then the method of payment. 

 

And people are saying, well it's going to go so we might as well 

get on with something different.  Well, Mr. Speaker, 18, 19 

years have gone by and yes, the transportation issue has 

changed somewhat.  It's been weakened.  The federal 

government is again shirking their responsibility, but we still 

have it.  And that's the point.  We still have it. 

 

And had it not been for the Government of Saskatchewan and 

the two ministers in particular, Mr. Speaker, I tell you I don't 

know whether we still would have had it.  But this government, 

these ministers and our members, Mr. Speaker, are backing the 

farmers of this province right to the hilt.  Because we know it 

doesn't matter how you slice it -- you can talk about 

diversification which is good, and we continue to diversify.  

The Minister of Economic Development has put plans forward.  

The Minister of Agriculture, along with the partnership 

program, are formulating plans to develop and diversify -- but 

the fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, in the grains industry the 

majority, the overwhelming majority of the product is exported.  

And we can diversify, let's say, 10 or 15 per cent of what we 

grow in grain.  We still have 85 per cent 

exported. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the subsidy that is involved in exporting that grain 

was $760 million, and as I say, it's been declining.  The federal 

government now are going to blackmail.  They say, it's going to 

be cut 10 per cent this year, 10 per cent next year, 15 per cent 

the following year, and thereafter 25 per cent a year. 

 

What they're saying is, you know, the gun's to your head; 

you're going to lose it unless you change it.  But the fact of the 

matter is, Mr. Speaker, it's $700 million that farmers of this 

province rely on to market their grain, to market their grain to a 

world market where every dollar that comes from that product 

is a new dollar to Saskatchewan, that benefits every person in 

this country.  Every person. 

 

And for the life of me, Mr. Speaker, I do not know why the 

members opposite and the Liberal member -- the 11 members 

of the opposition -- try to fight that.  That money is going to be 

gone, and then what are we going to do? 

 

Well I hear some people saying, like the member for Morse and 

member for Maple Creek, well we're going to develop our 

livestock industry.  How are we going to develop our livestock 

industry?  Well we're going to have cheap . . . (inaudible) . . . 

We're going to have cheap products so that we can get the 

livestock industry moving and we can sell a product. 

 

Well that's sounds good, but I wonder how many people are 

going to grow barley if it's going to be cheap enough to make 

this great livestock industry.  The livestock industry can and 

will flourish in this province but it won't be because of cheap 

barley.  It'll be because of good marketing systems.  It'll be 

because of organization in the industry.  And I'll tell you, 

knowing the cattle people in this province from feedlot to 

cow-calf operators, they have to be one of the hardest working, 

most ingenuitive groups I've ever seen. 

 

And we are working with them, as government.  We have a red 

meat stabilization committee together, and I have learned so 

much from those people and I have learned their desire to make 

the cattle industry work.  They understand the economic 

situation and they will make it work. 

 

But the members opposite's arguments, coming back to my 

point, Mr. Speaker, is that if you change the method of 

payment the world gets to be a better place.  Well we've seen it 

slip dramatically, and the world in Saskatchewan in agriculture 

hasn't got to be that wonderful place.  But it's the old marketing 

philosophy.  Open it up.  Those who can survive and beat out 

their neighbour, they win.  And those who don't win, they 

leave. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reason for this motion was to let the people of 

this province know by way of consultation meetings and the 

consultation strategy, that we are concerned about the 

agricultural industry.  And it surprises me that the members 

opposite stand . . . or sit 



1614 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1993 

idle in their place I should say, when for 10 years they were 

saying they were the saviours of agriculture. And since the 

election they have hardly addressed the issue. 

 

I wonder if the concern, Mr. Speaker, was for the farmers when 

they were in government, heralding themselves as saviours of 

agriculture, or for the members of government to get re-elected 

at that time.  Because since the election, as I say, the issue has 

hardly arisen.  I think it's pretty obvious, the hypocrisy.  Mr. 

Speaker, this being one of my favourite issues, I could go on 

for a long time, but I know there are other members who want 

to speak so I'll wrap up. 

 

I want to ask the members opposite one question, and I include 

all 11 members of the opposition.  If you are genuinely 

concerned about agriculture in Saskatchewan, will you please 

quit the negative, desolate, desperate attitude that you have.  

Because if you talk about wanting to build this province -- you 

say we're not doing a good enough job in agriculture, economic 

development -- if you're talking about wanting to build this 

province, you have to create an atmosphere of optimism, 

security, a base from which to grow. 

 

But all I hear day after day, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that 

everything's so rotten and so terrible.  I ask them not to do that.  

Because if they are genuinely concerned about the future of this 

province they will work with this government . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- There is no future. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Well the member from Maple Creek says there 

is no future.  I wonder if his constituents think there is no 

future.  Mr. Speaker, that's the type of attitude that we don't 

need.  That's exactly what I'm talking about.  The members 

opposite repeatedly try to create a climate here that's unstable.  

They did it by action in government by driving the debt up.  

And now they continue to do it by their vocal chorus.  Mr. 

Speaker, I ask members not to do that. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, this government, by doing things like 

as stated in this motion, consultation, developing strategies for 

the future, will take us into the year 2000 and beyond with a 

solid agricultural industry by working together with the red 

meat industry, with the feather industry, the dairy industry, 

with the grains industry, by maintaining and fighting for the 

fundamental rights that farmers have: orderly marketing 

systems -- the 11 members opposite are opposed to that, orderly 

marketing systems, transportation industry, by maintaining the 

method of payment; a strong Canadian Wheat Board to market 

our product around the world from a single desk so that we're 

not farmer to farmer competing against each other and getting a 

poorer and poorer price. 

 

These members opposite, and I just will end by saying, if they 

want to help their federal counterparts in the next federal 

election, better get onside or I'll guarantee you there won't be 

one sorry Tory left in the federal government as there are only 

10 left here. 

Simply because the fundamental principles that we have been 

fighting for and have maintained this province and the farmers 

of this province have maintained them for years and years are 

coming to the point of destruction by Tories.  It's been building 

for years and we're coming to a shaky point.  This government 

will not stop fighting for those fundamental principles. 

 

(1515) 

 

Because it's institutions like the Canadian Wheat Board . . . it's 

the fact that we've had a history since the beginning of a 

transportation subsidy to maintain the farmer of this province, 

it's institutions that developed the orderly marketing systems 

that have made Saskatchewan what it is today.  It's not the 

wide-open, dog-eat-dog free enterprise system. 

 

There is competition within those systems, Mr. Speaker.  And 

we all compete -- farmer to farmer.  But it's a healthy 

competition because we have the basis from which to work.  

And if we don't have that base, Mr. Speaker -- and that's what 

the people of the province have been telling us in these regional 

meetings -- if you don't have that base, you don't have an 

industry. 

 

And I ask members opposite to please give your head a shake, 

put aside your philosophical rhetoric, your idealism of the free 

market ruling the world, and understand how this country was 

built and how this farming industry will be maintained.  Please 

do that.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- With leave, may I move my motion . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Okay, thank you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, seconded by the member for Turtleford, I move: 

 

 

That this Assembly commend the provincial government for 

having the foresight to develop a comprehensive strategy for 

Saskatchewan agriculture for the future, and that the 

provincial government be further commended for its 

excellent consultation strategy and public relations process, 

which will involve eight regional meetings around the 

province with farmers, communities, and the agriculture and 

food industries, who will help develop the agricultural plan 

for the future. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Mr. Johnson: -- Mr. Speaker, in standing to second this 

motion, I would like to first of all indicate that one of the things 

I appreciate about the consultation process that this government 

has been implementing in agriculture and in other areas and 

fields is the nature of it.  If you looked at a short description of 

how the consultation occurred in the '80s you would see that it 

had a list of things that the government would do. 



May 11, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1615 

And the first thing on that little check-list of items that were 

necessary if you were going out to consult was to hire an ad 

agency.  And once you had the ad agency hired, then allocate 

half the funds that you were going to use for the program or 

that you intended on spending in supporting agriculture or any 

other industry by turning half of the funds over to that ad 

agency and create a wad of glitter and work from that particular 

aspect before you got down to really detailing with things. 

 

And this was not consultation.  It was an attempt by the 

government of the day to ride through its policies, policies that 

for the most part impacted negatively on anyone that was 

involved in them. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the interesting thing that I believe that the 

member who moved the motion indicated this, but I would like 

to dwell on it for a little while, and that is the nature of 

consultation that the federal Conservative government is using 

with agricultural people, with farmers and that in regards to the 

Crow benefit. 

 

Their suggestion is very simple.  They have a plan to change 

the method of payment, a plan that would allow them then to 

remove any payment at all, and a plan that would allow for the 

implementation of payments that would be disruptive and 

payments that when they went into the community would not 

achieve any . . . provide any stability to the agricultural 

community. 

 

And so what they do is they come up when they went around 

with the transport committee hearings and asked the 

agricultural community and the farmers in it, they consulted 

with them what should be done in this regard.  They got told 

and told in no uncertain terms to leave the payment with the 

transportation as it presently is, paying it to the railways and 

not to bother changing anything at all. 

 

But when that was not what they wished to do, then they came 

out with this particular approach which said that they were 

going to continue cutting the $720 million program and keep 

cutting it every . . . 10 per cent a year unless the farmers and 

the provincial governments were willing to agree to the 

changes that the federal government want.  And they consider 

that consultation.  And the members opposite know very well 

that that's the approach that they're interested in in consulting. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this government has approached 

consultation with groups in a very direct and a very 

non-expensive manner and one that allows for people to 

express their opinions and provide input into the system.  One 

of those is the paper that outlines the agricultural perspective 

for the province of Saskatchewan, and it's a document for 

public consultation and discussion.  And it was published in 

February of 1993. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this approach is not the glitzy approach, but it's a 

very down to earth approach of providing 

information and asking people to comment on it.  And that's 

what makes the process that this government has put in place as 

a consultative strategy one that you could rely upon and accept 

as compared to the previous government that had a system in 

place that was more beneficial to the advertising community 

than it was to the individuals who were being consulted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the indication is that there is changes coming in 

agriculture, and those changes are coming because of 

technological advancement in equipment, the changes of crops, 

and the nature of each of the grains and those type of changes.  

And the farm community could live with that and live, I would 

suggest to everyone, quite successfully. 

 

But what they won't be able to survive with is a strategy that is 

bent on implementing programs and policy that will provide a 

destabilizing effect in the community, and that is what the 

members opposite are pushing when they are supporting 

programs like moving the feed barley out from underneath the 

Canadian Wheat Board. 

 

Now this particular shift, if you go through the history of it, 

you can see that the federal government eventually, when they 

tried every approach they could and were turned down, they 

eventually went and commissioned a study by Carter.  And the 

strange thing about this study is that they defined what he was 

to look at so narrowly that there was no other results that one 

could expect to occur than what he delivered. 

 

He was told not to bother checking into the whole market, just 

check in to just a portion of it.  And in doing that, if you don't 

look at the whole market and the impact that it has, but look 

only at a narrow perspective, you end up not viewing the 

ditches and not seeing any of the things that make this 

particular approach of taking the barley from the jurisdiction of 

the Canadian Wheat Board as detrimental as what it would be.  

And it would be detrimental for the areas of the province that 

grow the major amount of barley. 

 

With those remarks, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to say that I will be 

supporting the resolution. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I certainly 

appreciate this afternoon being given the opportunity to correct 

the record as misquoted by the member from Humboldt, along 

with a few other things that are generally misguided and 

twisted and wrongly put in all of this debate in this motion. 

 

I can't for the life of me understand how anybody in this 

Assembly could stand up and try to take credit for an 

agricultural direction or policy that doesn't exist.  How could 

anyone say that a ludicrous plan like the one that this 

government has, which is no plan, is something that we ought 

to applaud, that we ought to congratulate.  I should think they 

would have buried this thing at least until two years down the 

road when they've at least had a chance to maybe show that 

there is a plan or to do something. 



1616 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1993 

The reality is there is no agricultural plan, there is no 

consultation.  There is no meaningful direction from this 

administration, in agriculture.  They spend $100,000 of 

Saskatchewan taxpayers' money to fly to Ottawa and came 

home with nothing, not even a suntan; a paid vacation for farm 

leaders and for a handful of NDP supporters.  And all they got 

out of it was a holiday.  Nothing for Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

And they stand in this Assembly and criticize the past 

administration for having gone to Ottawa and getting money 

for farmers.  It doesn't make any sense.  The whole thing is 

absolutely ludicrous.  In fact it would be laughable if it wasn't 

such a serious, serious problem. 

 

And here we have a government that stands up in this 

Assembly and wants to take credit for helping farmers in a year 

when all predictions say that annual farm income this year will 

be $5,000.  Is that above the poverty line all of a sudden?  Give 

me a break.  That's way below the poverty line.  Anybody that 

lived in the city of Regina that had a $5,000 income would 

qualify for welfare.  But Saskatchewan farmers don't.  And 

you're going to take credit for that kind of record.  You've got 

to be kidding. 

 

You throw away the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 

program last year that would have brought in $400 million 

more money to Saskatchewan farmers.  And that's a fact.  A 

plain fact that cannot be disputed.  And what did that do to your 

economy in the province of Saskatchewan?  It destroyed it, if 

you want to take a look at the record. 

 

I've heard optimistic predictions about how money spins 

through a society.  Some people tell me that up to seven times a 

dollar will spin through an economy if you have a new dollar 

coming in.  An Ottawa dollar coming to Saskatchewan I 

consider to be a new dollar.  You lost 400,000 of them.  Spin 

that through Saskatchewan's economy by seven times and 

you've got 2.8 billions of dollars that are spent. 

 

We also have people that tell us that it takes a working person 

until the middle of June -- from January to June -- before he 

works one day for himself.  All of the rest of that time is spent 

earning money to pay taxes in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

That's something around 50 per cent of your wages that go for 

taxes -- $2.8 billion of spinned-off money from the $400 

million that this government threw away.  Threw away.  Figure 

out the taxes at 50 per cent on that kind of money and you've 

got $1.8 billion.  A billion -- $800,000 in taxes that would have 

evolved out of the spin-off of having that money come in from 

Ottawa to Saskatchewan. 

 

And they threw it away because of socialist philosophical 

principles.  They would not deal with the Conservative 

government in Ottawa.  Plain and simple as that.  They 

absolutely refused to negotiate in good faith with anybody that 

isn't a socialist.  And they threw away enough money even on 

the minimum amount. 

I've also heard the story, Mr. Speaker, that 3 per cent is . . . or 

three times is the real spin-off -- seven is too high.  Let's look at 

three then just for a second -- $400 million times three -- and 

you've got a billion, two hundred thousand dollars.  Half of that 

in taxes spun through the economy is $600,000, the very 

minimum amount of spin-off you could have had.  That's 

enough to pay for our whole educational system in the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

One of the biggest portfolios you got in the province could 

have been paid off by the spin-off of the tax dollars from one 

bad deal that this government perpetrated on the farmers of 

Saskatchewan.  And they did it for politics, pure and simple.  

Partisan politics.  And we will suffer in this province for years 

to come for that misguided adventure. 

 

The member from Humboldt talks about the fact that we are 

causing depression.  Well I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, $5,000 net 

incomes is depressing and you can't get away from it.  Those 

people have a right to be depressed and they've got a right to be 

angry -- angry with this government for throwing away $400 

million just so they could play politics; federal money lost 

because the NDP decided to declare war on the federal 

government and not deal with them. 

 

(1530) 

 

And now we see them declaring war on business in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  That's the next thing.  Now we've 

got a trend established.  We're going to declare war on 

everybody and anything that makes a dollar or helps people to 

genuinely live a better life.  And then they pass it off as saying 

oh yes, but the real issues are whether or not somebody sells a 

load of barley outside of the Wheat Board. 

 

Well let's just straighten out the record for the member from 

Humboldt.  Nobody in this opposition has said that we are 

against the Canadian Wheat Board or that we want to have it 

destroyed or dismantled.  That is an absolute falsehood. 

 

The reality is, though, that the Canadian Wheat Board shouldn't 

even be called the Canadian Wheat Board because it handles all 

kinds of other grains besides wheat, not to mention the 

oil-seeds; but just the feed grains alone probably comes to as 

much as the wheat that we're handling. 

 

The reality is that it's a grain handling board and it makes 

mistakes -- plain and simple.  No organization, no structure is 

so indestructible that it can never make a mistake, and the 

reality is that the Canadian Wheat Board has done a really good 

job, and they're well worth having, and the members opposite 

will know that there are lots of ways to defend the actions and 

the record. 

 

But they will also have to concede that mistakes are made and 

we have to analyse how come those mistakes happen and 

where they do happen.  Where they happen and the reason they 

happen is because 



May 11, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1617 

the Canadian Wheat Board is used to trading in the 

international markets where they achieve the goals of selling 

massive amounts of grain in each contract.  I've never heard of 

a contract that didn't include hundreds of thousands of tonnes 

of grain. 

 

But the reality is also this, members: there are niche markets, 

small little markets, markets that the Wheat Board misses, and 

that's where barley fits into the scheme of things in the southern 

part of Saskatchewan and on the western boundary. 

 

The Alberta feedlots are looking for grain.  When they can't get 

them at home, they come to Saskatchewan; that's natural.  The 

same thing happens across the border in Montana.  If a rancher 

down in Montana wants 10 or 20,000 bushels, the Canadian 

Wheat Board wouldn't even know that he was looking for it.  

It's a very niche market, a very small amount. 

 

But to the chagrin of the member from Humboldt, it doesn't 

hurt him if somebody in southern Saskatchewan sells two or 

three loads of barley to that feedlot operator or that rancher in 

Montana; it actually will help him because the reality is that the 

Wheat Board then has less barley to handle and there is less 

competition for the market-place that his grain is going to go 

to.  If he's selling malting barley to Japan and there's less barley 

from southern Saskatchewan to compete for that market, he's 

got a better chance not only to sell it, but of having a better 

price, because that's how the supply and demand system work. 

 

But I shudder to think that anybody in the NDP ranks would 

ever understand what supply and demand means.  Socialists 

have never figured out that there is such a thing.  They believe 

that you dictate the prices and that somebody comes and 

automatically pays what you dictate. 

 

Well NDP times are hard times in Saskatchewan and you 

cannot get away from that.  NDP times have always been hard 

times in Saskatchewan and they are getting harder and harder 

to take and the people of Saskatchewan are starting to wake up 

and smell the coffee in that area as well. 

 

NDP times are hard times because NDP times are 

revenge-on-rural-Saskatchewan times and that reflects through 

a spin-off through the entire economy -- $400 million dumped 

down the tubes for philosophical reasons and a loss of tax 

dollars that could have bailed us out of almost all of our 

economic problems last year from one bad deal -- all done for 

politics. 

 

Rural revenge that costs us the hospital system in rural 

Saskatchewan is now impacting heavily on the cut-backs in 

education; teachers being laid off by the droves; nurses being 

fired in groups, not only one or two at a time but solid, massive 

groups fired all at one time; taxes up in every jurisdiction all 

through the province.  And why?  Because of one bad deal. 

 

Four hundred million dollars that weren't allowed to spin 

through our economy could have paid for 

everything we've lost in this whole system in the last year, and 

these people have the nerve to stand in this Assembly and try to 

brag about what a good deal they're doing.  Well talk is cheap, 

Mr. Speaker.  It takes money to buy food, and the farmers of 

this country and this province know that all too well.  And they 

know all too well that it's this NDP government's stubborn, 

arrogant, political ways that have cost them this money and will 

cost them their farms. 

 

They talk about consulting.  South of No. 1 Highway there 

wasn't a meeting.  They wouldn't dare go down there.  They'd 

get run out on a rail.  Some of them tried it; they had to run for 

their life.  They had to have police guards to get them out of the 

buildings.  There won't be an NDP going down there for a 

meeting, I can tell you, because the farmers have had it up to 

here with NDP partisan politics that costs them their farms and 

their lives and their incomes.  Down by how many percentage 

points?  You don't even know. 

 

Well, my friends, I want just to add for your benefit that the 

minister talks about how he's going to renegotiate, renegotiate 

the farm policies and the farm programs.  He's going to consult; 

he's going to come up with a new plan that's better than GRIP.  

Well I tell you straight out, you're not going to be able to do it 

because there is no way that you're ever going to put together a 

bureaucrat-driven program that's going to be the best possible 

for farmers. 

 

I'll give you a bit of advice.  Throw out the whole idea and get 

some cash to the farmers.  Stop trying to put bureaucrats into 

the place of administrating federal dollars and provincial 

dollars, creating jobs for bureaucrats.  Get the money that's 

allocated to farmers to the farmers.  Put it on a price of a bushel 

of wheat and the price of a bushel of barley at the elevator. 

 

That's what you ought to be negotiating with the federal 

government and with the farmers.  Put the price at the place 

where the people sell their stuff and get them the money.  Stop 

fooling around with all these ideas of some more complicated 

bureaucratic programs that probably never will work anyway. 

 

We've seen some of this tested, haven't we?  They haven't 

worked.  The members finally are seeing the light.  We've got a 

couple of farmers back there that know very well that it's the 

cash that's the real thing that's important.  And getting it into 

the hands of the people that it was intended to get it to -- that's 

important.  Now maybe we can start working together.  We'll 

also get you to understand how the barley market works too, if 

we work on it for a while. 

 

We have these niche markets, Mr. Speaker, that are so very 

important, not only in oats and barley but also in oil-seeds.  

And we have to have a central marketing agency because we do 

handle far more bushels of product in this province than we 

could ever eat or sell to our niche markets. 

 

So never let it be said that we don't support a central selling 

agency to work in the international markets.  But at the same 

time let's allow our producers the 



1618 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1993 

option to take advantage of niche markets where they can make 

an extra dollar occasionally and do something to help 

themselves in a very depressed economy and a very depressed 

industry. 

 

The members talked about the Crow's Nest Freight Rate 

Agreement.  Mr. Speaker, I've heard about this ever since I'm a 

kid, and I'm not exactly a young man any more.  So I've heard 

about it for a long time.  At one time we jokingly said, I hope 

somebody shoots the Crow; I'm tired of listening to the stories 

about it. 

 

But the reality is that it's very important politically and in 

reality, to Saskatchewan farmers.  But I challenge the members 

opposite.  In Alberta when reference was made to the Pools by 

the member from Humboldt, in Alberta, what does the Alberta 

Pool support?  They don't support the Saskatchewan Pool 

position any more, do they?  In Manitoba, what does the 

Manitoba Pool support?  They don't support the Saskatchewan 

Pool position any more.  They've changed, because times are 

changing. 

 

I don't know if they've recognized that if we don't grab it, we're 

going to lose it.  I don't know if that's their motivation or not.  

But that in itself has to be a motivation to grab something for 

Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

And I'll tell you where we stand on the issue, fully and 

squarely.  We stand fully and squarely on the proposition that 

those dollars belong to the Saskatchewan farmer.  They belong 

to the producers on the land, and they should go to that 

producer in some form, and to nobody else. 

 

If they don't benefit Saskatchewan farmers, then they are not 

being wisely and properly spent.  And I don't care how you 

distribute it or how you figure it out, so long as the benefit 

accrues to the farmer in the percentage that we were promised 

under the original agreement.  And that's our position, as I 

stand here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this motion is so absolutely wrong that I'm just 

forced to have to move an amendment.  But just before I do 

that, I want to encourage the members opposite to do one more 

thing.  Besides trying to get the producers some money at the 

elevator and getting a better plan that works there, pass a 

provincial law.  I challenge you -- pass a provincial law that 

would force all Saskatchewan retail sales of gasoline to contain 

Saskatchewan-produced ethanol at 10 or 20 per cent.  I 

challenge you to pass that law and do something positive and 

really make the system of diversification work. 

 

The member from Biggar can see the light.  I can see it already.  

If 10 or 20 per cent of his grain has to go into ethanol, that's a 

market.  Even a socialist will wake up if you tempt him with 

enough dollars.  But it's real, and it'll work, and I challenge you 

to do it. 

 

I'll go on with my motion, Mr. Speaker.  I move, seconded by 

the member from Estevan: 

 

 

That all the words after the word "Assembly" be 

deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

 

condemns the provincial government for its lack of vision 

and lack of comprehensive policy and programing to assist 

Saskatchewan agriculture today and in the future; and that the 

provincial government be further condemned for its lack of 

true consultation with our province's producers; and that this 

Assembly further condemns the provincial government for its 

emphasis on public relations rather than substance, which has 

evolved.  Even the Premier making statements while in New 

York claiming that farm receipts are on the rise in this 

province, and making this claim with full knowledge that 

Agriculture Canada's forecast for this year calls for 

Saskatchewan farm income to fall 56 to 68 per cent from 

1992 to less than $5,000 a farm in realized net farm income. 

 

I so move.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Members, give me a moment to have a look at 

the amendment, please. 

 

Order.  I want to remind members again that amendments 

should be first of all . . . contain really no preambles.  This one 

doesn't contain a preamble before but contains a preamble in 

the amendment. 

 

And therefore I would . . . the Speaker does have the authority 

to delete, and I will do that and make the amendment in order 

and ask the members whether or not they will accept the 

amendment up to the words "rather than substance" and delete 

the rest of the amendment which should be part of the debate if 

the members wish to make it such.  Otherwise I will rule the 

whole amendment out of order. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- We agree with your interpretation, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- All right.  The member from Estevan may 

continue.  I will read the amendment so that the members know 

exactly what the amendment is. 

 

Moved by the member from Maple Creek, seconded by the 

member from Estevan: 

 

 

That all the words following the word "Assembly" be deleted 

and the following substituted: 

 

 

condemns the provincial government for its lack of vision 

and lack of comprehensive policy and programing to assist 

Saskatchewan agriculture today and in the future; and that 

the provincial government be further condemned for its lack 

of true consultation with our province's producers; and that 

this Assembly further condemns the provincial government 

for its emphasis on public relations rather than substance. 



May 11, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1619 

(1545) 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You don't want a post-amble nor a 

preamble? 

 

The Speaker: -- No, no.  That would be the amendment. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I wanted to take a 

few moments to support the amendment that my colleague 

from Maple Creek has just made.  And the reason that I want to 

do that, Mr. Speaker, is to just point out the hypocrisy that we 

see in the NDP administration and by the MLAs (Member of 

the Legislative Assembly) who are now bragging about their 

agriculture policy as we see farm income plummeting in the 

province of Saskatchewan, down to $5,000 per farmer.  It's 

fallen over 50 per cent, and they are bragging about their farm 

income policy. 

 

We see the complete devastation of support programs, rural as 

well as urban, for agriculture, and the NDP are bragging about 

their plan and their policy and their consultation and how 

wonderful it is.  Well just a simple question, Mr. Speaker. How 

can they brag about their plan when in the last 16 months farm 

income has been cut in half and people have lost their hospitals, 

have lost their support systems, lost their GRIP, lost natural 

gas, and have been taxed through the hilt.  And they're 

bragging about this.  How can they do that? 

 

How can they credibly and honestly and sincerely feel good 

about agriculture and brag about their policies and their 

programs if in fact people are going through this pain?  Why 

would they stand in the House and tell everybody how good the 

NDP are to farmers, to agriculture, to rural people.  It doesn't 

make any sense. 

 

Anybody watching this anyplace in Canada or anyplace in the 

world would say, well how is it out there in the agricultural 

world in Saskatchewan?  To listen to the NDP, it must be very 

good, very positive, farm income must be way up; it must be 

quite good.  Because nobody would ever make a motion like 

this unless it was quite positive out there. 

 

And then when you tell them the truth, that farm income is now 

below $5,000 a farmer and it's down over 50 per cent this last 

year; and on top of that power rates have gone up, gasoline 

prices have gone up, rural taxes have gone up, utility rates up, 

and they've cut out their bus service, they've cut out their 

support programs, and they've cut the rural service centres, 

they've closed their hospitals, they've taken away their schools, 

they've ripped up their roads, and they say, well how could 

anybody even think of raising a motion that bragged about 

NDP policy?  It doesn't make any sense at all. 

 

So the NDP raise this, and I'm going to support the motion 

from the member from Maple Creek because it's not credible; 

it's not honest.  It's just straight fluff and just frankly partisan 

politics. 

I want to reiterate what a lady said to me about the agricultural 

policy, and I used it in here when I was talking to the Minister 

of Health.  What she said to me, how would you feel if you 

lived in rural Saskatchewan and this is what they were doing to 

your farm and to your community?  How would you feel?  And 

I think it's a fair question. 

 

She said, we've had an NDP administration for 16 months and 

this is what they've done to me and my family and my farm.  

Now how would you feel if they came and did this to you?  

They took away my children's dental plan.  They took away the 

protection I had for optometric and chiropractic coverage.  

They took away my protection on the prescription drug plan -- 

dramatically.  Costs hundreds and hundreds of dollars per 

family.  They took away any protection for insulin and oxygen 

coverage.  And then they took away my hospital.  It's gone, 

closed. 

 

They took away the jobs associated with the hospital, they took 

away my doctor, took away the druggist because the 

pharmacists aren't going to operate there without the hospital.  

They have taken away roads in my community. And then 

they've just announced they cancelled my bus service. It's gone 

-- no more bus service.  They're closing the school.  They've 

taken away my senior citizens' heritage plan for the poorest of 

poor in rural Saskatchewan. And they've taken away the 

pension plan, the Saskatchewan pension plan. 

 

So the pensioners have been hit, schools have been hit, low 

income seniors.  And we're looking at the staff of the local 

senior citizens home saying, we will be next.  They took away 

the natural gas system. No more natural gas distribution 

system.  It's finished. 

 

And as my colleague pointed out, they took away the farm 

support system which was cost shared by three jurisdictions.  

So my farm support systems are gone.  And they raised all the 

fees -- pasture fees, breeding fees. And all the taxes associated 

with farming have gone up.  And my farm income now is 

$5,000 on average per farm. 

 

They took away any tax benefits from harmonization because 

we used to be tax free with harmonization.  We got not only the 

GST (goods and services tax) back, but the PST (provincial 

sales tax).  Farmers were sales tax free and businesses were 

sales tax free -- both of them refunded. Took that away.  They 

took away the farm service centres. 

 

My children are looking to Alberta for a job because obviously 

you can't find it in rural Saskatchewan.  My town is thinking of 

expanding the food bank and my town is thinking about not 

being a town because they're talking of even closing the 

church. 

 

And then she asked, how would you feel if that happened to 

you in 16 months under a new NDP government?  She says, 

what else have they got left to take?  What else could they do to 

me? 

 

And she says, well I finally figured out what else they 



1620 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1993 

could do.  They could take away my vote. They could take 

away my riding because there won't be enough people here to 

justify having a riding and they'll pass a new law way ahead of 

time in his legislature prior to the next election saying, we 

won't let the rural people have the representation they have 

because there's nobody there.  So you take away their franchise. 

 

And after all that she says, how would you feel about an NDP 

administration that promised no new taxes, health care support, 

costs of production in farming, promised viable rural 

communities, stick up for the farmer?  How would you feel?  

She says, absolutely, totally betrayed; she will never, ever, ever 

even think about voting NDP ever, for what they've done to 

rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And they campaigned, my gosh, on doing all of the positive 

things -- helping to diversify, helping to build, provide the cost 

of production, good farm support programs, all of these great 

and wonderful things they're going to do, no increase in taxes.  

They didn't tell the truth.  They didn't tell the truth. 

 

Well now, Mr. Speaker, what I want to say to the members of 

the legislature, you can't fool this woman who identified all the 

pain that she's been experiencing here; you can't fool her.  The 

NDP Premier can go and speak in New York and he can try to 

fool New Yorkers. He can say farm income is going up in 

Saskatchewan -- he'll say that in New York.  And when he's 

caught on it, he says, oh that was a different speech; CP 

(Canadian Press) got it wrong. 

 

The NDP Premier, the member from Riversdale said in New 

York, farm income was going up and he bragged about farm 

income increasing.  Back home we find that farm income is cut 

in half, and farmers are suffering and rural people are suffering, 

and he says one thing in New York and another thing at home.  

And these people stand up now and brag about their 

agricultural policy. 

 

Then the NDP Premier says, well I can do one better than that. 

I campaigned against Cargill and Weyerhaeuser and upgraders.  

They're just terrible things, terrible, terrible for the people of 

Saskatchewan.  There's no jobs in the oil patch, no jobs in 

fertilizer, no jobs in paper mills, no jobs in upgraders.  It's a 

terrible thing to do. 

 

Well when he's in New York it's just like agriculture policy.  

He has a new story in New York and we could quote from the 

speech.  He says, and we have lots of very important and 

positive international people investing in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Cargill is investing in Saskatchewan, and the NDP Premier 

brags about Cargill; Weyerhaeuser is investing in 

Saskatchewan in paper mills, and the NDP Premier in New 

York brags about Weyerhaeuser.  And he says, we have 

international investment in share offerings.  There's been 

privatizations in the province of Saskatchewan, and he talks 

about the strength of international investment in Saskatchewan.  

He does that in New York but when 

he's here, he says exactly the opposite. 

 

But we know that's been going on for some time.  Because he 

would say one thing in Gravelbourg about hospitals and he'd 

say something else in Regina and Saskatoon.  He'd say one 

thing in Harris, Saskatchewan about decentralization and he'd 

say something else in Regina. 

 

And the agricultural policy looks like that.  They don't know 

what they're doing.  They don't understand diversification.  

They've campaigned against diversification.  They've 

campaigned against allowing farmers to change their source of 

income. 

 

Despite the NDP, and despite the NDP's great big hollering 

about freight rates and about the Canadian Wheat Board, the 

diversification is taking place among NDP members because 

they are saying, I'm going to have to grow mustard even though 

it isn't under the board.  I'm going to have to grow oats, and 

they are.  And they're going to grow lentils.  And they're going 

to grow peas.  And they're going to grow beans.  And they're 

going to grow various kinds of specialty crops.  Mr. Speaker, 

they're doing it regardless because they know their own 

agriculture policy is a complete failure -- absolutely failure.  If 

everybody was to grow just wheat, and just listen to the NDP, 

you'd all be broke. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP administration has cost the average 

farmer over $50,000 alone just by wrecking the support 

programs.  The last two years, if you look at frozen wheat, and 

you look at the lack of protection, the NDP administration has 

cost the average farmer $50,000.  And the NDP are standing in 

their place bragging about their farm program.  What program?  

You'd have been better if you never did anything.  Don't even 

get into agriculture.  Don't even pretend you know anything 

about it.  You've cost this province billions and billions of 

dollars because you wouldn't cooperate with the federal 

government. 

 

As well, you've cost the farmers and rural people and 

businesses millions and millions of dollars because you 

wouldn't cooperate even in terms of putting the two tax systems 

together.  Farmers could have tremendous benefits by having a 

sales tax free system in the province of Saskatchewan that 

generates money for the coffers in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  In fact, harmonization pays for rural hospitals, 

and pays for programs like GRIP to support agriculture. 

 

In fact that's why it was introduced.  If you harmonize the two 

systems, you will have the money to provide the income.  And 

at the same time, Mr. Speaker, you can make sure that farmers 

will get the benefit of having no sales tax in the province of 

Saskatchewan to compete with Americans or to compete with 

other jurisdictions like Alberta.  But no, the NDP can't do that. 

 

They don't understand it.  They're raising every tax and they're 

hurting the economy.  We see now that as a result of their farm 

programs and their farm policy, 



May 11, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1621 

Saskatchewan's gross domestic product is declining, not 

increasing and in good part because of rural Saskatchewan.  It's 

the only province in Canada now on this chart that is actually 

seeing a decrease, a decline, a reduction in the gross domestic 

product.  And the NDP are bragging about this. 

 

The charts from StatsCanada and financial institutions speak 

for themselves.  Saskatchewan is the only jurisdiction on the 

way down.  And the place that's going down the quickest and 

the fastest with the most pain, in a free fall, is agriculture.  And 

the NDP here are bragging about their policies. 

 

This chart is led by agriculture.  The agriculture people are 

below this in the chart.  Their farm income is down 65 per cent.  

There is no change at all done the increase of gross domestic 

product.  It's all falling through the floor. 

 

And on top of that, you've cut their hospitals and cut their bus 

service and cut the rural support programs and cut the farm 

service centres.  Take the very heart and soul right out of them 

and then probably cut their ridings.  And you have added to this 

and you have the audacity to stand in here.  And I suppose 

you're going to run around the province in the next federal 

election now, saying, oh vote NDP, and we'll protect you from 

the big, bad wolf.  We'll protect you from whatever it is you're 

going to try to make them afraid of. 

 

(1600) 

 

The biggest threat to life in rural Saskatchewan in this province 

today is the NDP administration.  The biggest single threat to 

farm viability, rural lifestyle, rural health, and community 

living is the NDP.  And these charts now statistically confirm 

that, that you have hurt the economy and you've hurt farmers.  

You've taken away their support programs. 

 

And members opposite say, well we didn't do that.  Well did 

you take it away?  Of course you did.  Did you take away the 

hospitals?  Yes, you did.  Did you  increase the price of gas?  

Yes, you did.  Did you take away their support program?  Yes, 

you did. 

 

And he says, they knew exactly what the debt was and they 

campaigned against it, but they still promised cost of 

production, lots of support.  And they say ah, forget that.  They 

don't like to hear it. 

 

They said they would help, and they have delivered pain.  And 

they have hurt farm people.  There are people that will never, 

ever vote NDP again because of what you've done.  You have 

betrayed them.  You've let them down.  You've wrecked their 

families, wrecked their communities, closed their hospitals, 

ripped up their roads, closed their bus service, charged them for 

health care. 

 

You care more about freight rates than you do the local 

hospital, and that's the truth.  You'd rather argue freight rates 

than you would stick up for protecting the sick and providing 

health care support for people, and that's what they're talking 

about out there.  You can 

run around and say well, I can't go to the hospital on the Crow 

rate.  That's all the NDP will talk about, freight rates, but they 

forget they took away the hospital. 

 

You are more interested in freight rates than you are health 

care, and I'll tell you when you go to see the people the next 

time they'll be telling you that.  You think freight rates are 

more holy and more righteous than people's families, people's 

hospitals, people's communities, people's nursing homes, and 

their communities. 

 

And you put up these phoney straw men.  Well I guess we'll 

have to have the next election on freight rates.  Well what about 

people?  What about their lives?  What about their hospitals?  

What about their nursing homes?  What about their life?  And 

then it's a hypocrisy because as they argue about freight rates 

all the time, do you know what the NDP farmers do?  They say 

hey, I can't make it with these freight rates and I can't make it 

this way.  I'll have to grow something that is not under the 

Wheat Board and not supported by the freight rates. 

 

And what do they do?  They grow mustard, and they grow 

lentils, and they grow peas, and they grow beans, and they 

grow all kinds of different commodities, livestock.  Livestock, 

just to get out from what they're preaching because they won't 

follow it themselves.  No.  They diversify.  I think the past 

president of the Wheat Pool has gone totally into livestock 

agriculture, 300-and-some cows.  This is the big defender of 

the freight rates and put everything through.  Do you think 

cows are marketed under the Canadian Wheat Board?  No.  

Well then why are the NDP growing cows?  Why are they 

growing lentils and peas? 

 

Well for heaven's sakes.  It's just the hypocrisy.  It's the 

absolute hypocrisy that they will not stick up for health care; 

they won't stick up for communities; they're more concerned 

about freight rates than they are people, and hospitals in 

communities.  Well, Mr. Speaker, obviously this side of the 

House and the general public condemns the NDP, would not 

vote for their silly motion about bragging about how good they 

are in agriculture. 

 

People are laughing at the NDP Premier who tries to tell the 

rating institutions that farm income is on the rise in 

Saskatchewan.  And then he brags today because he says 

they've stabilized our credit rating at the bottom.  It's not going 

to move.  It's down there.  They say it's okay.  It'll stay where it 

is. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we had a plebiscite in the province for 

balanced budgets.  We had a harmonization package that would 

balance the budget and pay for farm programs, and the NDP 

said no.  The people said yes I think we should have have 

balanced budget legislation.  The people know that if you 

cooperate with the federal on agriculture programs, 

environmental programs, educational programs, or farm 

programs, you're going to be better off than going it alone.  But 

no, the NDP says, we can go it alone; it'll 



1622 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1993 

be magic.  We don't need GRIP.  We don't need harmonization.  

We won't have to raise taxes.  We'll give you all this stuff for 

nothing and we'll balance the budget. 

 

And do you know what, Mr. Speaker?  They can't do it.  All 

they can do is stand in the House and brag about their mythical 

plan. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, let me just say this.  The general public 

would not vote for the motion put forward by the member from 

Humboldt and the general public would certainly endorse the 

amendment put forward by the member from Maple Creek.  I 

am certainly going to endorse that amendment and I move to 

adjourn debate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- By agreement of the House, I would 

move that we move to Estimates, Committee of Finance. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Finance 

Vote 18 

 

The Chair: -- At this point I would ask that the minister please 

introduce the officials who are with us here today. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  On my 

right is the deputy minister of Finance, John Wright; seated 

next to him is Len Rog, assistant deputy minister, revenue, 

pensions, and administration.  Behind Mr. Wright is Craig 

Dotson, associate deputy minister, budget analysis division.  

And next to Mr. Dotson is Bill Van Sickle, executive director, 

administration division.  On my left is Bill Jones, associate 

deputy minister, treasury and debt management division.  And 

seated at the back are Gerry Kraus, the Provincial Comptroller, 

and Kent Walde, acting director, pension programs, public 

employee benefits agency. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

today we don't have a great deal of time to discuss everything, 

but there's some issues that are very current out there with the 

Saskatchewan public that I think we should discuss here today.  

As you know all of the recent economic indicators that have 

been coming in show that your government isn't up to snuff as 

far as economics in the province of Saskatchewan and the 

ability of Saskatchewan people to have faith in your 

government to allow them to participate in the economy, 

provide jobs, and pay taxes in the future. 

 

And particularly the business community, Madam Minister, is 

saying to you and to your Premier that it's time that we sat 

down and had a bit of a chat again 

because the economic plan that your government put in place 

last September is turning out to be a fiasco, that the projections 

and the promises made there are quite simply ringing very 

hollow with the reality of the Canadian economy today.  And 

it's time that you sat down with them to start reworking some of 

that particular plan that obviously isn't working, and they're 

talking about people being deceived, about a feeling of anger, 

feelings of rejection. 

 

Madam Minister, your Premier then has the gall to stand up in 

this legislature and say that these people don't represent the 

business community of the province, that the chamber of 

commerce and the federation of independent business and the 

construction association and others don't represent the people 

that pay their dues. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, as you know in the last two interim 

supply motions, we've asked you to bring forth your own 

analysis.  And I notice in the budget here that we've got over $4 

million allocated, and you've got a deputy minister that's 

assigned to that particular section of budget analysis and how 

well you're doing. 

 

Madam Minister, I think it's time that you started to come clean 

with the people of Saskatchewan, with this Assembly about 

what your budget has done to Saskatchewan's economy; what 

your budget has done to the business community; what your 

budget has done to the average taxpayer who now has less 

disposable income; and what your budget has done to those 

many thousands, those tens of thousands of Saskatchewan 

people that find themselves unemployed with no prospect of 

employment in the future and the alternative simply to be to go 

to the No. 1 Highway or go to the Yellowhead and hang a right 

and head for Alberta or British Columbia. 

 

In other words, Madam Minister, what they're saying by 

marching with their feet out of this province is that they have 

no confidence, that there is a lack of confidence in your budget 

and in your financial direction and your ability to draw new 

business to this province.  And that for all the promises made, 

all we've got so far are broken promises and nothing else -- not 

one concrete thing. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, I'm going to give you the opportunity 

to show us some results that your department has put together, 

to show Saskatchewan people that you are on the right track, 

that your increases in taxes and utility rates, in gasoline tax, 

that the potential taxes that you're going to impose on 

Saskatchewan business through occupational health and safety, 

through workmen's comp aren't going to drive our economy 

further into the hole than what it already is. 

 

And, Madam Minister, I'm going to give you the opportunity to 

refute what the Premier said when you and the Premier and 

your officials were in New York and you told the people in the 

rating agencies, the people in New York, that there was major 

increases in net farm income that were going to help your 

picture 



May 11, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1623 

out. 

 

And the reality being the net farm income in this province, by 

all analysis, Madam Minister, is going the opposite way; that 

we've got as much as a 68 per cent drop.  And yet you use 

rising farm net income receipts as one reason for your 

economic indicators going up.  Well, Madam Minister, you 

can't tell one story in New York and come home and tell 

another one. 

 

So, Madam Minister, maybe you can start explaining first of all 

to the farmers of Saskatchewan who are in an income crisis, 

and then I'll give you the opportunity to move through the 

business sector and others, for you to provide some information 

to show them why they shouldn't be so angry with you, that 

they would demand an economic summit with you and your 

government to try and redefine the plans that you so glowingly 

sold to this province and the business community last 

September. 

 

So, Madam Minister, perhaps you could start by telling us why 

you would go to New York and say that rising farm receipts 

were one reason for optimism, and in fact they are falling as 

much as 68 per cent in the province of Saskatchewan.  Could 

you do that, Madam Minister? 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, thank you very much 

for that question.  I attended all of the speeches given by the 

Premier and I listened very carefully to what he said because 

sometimes he answered some of the questions that would arise 

from the speech and sometimes I would answer some of the 

questions that would arise from the speech.  And I can assure 

you that the Premier of Saskatchewan never said that there 

would be an economic recovery in Saskatchewan because of 

rising farm income. 

 

I'm not sure that I know why the member opposite would have 

such confidence, that just because one press report suggested 

that, that this showed beyond a doubt that this was said.  So all 

I can say is I listened to every speech; that was never said. 

 

Now the member opposite raises the issues of the Conference 

Board of Canada economic forecast.  And I think it's 

worthwhile reading these into the record, because for people 

who are open-minded about the future of Saskatchewan and in 

our present circumstances, this is very good news. 

 

And what I would like to read into the record is the 

comparisons, what the Conference Board of Canada projects 

for Saskatchewan and what the Department of Finance has 

projected for Saskatchewan.  And our projections take into 

account outside forecasts given by all agencies and also they 

take into account changes made with respect . . . as a result of 

this budget. 

 

This year there is a difference in opinion.  The Conference 

Board of Canada says growth, real growth 

in the province is going to be 1.8 per cent, the Department of 

Finance says it's going to be 2.8. 

 

However, next year the situation is reversed.  For 1994 the 

Conference Board of Canada is significantly more optimistic 

about the level of growth than is the Department of Finance.  

The Conference Board says 2.3; Department of Finance says 

1.6.  And if you look . . . What you have to do is you have to 

look over the four-year period, from '93 to '96, and there's very 

little difference in the two forecasts in terms of economic 

growth. 

 

There are other statistics included in that forecast.  For 

example, the Conference Board of Canada makes projections 

with respect to unemployment.  What's interesting is their 

projections are more optimistic than ours.  We say 

unemployment in '93 is going to be 8.9 per cent; they say it's 

only going to be 8.5 per cent.  Next year we agree entirely on 

the rates of unemployment. 

 

And again if you look at things like personal income, we say 

personal income should rise by .6 per cent.  Conference Board 

of Canada is much more optimistic.  It says 2.2 per cent. 

 

Now over the next number of months we will go through 

different forecasts.  Some will be up; some will be down.  

There's another forecast came out post-budget which had 

growth in Saskatchewan at 2.7 per cent.  And we'll fling these 

figures back and forth. 

 

But unless the members opposite are just looking for the clouds 

in the silver lining, what they will have to focus on is every 

single economic forecast for the province of Saskatchewan for 

the next four years says the economy is going to grow; there 

are going to be more jobs created.  And that is good news. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Madam 

Minister, you may not agree with what the media report about 

what the Premier said while you were on your junket to New 

York, but they are quite confident, Madam Minister, in what 

they say.  As a matter of fact, they're quite willing to stand 

behind the transcripts that they took at that meeting.  They have 

no problem at all standing behind what they reported. 

 

So I would say, Madam Minister, if you've got a problem with 

it, that you should talk to them.  And if you're accusing them of 

telling an untruth, then do something about it.  But they're quite 

willing to stand behind what they reported. 

 

And I just can't believe, Madam Minister, for a minute that the 

Premier of this province, coming from a province where net 

farm income is just absolutely devastated -- a good part by the 

programs brought in by your government, by the taxation 

brought in by you, Madam Minister, that you could even allude 

to the fact that Saskatchewan agriculture had any semblance of 

health attached to it at all. 

 

Matter of fact, if you'd gone there and told the whole truth and 

nothing but the truth about our economy, 



1624 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1993 

you would have had to tell them that it wasn't looking good at 

all.  And you would have had to tell them that you had pulled 

out of GRIP and you'd done a whole bunch of things that were 

having an adverse effect on the economy.  And I don't suppose 

you want to do that, Madam Minister, because you always like 

to tell the folks in New York one thing, and the folks at home 

another. 

 

That's why when we refer to one of the many speeches that the 

Premier sent across to us, we talk about his glowing reports of 

Cargill and Hitachi and IBM and Northern Telecom and 

Weyerhaeuser and what great corporate citizens they are, and 

how they're adding to the employment in our province, and 

they're all substantial projects.  And then he comes into this 

Legislative Assembly and out in Main Street, Saskatchewan, 

and he says all these are just terrible rotten people and they 

shouldn't be here. 

 

I mean, Madam Minister, you can't go to New York and always 

give these mixed messages simply to define your own political 

well-being.  But that's what you do.  I mean I could read half of 

this speech in the verbatim here, and it would counter half the 

stuff that you guys stand up in question period and talk about. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, those numbers that you just wanted to 

get on the record here in this Legislative Assembly, you should 

finish the statements off.  When they talk about 1.8, they say 

1.8 or lower.  And the reason that it will go lower is because of 

the budget brought down by the Government of Saskatchewan; 

that the budget is having a serious impact on the economy.  So 

1.8 is the best in '93-94 that you're going to be able to achieve.  

But it will be probably significantly lower because of your 

budget. 

 

And, Madam Minister, what the business community is saying 

is exactly that.  Because of your budget -- the only cause of 

inflation in the province of Saskatchewan today -- because of 

your budget, you've got 16,000 less jobs, that your 

unemployment rates are up, that out-migration is continuing.  

And, Madam Minister, they want to sit down and talk to you 

about it. 

 

So maybe what we should do first of all is get you to finish off 

the statement and answer this question.  Why does the 

Conference Board of Canada give you 1.8 as your top end and 

say it will be substantially lower because of the budget that you 

brought down in the province of Saskatchewan.  Madam 

Minister, why will it be substantially lower according to the 

Conference Board of Canada? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I would gladly finish 

off that sentence.  Because the disagreement again is about this 

year.  They're lower this year; they're higher next year.  But 

what matters most is not volume.  It's not how much you pass 

through the system.  It's the value of what you pass through the 

system, the value of what you sell. 

 

What's interesting there is the statistics.  They say next year -- 

this is Conference Board of Canada revised -- they say the 

value of what we produce in this province is going to increase 

by 3.7 per cent.  We say it's going 

to increase by 3.3 per cent. 

 

So again if you want to try to go through numbers and figure 

out the most pessimistic interpretation of them, that's fine.  And 

the people of Saskatchewan will judge you on that basis.  But 

what I'm saying is that there is no cause for concern here.  

Considering the past of the province, this is an optimistic 

forecast. 

 

I want to say a word with respect to Cargill and New York.  

What precisely would the Premier of Saskatchewan say in New 

York?  Cargill, it does not exist in our province.  He stated the 

fact that Cargill is here.  But I can tell you when we talked to 

the bond rating agencies, we didn't have to tell them about the 

kind of deal that the previous administration signed with 

Cargill; they knew about it.  And they knew that it was one of 

the major problems, one of the major liabilities that we as a 

government have to deal with. 

 

So make the distinction between saying yes Cargill's here and 

comments about the deal.  Yes, Cargill is here, but the deal 

signed with Cargill was not a deal in the best interests of the 

province.  And that was said in New York as well, and it was 

said with the complete understanding of the bond rating 

agencies. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, the reason that you won't 

finish off the statement is because you know full well that the 

numbers you were talking about occurred last year. 

 

I mean I just read the front page, or the business page of the 

Star-Phoenix yesterday and the president of PCS (Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan) is saying that the going price on 

potash is backing off, that the spot market is a lot lower. 

 

You go to New York and you tell the folks that the price of 

uranium is up 21 per cent.  The last reports in, even though 

Cameco's share value is going up, that the spot market is as low 

as $8. 

 

Madam Minister, the business community aren't stupid.  They 

also understand what is going on in the world market-place.  

Madam Minister, your agricultural production, your net farm 

receipts are down as much as 68 per cent.  Madam Minister, the 

projections for the next crop year starting in August for the 

price of all of the major grains and oilseeds, is down.  Not up -- 

down.  That crop year is going to take you well into 1994. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, with your agricultural community 

facing that, with a lot of your major commodities by their own 

reporting saying that they are off in their sales projections, and 

for next year, the business community and others are saying, 

you've got a serious problem.  You're not admitting what reality 

is and you're not admitting what your budget is doing to people 

that pay taxes and employ others. 

 

And that's why they want to sit down with you.  Because 

they're saying this stuff, you can project it out as far as you 

want, Madam Minister.  The reality is today, the reality is the 



May 11, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1625 

tax Bill, the reality is the jobless, the reality is nothing going on 

in the province of Saskatchewan.  That is the reality. 

 

And you have to go to New York and talk about all the 

previous deals done in this province by other governments in 

order to come up with any good news at all. 

 

While you're answering my question, Madam Minister, I'd like 

to know what the existing interest rate is that Saskferco is 

paying the Government of Saskatchewan.  What is the 

commercial rate that Saskferco is paying the Government of 

Saskatchewan on the loan guarantee that they have right now? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, with respect to the 

interest rate, there's a formula.  The three-quarters of one per 

cent is the maximum; one-quarter of one per cent is the 

minimum. 

 

But let me clarify what our concern is and what the bond raters' 

concern is.  The bond raters' concern is simple.  The previous 

administration has the Government of Saskatchewan on the 

hook to the tune of $280-some million.  It actually is probably 

more than that if we look up the number, $280 million of debt, 

clear debt -- $288 million of debt to create under a hundred 

jobs.  This is the kind of economic development the members 

opposite believed in and the kind of economic development 

that has caused the financial problems of the province -- 

expensive, expensive jobs. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Minister, you says it's 288 million.  Would 

you break that down, please, between direct investment and 

loan guarantee? 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, the 288 is loan 

guarantee alone.  CIC has direct investment to the tune of 60 

million.  But what's key is what the bond raters say is a debt, is 

a debt.  It's like somebody going to the bank and saying, you 

know, to the banker, will you give me a loan?  And they say, 

well if you get a guarantee.  And they come to you and you say, 

well listen, if the bank gives you the guarantee, I'll give you the 

loan.  The people on the hook are the people who've given the 

guarantee, and that's the province of Saskatchewan.  And that's 

what the members opposite have committed these taxpayers to. 

 

And I thank the member opposite for mentioning that to me, 

because really what I'm saying is fewer than a hundred jobs for 

more than $300 million, if you look at the total exposure of the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I missed your answer, Madam Minister, on 

the amount of direct investment.  Could you please tell me 

what that was again? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- As I said, it's approximately 60 

million by Crown Investments Corporation, not by the 

Department of Finance.  What the Government of 

Saskatchewan has is the $288 million loan guarantee. 

 Crown Investments Corporation has, on top of that, in the 

neighbourhood of 60 million-plus in direct investment. 

 

So as I say, it's over 300 million tax dollars exposed for under a 

hundred jobs. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Now, Madam Minister, back to the rate that 

you're being paid on the commercial rate.  You're saying that 

it's only three-quarters of one per cent? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Three quarters of one per cent is the 

maximum; one-quarter of one per cent is the minimum.  And 

we received 1.9 million in payments to the Government of 

Saskatchewan last year. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, would you give me that in 

dollars, please, for the last fiscal year, the amount of money 

that that amounted to? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- $1.9 million is what the government 

received in payment last year. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, how many people are 

currently employed there? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Certainly the figure that I heard most 

recently was 88, but let's be cautious and say fewer than 100 

long-term permanent jobs. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, how many people were 

employed there at the peak of construction? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Well obviously we don't know the 

answer to that, but that information would be readily available.  

What matters to the long-term future of the province is how 

many long-term permanent jobs you have and what did you pay 

to get them. 

 

So I think my point is, we as the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 

have been exposed to a liability in excess of $300 million, 

which is one of the factors affecting our credit rating out there, 

the exposure on these deals.  And in the long term we're 

looking at a hundred or fewer jobs. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, what would the income tax 

paid by the average person making 40 to $45,000 a year, what 

would they pay in personal income tax and sales tax?  You've 

got figures that show sort of a combination for gas tax, sales 

tax, personal income tax, that type of thing for an average 

individual. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, in the back of the 

budget address there are figures to that effect.  We have 

$50,000 income here.  For example, an estimate is $5,246 a 

year. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I'm told that 

there were about 1,100 people working there at the peak of 

construction.  I was also told that their average salary put them 

in excess of $50,000 a year 



1626 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1993 

according to the money that they were making on that job site, 

considerably more.  So get one of your officials to do a 

thousand times that number for me, please, and I'll ask you 

about it a little later. 

 

Madam Minister, are you saying that as far as Saskferco goes 

that the province of Saskatchewan is getting nothing -- nothing 

-- from the people that truck fertilizer out of there, that the 

province of Saskatchewan is getting nothing in fuel tax for 

product being hauled both in and out of there? 

 

Madam Minister, are you saying that the province of 

Saskatchewan is not getting anything from the railroads, both 

CN (Canadian National) and CP, who are hauling product out 

of there; that you are not getting any fuel tax from either CN or 

CP out of that plant? 

 

Madam Minister, are you telling me that there are no royalties 

accruing to the province of Saskatchewan on products used in 

that plant for the production of nitrogen fertilizer?  Are you 

telling me there is none whatsoever? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, thank you for that 

question.  I'd be very pleased to answer that.  The Government 

of Saskatchewan through Crown Investments Corporation has 

some $60 million in equity.  The cost to the taxpayer on an 

annual basis for the interest on that money is about 4.8 million.  

So it's 4.8 million we could have used for other purposes.  Let's 

add in the 1.9 million that Cargill pays for the loan guarantee.  

The taxpayer each and every year is still out $2.9 million in 

terms of interest that could have been used for other purposes -- 

2.9 million each and every year. 

 

Nobody is saying that the people working at Cargill do not pay 

taxes.  Of course they do.  Nobody is saying that some 

employment is not created. 

 

But what we're saying to the people of Saskatchewan is we're 

distancing ourself from that particular approach to economic 

development, and we're doing it because the cost to the 

taxpayer of Saskatchewan in terms of the exposure is in excess 

of $300 million to create fewer than a hundred long-term jobs. 

 

If in fact we were interested in taking that pool of money -- 

$300 million, $288 million in loan guarantees -- and giving 

those guarantees to small business, we could create many, 

many, many more jobs. 

 

And this is the wasted opportunity of the 1980s.  The hundreds 

of millions of dollars in loan guarantees, direct investments into 

huge projects that are still draining the treasury of the province, 

created very few long-term jobs, rather than putting the 

emphasis on the people in the province who really create the 

jobs -- the co-ops and the small businesses. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, does Saskferco pay a 

dividend to the province of Saskatchewan when it makes a 

profit? 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, Cargill has yet to 

make a profit.  We are not aware of any projections to the 

effect that they will be doing so.  We would only get a return 

consistent with our equity. 

 

But I think the key is looking at what Moody's had to say about 

these sorts of deals . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, yes.  

Well a little bit of information would help too . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Yes, as my colleague said, a few facts help 

every so often. 

 

They're talking about our plan to turn around the finances in the 

economy of the province, a plan which they endorse.  And they 

say: 

 

 

Success in curtailing government exposure to private sector 

venture debt and loan guarantees will be important to 

maintaining the current credit rating.  This will determine the 

extent and pace to which Saskatchewan's overall financial 

position will benefit from current reductions in the budgetary 

deficit. 

 

What they're saying is how we manage these sorts of 

investments and how we ensure that this government does not 

make the mistake that the previous administration made, will 

help to determine the future credit rating of the province. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, you said in the Assembly a 

short time ago that when you were in New York you said this 

was a bad deal; that you talked to Moody's about this one being 

a bad deal. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, as per the agreement, can the province 

of Saskatchewan sell its investment in this plant at a future 

date?  And when is that future date? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- What needs to be pointed out is that 

the problem for the province of Saskatchewan is the level of 

exposure with this and other deals signed by the previous 

administration, because when the credit rating agencies look at 

the province, they look at all of the debt of the provinces. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You know why you don't want to sell it?  

Because you know it's going to make you money.  And that's 

why you're not going to sell it. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- The member opposite asked from 

his seat whether or not the government would be prepared to 

sell it.  I guess my point would be, until there's a track which is 

showing profitability, it's like many of the other deals.  It's like 

NewGrade.  We would certainly look at selling it if we could 

find anybody who would be willing to look at buying 

something like NewGrade.  So many of those deals are based 

on such weak economic foundations that they will not be sold 

because we will not be able to find buyers for them. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, you are beginning to act 

like Alice in Wonderland; you fell down a rabbit hole 

somewhere here.  We're not talking 



May 11, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1627 

about NewGrade.  We're talking about Saskferco.  I'm asking 

you questions about Saskferco and whether the government can 

sell its shares in Saskferco. 

 

Madam Minister, Simplot just cancelled an expansion of their 

plant in Brandon because they can't compete against Saskferco.  

The analysis on fertilizer supplies, Madam Minister, in western 

Canada and the western United States is that they are extremely 

tight, that Saskferco is selling every ounce of product that they 

can possibly make at a very good price, Madam Minister. 

 

Now the fact is that they are going to be making a profit.  I 

asked you earlier: if they make a profit, what portion of that 

profit goes to the province of Saskatchewan?  And I ask you 

again, can the province of Saskatchewan sell its shares in 

Saskferco as per the agreement, and what is that agreement, 

Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm trying to be 

cooperative here.  The questions the member opposite is asking 

are questions that should be directed to Crown Investments 

Corporation.  That's where they will have all the details on 

these particular deals. 

 

This deal, the equity investment from this deal, in this deal, 

does not come through the Department of Finance.  So I'm 

trying to give you some estimates as to the answer.  If you want 

the detailed, precise figures, the details of the contract, ask the 

Crown Investments Corporation. 

 

I would also like to correct the member opposite with respect to 

the Manitoba project. The project collapsed because they could 

not get financing. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- One reason they couldn't get financing, 

Madam Minister, is because they could not compete.  Nobody 

is going to invest money in a fertilizer plant that can't compete 

against the one next door in Saskatchewan. 

 

Madam Minister, you sit as the chairman of Treasury Board 

and you also sit on the board of CIC.  Now if you're like the 

previous Finance ministers that I knew, they usually chaired 

over there or they had a big part to play in it.  So, Madam 

Minister, you are well aware of all of that stuff and you can't 

hide. 

 

The other thing, it was you that said on your New York trip that 

the bond rating people in New York said that Saskferco was a 

bad deal. 

 

(1645) 

 

Now, Madam Minister, there's certain criteria that bond rating 

agencies look at to determine a bad deal.  And I'll refer you to 

the accounting recommendations of the Institute of Chartered 

Accountants where they have three criteria attached to doing an 

analysis, and I'd like you to tell me which one Saskferco falls 

under. 

 

This is dealing with the uncertainty relating to the 

occurrence or non-occurrence of future events which determine 

the outcome of a contingency.  This section identifies the three 

areas of this range by a general description as follows: a) likely.  

The chances of the occurrence or non-occurrence of future 

events is high.  Are you saying that Saskferco is likely to go 

bankrupt, Madam Minister?  b) unlikely.  The chance of the 

occurrence or non-occurrence of the future events is slight.  Is 

it b)?  c) not determinable.  The chance of the occurrence or 

non-occurrence of the future events cannot be determined.  

Madam Minister, which one of those would you determine to 

be where Saskferco sits? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, this is not multiple 

choice.  This is the estimates for the Department of Finance.  

The member opposite asked me, because I sit on the CIC board, 

for some general responses with respect to Crown Investments 

Corporation.  He knows full well that if he wants the details 

he's going to have to ask the Crown Investments Corporation 

chair when that person is here. 

 

With respect to Saskferco, the point is a simple one.  Bond 

rating agencies look at the exposure of the province in terms of 

all kinds of debt, including guarantees and therefore they look 

at the guarantees on Saskferco with a lot of concern, and they 

say that the success of our plan to turn around the finances of 

the province will depend largely on our capacity to manage 

what we inherited in a financially prudent way.  And we are 

assuring the people of Saskatchewan that we will do just that. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- No, the point here, Madam Minister, is you 

said you went to New York -- not the chairman of CIC -- that 

you went to New York, and while you were there the bond 

rating agency said Saskferco was a bad deal.  Now, Madam 

Minister, what I want to do is get to the bottom of this bad deal.  

I want us to lay it out here in the legislature for the 

Saskatchewan taxpayer why the bond rating agencies in New 

York say it is a bad deal. 

 

Now I've given you the criteria that people use to judge bad 

deals with.  You will not pick the one that Saskferco falls 

under.  I am told, Madam Minister, by people fairly close to 

Saskferco that there were $90 million in goods and services 

purchased during its construction; that there was 25 million in 

direct and indirect taxes paid.  There will be 130 full-time jobs 

when the plant is at full capacity.  It is a fully taxable 

corporation under all the laws of the province of Saskatchewan.  

There are several RMs (rural municipalities) and school 

divisions also taking taxes and profits and mill rates out of it. 

 

Madam Minister, I want you to tell me why the bond rating 

agencies say that Saskferco is a bad deal, and I want you to tell 

me that the Government of Saskatchewan cannot at some future 

date sell their equity in Saskferco.  And I want you to tell me, 

according to what you heard in New York, that if they did try 

to sell their equity in Saskferco, that they would take a 

commercial bath on it.  And I want you to tell me 



1628 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1993 

how you're going to take that commercial bath, because that's 

what you're trying to tell this Legislative Assembly and the 

taxpayers of this province.  It's you, Madam Minister, who said 

that people in New York were concerned about Saskferco. 

 

Now I asked you about taxes from trucking and fuel and 

railroads and personal income tax, along with the nearly $2 

million that you receive in direct fees.  Now I think, Madam 

Minister, it would be proper for you to give an entire 

accounting to this legislature and to the taxpayers if you're 

saying in New York they want this deal as a bad deal. 

 

So, Madam Minister, why don't you start accounting? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I would be most 

pleased to do that.  The main problem the province of 

Saskatchewan has with respect to bond rating agencies and 

other financial agencies is the level of debt.  The province has a 

level of debt which is far too high for the population and the 

economy underpinning it. 

 

So what the bond rating agencies see as a problem is that what 

this deal does, is it increases the level of exposure of the 

province to the tune of $300 million -- more than 300 -- taking 

the guarantees into account and the equity.  That's the problem.  

It's the problem, plain and simple. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, you still will not answer the 

questions.  Can you liquidate that guarantee at a future date?  

Like what is the parameters on the deal?  When can you start to 

liquidate that if you so wish, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, those sorts of 

possibilities become realistic if the deal turns out to be 

profitable.  Nobody in the province would sit here and hope 

that any of those deals, terms as troublesome as they were, 

don't succeed or don't become profitable.  You hope that they 

become profitable.  But until they become profitable, there's no 

capacity to liquidate because there's nobody willing to buy or to 

take over the guarantee. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- One thing at a time, Madam Minister.  As per 

the agreement, when does the province of Saskatchewan have 

the first opportunity to sell their assets in Saskferco? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm trying to be 

cooperative.  This is not estimates for Crown Investments 

Corporation.  This is estimates for Department of Finance.  

What I can tell you about are the loan guarantees because 

they're under the Department of Finance. 

 

If you want the specifics of the contract, then you have to wait 

until Crown Investments Corporation are here.  And I'm sure 

they'll be most pleased to answer exactly those questions. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, that's simply not acceptable.  

In your own budget analysis you have an 

analysis of CIC and CIC's debt.  You just love to roll it in there 

when it's appropriate, at the right time.  You just love to talk 

about the total accumulated debt of the province being 

whatever.  And you use the Crown debt when you're out on the 

stump, when you're speaking, and I'm sure you used it at the 

appropriate times in New York.  So, Madam Minister, that's 

simply not acceptable. 

 

Now I would like you to answer the question, because you can't 

duck and hide with that flimsy excuse, Madam Minister.  Just 

give us the answer and we'll get on with life in this Assembly. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, with respect to 

details about the contract, what I suggest is when Crown 

Investments Corporation is here ask about the details of the 

contract. 

 

What the Government of Saskatchewan will do with respect to 

this deal and other deals is to manage what we inherited in the 

best interests of the province.  And if there is an advantage to 

the taxpayer in selling an asset or getting rid of loan guarantees, 

obviously we are open to that.  We have proven that with 

respect to Weyerhaeuser where we got $150 million in loan 

guarantees removed . . . $150 payment and another $50 million 

in loan guarantees removed.  So we will manage all of these 

deals which we inherited -- good or bad -- in the best interests 

of the province. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:56 p.m. 

 


