


















































Hansard: May 25, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1921 

 May 25, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: -- Before we have the routine introduction of 

guests, it is my distinct pleasure today to welcome and 

introduce seven very distinguished guests to the members of 

the Legislative Assembly.  Seated in the Speaker's gallery we 

have none other than the 1993 world junior women's curling 

silver medalists. 

 

As I introduce our guests today I would ask them to stand and 

remain standing until they have all been introduced.  Ms. 

Amber Holland, skip; Ms. Cindy Street, third; Ms. Tracy 

Beach, second; Ms. Angela Street, lead; Ms. Maria McKenzie, 

fifth; Mr. Merv Fonger, coach; Mr. Gary Gregor, team 

psychologist.  I ask all members to join with me in welcoming 

to our Chamber the 1993 world junior women's curling silver 

medalists. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- The members of the Legislative Assembly 

will have an opportunity to welcome and congratulate our 

guests after question period and immediately before orders of 

the day.  We will now continue with introduction of guests. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

Mr. Speaker, it's my honour and privilege to introduce to you, 

sir, and to all the members of the Legislative Assembly, in the 

Speaker's gallery, two officials of the Namibian government 

who are visiting with us for a brief time in Saskatchewan and in 

Canada. 

 

They are Mr. Immanuel Dumeni and Mr. Gerson Tjihenuna, 

both of whom are seated with officials from our cabinet 

secretariat.  Mr. Dumeni is the under-secretary in the cabinet 

office of the Namibian Prime Minister.  Mr. Tjihenuna is the 

deputy permanent secretary to the Prime Minister.  A third 

official, Mr. Hermanus Kasper, the deputy permanent secretary 

to the Namibian Ministry of Finance, will be arriving later this 

week. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members of this House, these gentlemen are here 

as part of a mentoring program initiated by the Institute of 

Public Administration of Canada, IPAC, and the Canadian 

International Development Agency, CIDA.  This program 

enables officials from developing and third-world countries to 

visit Canada and to learn about how governments work.  IPAC 

and CIDA, in conjunction with the South African trust 

education fund, are sponsoring their visit to Canada. 

 

As members will know, Namibia achieved independence and 

became a democracy in 1990.  The country is keenly interested 

in learning about the structure, the processes, and the 

machinery of 

democratic governments.  We hope the time that they spend 

here with us will prove to be useful in nurturing the 

development of democracy in Namibia. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that the two gentlemen stand, Mr. 

Dumeni and Mr. Tjihenuna, and be recognized by the 

Assembly today, if you will please, gentlemen, and welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to join with the Premier on behalf of Her Majesty's 

Loyal Opposition, to also welcome our guests from Namibia 

today.  It's always nice to see another country join our world of 

organizations and countries, and we hope that in your visit here 

today that you will learn some things that will set your new 

country in good stead, and the people in Namibia and the great 

resources that you have at your disposal will be put to use to 

help your people grow and prosper in the future.  And welcome 

to the Saskatchewan legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure and 

privilege to introduce to you and to members of the Assembly a 

group of SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 

and Technology) students, eight to be exact, who are students 

in English as a second language, taking the course with SIAST.  

They're here with us today to observe question period, and with 

them, their teacher Ruth Quiring.  And I'm pleased to welcome 

them here today and look forward to meeting them after 

question period. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I am pleased to introduce to you and through you 

some special guests from Inner Mongolia who are seated in the 

west gallery. 

 

First I would like to introduce Mr. Tian Jinqu, Mr. Zhao 

Weiping from Hohhot Transportation School and Ms. Guo 

Renquan and Mr. Ge Yumin from Hohhot Electric Power 

School.  Both are located in Inner Mongolia. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Speaker, these schools and SIAST 

International campus are involved in a linkage project with 

Highways and Transportation and SaskPower.  It's designed to 

create a substantial long-term relationship and exchange of 

ideas that strengthens each party's ability to meet the 

educational needs in transportation, mining, and power 

industry. 

 

Last year Inner Mongolia sent a large group of teachers and 

professionals to Saskatchewan to study our programs and 

techniques in many technical areas. 



1922 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1993 

 And we're happy to report, Mr. Speaker, that currently one of 

our department's senior engineers, Mr. Ray Gerbrandt, is 

spending six weeks at the Huhhot Transportation School, 

teaching a class on a variety of highway programs that have 

proven successful in Saskatchewan.  Mr. Gerbrandt's trip is 

sponsored by Inner Mongolia and Saskatchewan is pleased to 

offer his expertise. 

 

Also seated, Mr. Speaker, with our guests from Inner Mongolia 

are the staff of my department and SIAST.  And I would ask 

the Assembly to join with me to give them a warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And to our guests I 

would just like to say this.  I want to welcome you and say that 

it's a privilege for me to welcome you, particularly since you 

come from Huhhot in Inner Mongolia.  My nephew is a doctor 

of veterinary medicine and teaches at the university in Huhhot.  

He teaches English and range land management and he's been 

there for two years.  He's coming home in June and then he's 

going back there in fall again. 

 

And I too want to welcome you here, and I know that he has a 

real concern for the range land management focus there.  And I 

want you to enjoy yourself here and we want to welcome you 

here too. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would 

like to introduce to you and through you to other members of 

the Legislative Assembly, some guests that are not so quite so 

far away, a little bit closer to Regina, and that is a group of 69 

high school students, grade 8 students from Martensville, Mr. 

Speaker.  As you may have known from previous times when 

Martensville has been here, it's the largest centre in my 

constituency, and it's where I have my office.  And it's also 

where an old -- oops, I'd better rephrase that -- past colleague 

of mine that I used to teach together with, Loretta Bell, 

Deborah Rodger, and Dale Wiebe as teachers that are here with 

the group.  And I look forward to meeting you again, having a 

discussion later on, and drinks together around 3 o'clock. 

 

I'd ask all members to please help me welcome these students 

from Martensville. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it 

gives me pleasure today to introduce to you, sir, and to other 

members of the Assembly, 25 grades 7 and 8 students from 

Rouleau School, Rouleau, Saskatchewan.  They're seated in 

your gallery, sir, and they're accompanied by their teacher 

Karen Fedor today, and bus driver Diane Sanborn.  They are 

here for a tour of the Legislative Building and to watch 

question period. 

 

I hope that they enjoy themselves and learn lots about 

our system that we practice here in Saskatchewan as far as 

British parliamentary democracy.  I'll be meeting with them for 

pictures afterwards and would like all members to welcome the 

students from Rouleau, Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Co-op Upgrader Review 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Premier today, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, your 

government's handling of the Co-op upgrader agreement is 

setting a very dangerous and disturbing precedent in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Premier, the use of threats, intimidation, and untimely 

legislation to rewrite legally binding agreements is completely 

unacceptable.  It sends exactly the wrong message to any 

business considering setting up shop in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Premier, despite the fact that FCL (Federated 

Co-operatives Ltd.) is under no legal obligation to change 

anything in the agreement, they have agreed to meet you 

halfway and negotiate a settlement so long as these negotiations 

are done in good faith and not under threat of legislation or 

expropriation, Mr. Premier. 

 

Mr. Premier, why don't you take FCL at their offer?  Will you 

remove the threat of legislation and enter into real negotiations 

with FCL on this matter and make it resolved? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, every member in this 

House should know exactly what we're living with with respect 

to this project.  We're living with a megaproject with $600 

million-plus of taxpayers' liability, a megaproject which is right 

on the edge.  Justice Estey has said it has run financially 

aground.  Justice Estey has concluded that it cannot sustain 

itself financially.  Those are not my words.  The hon. member 

from Moosomin may not like them.  Those are the findings of 

the justice. 

 

Situation is that after four years of operating, NewGrade in its 

own annual audited reports has accumulated in that four-year 

period a deficit of $300 million.  There hasn't been a surplus in 

each one of those four years. 

 

We have sought now for 18 months to negotiate an adequate 

solution.  We were not successful in getting Federated Co-ops 

to sit down to do so with us.  Justice Estey was appointed to 

recommend the solution.  We support the principles of Mr. 

Justice Estey's report.  We would like to negotiate based on 

Justice Estey's report.  That is our position.  We want FCL to 

say that that's their position.  And above all we want you, sir, as 



May 25, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1923 

being a member of the government that struck this deal, to tell 

us whether you support Justice Estey as the basis of settlement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Premier, 

you revert back to very familiar behaviour for people that were 

around this province in the 1970s.  You create a crisis, and then 

you use the heaviest-handed measures at your disposal to try 

and make yourself look like a hero, Mr. Premier, to people 

around this province that don't have the opportunity to be as 

informed as the members of this legislature.  You did it in the 

1970s; you expropriated potash companies, and we all know 

how that experience turned out, Mr. Premier. 

 

Justice Estey, Mr. Premier, said that the upgrader is an 

operating success.  Mr. Premier, FCL have not said they would 

not negotiate.  But they have asked time, Mr. Premier, so that 

their round of membership meetings . . . 240,000 I remind you, 

Mr. Premier, who reside in the province of Saskatchewan, 

240,000 members who have paid their 5 and $10 memberships 

to belong to the co-op movement.  Mr. Premier, they have said 

let's negotiate in good faith.  Let us keep our membership 

informed, and we can come up with a suitable agreement. 

 

Mr. Premier, what is the big hurry?  Why must you use the 

heavy hand of your legislative agenda to take away the rights of 

240,000 Co-op members?  Why are you doing that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, like last question period, 

I want to draw to the attention of the House how the hon. 

member's question is predicated on a false fact from which then 

the question is conducted and closed.  He starts it on the 

assumption that somehow we created the crisis. 

 

The reality of the situation is that this crisis was created as a 

result of the deal which was negotiated by you, sir, when you 

sat on the treasury benches back in 1985-1986.  The Donald 

Gass Commission said that.  The Estey report has found the 

same.  And these are the circumstances.  We didn't create it.  

That was the situation which you caused and created. 

 

And the hon. member opposite says, what's the hurry?  I say to 

the hon. member and to FCL, what could be the benefit of 

waiting?  Four years of annual reports, $300 million annual 

operating debt, not a profit in each one of those years, exposure 

of over $600 million of taxpayers' money, a basic finding by a 

former Supreme Court justice of Canada that says the project 

has run financially aground, and you stand up in this House, sir, 

and say credibly that there is grounds for waiting? 

 

Waiting for what?  Waiting for Godot?  Waiting for a flash of 

lightning?  Waiting until prayer works?  Or acting in the 

interests of the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan?  That's what Justice Estey said.  He said, take 

this line that I am recommending in the interests of the 

taxpayers of all of Saskatchewan.  And I say to you and to the 

former premier, why don't you join us?  Where do you stand on 

Estey? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the 

Premier keeps saying that the Estey report should be used as 

the basis for restructuring the upgrader agreement.  

Unfortunately, Mr. Premier, you don't seem to like to read the 

whole report, only the parts that you think agree with you. 

 

On page 14, Mr. Estey says, and I quote: any financial 

restructuring must do justice to FCL and to its member 

cooperatives and ". . . without exposure of FCL to a systemic 

risk which would place a financial stress on the far-flung and 

valuable Co-operative . . ." movement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Premier, imposing an agreement that is 

not acceptable to FCL flies directly in the face of what Justice 

Estey recommended. 

 

Mr. Premier, what's needed is to achieve a suitable negotiation 

as a basis of a settlement -- not legislation, not expropriation; 

negotiation, Mr. Premier.  Why don't you follow Mr. Justice 

Estey's recommendation and take the time to negotiate an 

agreement that does not do irreparable harm to the co-op 

movement and its 240,000 members in this province, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, let me be absolutely 

clear about this.  We believe and we want, even at this late 

date, a negotiated settlement that, in the words of Mr. Justice 

Estey, is fair not only to the FCL, but is fair to the taxpayers of 

the province of Saskatchewan.  I repeat that again. 

 

We have been for 18 months seeking to negotiate such an 

arrangement.  But I also remind the Leader of the Opposition 

that in that same report where he quoted Mr. Justice Estey, 

Justice Estey set out the methodology for coming up with that 

fair settlement.  The methodology is set out there. 

 

I have said to you, sir, and I repeat again, on behalf of the 

Government of Saskatchewan, I'm prepared to accept the 

principles of Mr. Justice Estey's proposed solution, which 

solution he says is fair and just to FCL and to the Government 

of Saskatchewan and the Government of Canada and the 

taxpayers of this country and this province. 

 

Are you, sir, prepared to stand up with me and endorse the 

recommendations?  I want to know that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1924 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1993 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, 

Justice Estey says that the upgrader is an operating success.  I 

agree with him.  Justice Estey says the province is not equipped 

financially or managerially to own and operate the upgrader.  I 

agree with him, Mr. Premier.  You people don't have the 

capability to operate it or finance it. 

 

Mr. Premier, you and your ministers refuse to acknowledge the 

fact that there are about $35 million a year in royalties, because 

the upgrader is in place, accruing to the people of the province 

of Saskatchewan.  When you add on the spin-off benefits and 

the taxes, Mr. Premier, there are almost $50 million annually 

accruing to your government.  Your minister responsible for 

CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) refuses 

to acknowledge that. 

 

Mr. Premier, why don't you, instead of just picking and 

choosing the parts of the Estey report that you want, why don't 

you acknowledge those things which Justice Estey says, those 

things which the Co-op puts on the table, and negotiate, sir, on 

the basis of those things an agreement that will be 

long-standing and fair to the 240,000 Co-op members in this 

province? 

 

What is the hurry to use the legislative process when you fail to 

acknowledge the other sides of the argument? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, let me again be clear to 

the hon. member.  We acknowledge the Estey report in its 

totality -- something that the hon. member refuses to do.  You 

have given several quotations of the Estey report, presumably 

in support of your argument, but you have failed to endorse the 

most fundamental aspect of the Estey report, which is the 

mechanism of settling this in a fair and just way. 

 

Now will you match me and go that one step further and 

identify and accept the Estey proposal with respect to 

settlement?  You've refused to do that. 

 

Now the second aspect of this matter is the question of $35 

million in royalties.  I want to tell this to the hon. member of 

Morse, which to me . . . or is it Thunder Creek?  I'm sorry.  

Thunder Creek.  I want to say to the hon. member from 

Thunder Creek that of all the people, he being a former 

minister of Energy, his lack of knowledge in this area is either 

wilful or it's appalling. 

 

Thirty-five million dollars is not the figure that we got in 

royalties on heavy oil, that you got.  It was less than that. 

 

But let's take 35 million.  That 35 million was still being paid to 

the provincial treasury before the upgrader hit the scene 

because it was being provided to alternate markets -- alternate 

markets.  And you know that.  It was alternate markets.  It's 

true that the upgrader is here, but the royalty return did not alter 

at all; in fact it increased. 

But in any event -- as I take my place, Mr. Speaker -- in any 

event, the most important thing to know is this.  Mr. Justice 

Estey looked at all of those arguments that you advanced on the 

royalties and still recommended the settlement that we're 

endorsing.  Why won't you endorse those settlements, is what 

I'm asking. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well one thing's for 

sure, the Premier never has been the minister of Energy or he 

wouldn't make such a silly statement as he just made in the 

House today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- The simple fact is, sir, that the 53,000 barrels 

a day going through this upgrader and the 50,000 barrels a day 

going through the Lloyd upgrader would be in the ground if 

they weren't being upgraded today in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The simple fact is, Mr. Premier, instead of . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I think before the 

ministers can answer their questions we've got to hear the 

question. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, that is 

a fact that anyone in the oil patch will confirm and if you would 

take the time to listen to the business community in this 

province, they would tell you that. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, I'll ask you this.  Your minister responsible 

for CIC has claimed that the Co-op, FCL, are not prepared to 

deal with the outstanding issues, four main issues: pricing, the 

keep-whole clause, staffing, and the splitter on the diesel fuel 

production.  Your minister claims that they will not talk about 

it.  In fact, Mr. Premier, it is your friend Don Ching that said 

that those issues weren't to be on the table until the bigger 

negotiations had taken place.  And in fact your minister 

received a letter this morning saying the Co-op is prepared to 

deal on those issues at any time. 

 

And according to the Estey report, and I refer you to page 22, 

that that can be dealt with in three different ways:  through 

separate negotiation, arbitration, or through wrapping all of 

these issues into the overall financing package.  That's the letter 

your minister got this morning, Mr. Premier. 

 

Why, Mr. Premier, aren't you willing, on the basis of that, to sit 

down and negotiate?  The Co-op says those things are on the 

table, not as your minister says, that they won't negotiate, but 

they are on the table.  What is the big hurry?  Why do you have 

to use this legislature to legislate what you don't seem to want 

to do at the negotiating table?  Why is that, sir? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member talks 

about the letter which was received today by the minister of 

Crown Investments Corporation.  But I want to tell the hon. 

member that 



May 25, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1925 

not only was my minister, but I myself, we were around all 

weekend, ready, willing to undertake to receive any phone call 

from FCL to negotiate this -- or officials.  We did not hear a 

word from them, not at all.  In fact, they take the position that 

they're not going to negotiate. 

 

They say they're ready to arbitrate.  I tell you, sir, again when 

you were minister of Energy, most of those arbitrated matters 

stem back to the period when the former premier, who keeps on 

making these questions from a seated position rather than 

having the courage to stand up and ask about this deal in a 

public, open fashion . . . These are arbitrations which are 

outstanding as a result of your administration, which they have 

blocked, which FCL has blocked. 

 

They say now they're prepared to deal with the arbitrations.  

Well good for them.  I'm ready to deal with those arbitrations 

too.  But why the delay?  You tell me why we should not 

accept the Estey report.  Stand up and tell us where you stand 

on the Estey report, because that is the core of it.  Three months 

of fact finding; three months of mediation resulted in this 

recommendation.  It's the only solution which is around out 

there acceptable to Ottawa, Saskatchewan, and to FCL. 

 

Tell us where you stand on this, because that's the key.  And if 

the FCL people say they buy it in principle, we'll send our 

people right now to negotiate, to prevent the introduction of 

legislation.  But so long as they refuse to deal with us, we are 

going to take the position that the taxpayers' interest has got to 

be protected -- something which you sadly for nine and a half 

years did not adopt. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, you 

know full well why those issues weren't dealt with at an earlier 

time.  Because your friend, Don Ching, said that they were not 

to be dealt with until the bigger question of the financing had 

been dealt with.  And you know that for a fact, sir. 

 

Your Mr. Don Ching, who sits over there at CIC, who doesn't 

have to answer to the auditor, doesn't have to answer to this 

legislature, he has legislation now that allows him to write any 

particular Act that he wishes, Mr. Premier.  Mr. Ching and Mr. 

Banda and Mr. Dombowsky -- all of your friends, all of your 

patronage appointments that you have over in CIC, said to the 

Co-op, these issues are not on the table until the bigger 

financing thing has been handled. 

 

Mr. Estey recommends that those things all be included, and 

you know full well, sir, that that's the truth.  In light of that, Mr. 

Premier, and the fact that your minister has a letter saying that 

they're willing to put that to arbitration, that they're willing to 

negotiate or they're willing to wrap it into the whole package, 

why don't we take the time to do this properly and negotiate a 

settlement on something that is an operating success, is 

generating revenue for the province of Saskatchewan and not 

use your heavy 

hand.  Why don't you do that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, yet again some more 

witness and evidence, if that be required, why these people 

opposite ran up a $16 billion debt for the province of 

Saskatchewan, those kinds of numbers. 

 

I want to tell you about the arbitrations, Mr. Speaker.  In July 

of 1991 FCL unilaterally changed the formula used to 

determine the price that it pays NewGrade for reconstituted 

crude oil -- 1991.  You, sir, were the Premier.  That's when that 

arose. 

 

Second outstanding issue in arbitration is the operations fee of 

$18 million from 1989 to 1991.  You wanted to change that.  

That hasn't been changed. 

 

Third issue.  The terms of the operating agreement with respect 

to incremental costs going all the way back from 1988 to 1990.  

You were the government, sir, and those were unsettled. 

 

Those are the issues which are to be arbitrated and are not to be 

settled.  Mr. Ching and this government has nothing to do with 

them.  They were put on the table when you were the 

administration.  Those are the facts, and Estey indicates that.  

And the records will show that very quickly. 

 

And why would you not do anything about them?  Because you 

did not understand the importance of this to the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan and to the FCL.  I say to the Leader of the 

Opposition, grow up and exhibit some maturity for the 

taxpayers for a change. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, the Premier knows full well that 

that . . . and I believe it was $17.3 million last year on the 

operating agreement.  It's gone as high as 20.  The pricing 

arrangement which FCL puts at about a million and a half, your 

government puts at 16 million.  The issue that went back to 

when the fire was and they had to use sweet crude instead of 

heavy, staffing 4 to 16 PYs (person-years), the splitter for the 

diesel was a $5 million total cost.  All of those issues, Mr. 

Premier, as per the agreement, as per the agreement, the Co-op 

is saying they'll put in front of arbitration or roll into a total 

financing package.  It was your Mr. Ching that said that they 

didn't want to talk about any of these issues until a larger 

picture was dealt with.  And yet you've held that over the head 

of FCL like the sword of Damocles as if you, Mr. Premier, are 

the final word in all of these issues. 

 

Mr. Premier, 240,000 Co-op members in this province are 

demanding that you take the time to negotiate an honourable 

settlement.  Mr. Premier, why don't you take the time instead of 

befouling this legislature with your legislation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I've tried to 



1926 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1993 

answer that question now several times about why take the time 

by asking the question what the advantage is in delay.  Let me 

try it another way. 

 

Apart from the basic funding, which I repeat again that the 

project has run financially aground, let me put it to you this 

way, Mr. Speaker.  It costs NewGrade $4.18 in direct operating 

costs to upgrade a barrel of crude -- 4.18.  This figure does not 

include interest charges, retirement of principle, or depreciation 

allowances.  At full capacity, NewGrade needs an additional 

$2.95 per barrel just to meet its interest charges, Mr. Speaker, 

or meaning $7.13 in direct cash expenses per barrel. 

 

Right now, CCRL (Consumers' Co-operative Refineries Ltd.) 

pays NewGrade 5.87 -- by the way, unilaterally it struck this 

figure, one of the arbitrated issues during their regime -- right 

now CCRL pays 5.87 for every barrel of heavy oil it upgrades.  

The direct cash expenses are 7.13. 

 

Meaning what?  A shortfall of $1.26 for every barrel of 

upgraded crude sold to CCRL; 50,000 barrels per day are 

upgraded.  That's a big problem.  The member may not think 

it's urgent.  The taxpayers of Saskatchewan say that shortfall is 

urgent and requires action. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'll direct my 

question to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) actually started the ball rolling on the 

upgrader in 1980-81.  And there was a great deal of political 

lobbying at the time about which NDP MLA (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly) would get the project in his 

constituency. 

 

When the deal was brought in by the Conservatives prior to the 

election, and when the interim agreement became final after the 

election, sir, very little opposition was raised by the New 

Democrats.  In fact during the entire time that the NDP sat in 

opposition, almost no criticism was raised of this deal. 

 

Now you can act as though the NDP had absolutely no idea 

what was in the deal, but how many members are currently 

sitting in this legislature today who actually publicly spoke 

against this deal with Federated Co-ops for the five years or so 

that it was in existence? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I will answer the 

question very specifically.  But I will ask the Leader of the 

Liberal Party for a change, to take a specific, clear stand, that 

she doesn't flip-flop on as she has been doing all session long.  

Tell us specifically whether you endorse the Estey 

recommendations -- yes or no.  And you don't tell me; you can 

please tell the public at large. 

 

But to answer your question specifically, it's very simple.  

Records will show very clearly -- although I was not in the 

House, but it's been researched, and I'm sure that we can find 

this fairly quickly -- when we asked the premier of this 

province in Hansard to 

table the documents, and the appropriate ministers, all of the 

documents were refused by both FCL and the government of 

the day as not being in the commercial and public interest. 

 

And the hon. member then says, why don't you oppose it.  How 

could you oppose it when the deal was made secret.  It was 

only until the Gass Commission opened up all the books and 

said that this was a bad deal, and Estey says it's a bad deal to be 

renegotiated, that the government must choose to act in the 

interest of the taxpayer.  That is the reason why the action was 

taken. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Before I accept the next question, I 

just want to remind members not to refer to people by the 

political position that they may hold, but by either the 

constituency they represent or the portfolio in which they 

represent. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Premier, you keep posing questions to me, and very soon you'll 

have that opportunity when I'm on the other side of the House.  

The question is not, do I accept Estey; the question is, does 

McKnight accept Estey and does Federated Co-ops accept 

Estey as well?  I'm here just to ask the questions so far. 

 

You're wondering, Mr. Premier, why it is that some time 

should be given to Federated Co-op, and I would like to 

provide you with some of this information. 

 

You proudly spoke on television about being a co-op member.  

The membership of Federated Co-op is a large and dedicated 

membership represented by a highly professional and highly 

skilled management team.  And the head offices in Saskatoon 

house more than 300 people working in that fair city. And 

much of the profit generated by Federated is paid directly to its 

members in cash dividends.  Last year alone, Mr. Premier, that 

amounted to $91 million in dividends pumped into this 

Saskatchewan economy through Co-op stores and the holdings 

across the province. 

 

So when your government so much as breathes the . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Does the member have a 

question?  I want the member to put her question. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- When you breathe the words expropriation 

through legislation, do you have any kind of clue at all as to the 

message that this gives, and the consequences that it'll have for 

this province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- The hon. member surely can't be 

serious with that question.  She expects me to get up and say, 

oh I don't have a clue as to what this message communicates. 

 

I mean, please, I say to the hon. member and to the members of 

this House, I ask you where you stand on Estey.  You don't like 

what we're doing; I don't like what we have to do.  We don't 

like to do what we have to do.  But if it doesn't achieve the 

result, what is your 



May 25, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1927 

option?  Your option is, do nothing.  That's what they did for 

nine and a half years.  That's why you and them -- $16 billion 

in debt.  They did nothing. 

 

We don't believe in a policy of prayer.  We say that $600 

million indebtedness for the taxpayers in your constituency 

who, by the way, include cooperative members, after several 

years of outstanding issues, dictates that the government act in 

the interests of all the taxpayers, all the taxpayers. 

 

This gives me no pleasure as a member of the co-op movement 

or a member of the government, but you tell me what a person's 

got to do when after all of these years FCL refuses to come to 

the table, refuses to accept the principles of Estey report, does 

not have the opposition even telling us where they stand on 

Estey, does not have the member from Greystone telling us 

where they stand on Estey.  All you do is snipe at us from the 

corners while the taxpayers of Saskatchewan run the risk of 

living with a megaproject which is on the edge.  Not good 

enough, Madam Member, not . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 89 -- An Act to amend The Teachers' Federation 

Act 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that The 

Teachers' Federation Amendment Act be now read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

Mr. Speaker, with leave I would like to rise to move a motion, 

with the consent I believe of the Opposition House Leader, the 

Leader of the Opposition as well.  At the conclusion of my 

remarks, to congratulate our honoured guests today in your 

gallery, and I ask for leave, sir. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Recognition of Junior Curling Champions 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank 

you, members.  Mr. Speaker, and members, like everybody in 

this Chamber I'm very proud to stand in my place and on behalf 

of the Government of Saskatchewan, congratulate the silver 

medalists of the world junior curling championships -- which 

were held in Grindelwald, Switzerland in March of this year -- 

in your gallery. 

 

For so young a team, this team none the less have, between the 

players, over 40 years experience, leaving no doubt that their 

place in the championship, in my judgement, was well deserved 

and earned with much dedication to their sport.  Their rink has 

succeeded in attaining both the Pepsi junior 

championship and the national junior championships in 1992, 

securing their place for international competition this year. 

 

At the world championships they compiled, as we know, a 7 to 

2 round robin record which qualified them for medal play.  

Then they defeated Denmark in the semi's, going on to the 

championship round against Scotland where they lost but 

became the silver medalists. 

 

In addition to the great team accomplishments, I would also 

like to remark upon the personal achievements of Angela 

Street, who was the all-world lead on the all-star team.  That's 

quite an honour.  Cindy Street and Maria McKenzie were also 

high school provincial champions for 1993. 

 

With the expert coaching and support given by coach Merv 

Fonger and team psychologist Gary Gregor, our young 

Saskatchewan curlers have represented our province and our 

country with honour, and we thank them all for a job very well 

done.  We're very proud of you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- And so, Mr. Speaker, I would now 

like to move, seconded by my colleague and friend, the 

member for Thunder Creek: 

 

That this Assembly congratulate the members of the 

Canadian junior women's curling team, including Amber 

Holland, skip; Cindy Street, third; Tracy Beach, second; 

Angela Street, lead; Maria McKenzie, fifth; Merv Fonger, 

coach; and Gary Gregor, team psychologist, for their 

outstanding performance at the World Junior Curling 

Championships in Grindelwald, Switzerland, where they 

secured the silver medal for Canada. 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On behalf of Her 

Majesty's Loyal Opposition, it's a pleasure to join with the 

Premier today in this motion before the Assembly to 

congratulate our honoured guests here today -- our Canadian 

junior women's curling champions and silver medalists on a 

world level. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the distinguished young women in the gallery 

today follow in what has been a long tradition of excellent 

curling from Moose Jaw from the Hillcrest Sports Centre, and 

before that the old rink on Caribou. 

 

(1445) 

 

And I think of names like Schoenhals and Stirton, to mention a 

few, that went on to greater laurels.  And certainly their coach, 

Mr. Fonger, is of the same generation as many of those people 

that achieved such excellence in curling, and still throws a 

pretty mean rock himself today, besides being a coach. 



1928 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1993 

So I would say to these young ladies, you have truly honoured 

your province, your community. And I'm sure if you follow the 

traditions of the people from the Moose Jaw and area that have 

curled in the past, that you will go on to do greater things in the 

curling world.  And we all look forward to that day when you 

mount the gold medal platform on behalf of us at the senior 

level.  So congratulations. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too would like 

to offer my congratulations to Amber, Cindy, Tracy, Angela, 

Maria, Merv, and Gary, on winning the silver medal at the 

world junior women's curling championship.  And all of us do 

applaud you for your years of sacrifice and dedication, your 

intensity, and solid commitment to excellence in your sport.  

And we also want to thank you for being such terrific 

ambassadors for our province and our nation as well, when you 

were competing overseas. 

 

So I join with the other members of the Legislative Assembly 

in congratulating you wholeheartedly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, members of the Assembly, it is 

my privilege to introduce to you, Amber Holland, skip.  Amber 

is 18 years of age and has been curling for eight years, with one 

year of coaching experience. 

 

Amber says: my dad has had the most influence on my curling 

career.  He got me started in curling and has been my coach for 

three years.  Her hobbies other than curling are reading, music, 

volleyball, basketball, and spending time with her boyfriend. 

 

Amber plans to continue curling throughout university and 

hopes to get to the Scott Tournament of Hearts.  Amber's future 

plans include university to become a physiotherapist. 

 

Amber says the key to their success at the world junior 

championship was to focus on the job you have to do and only 

on that, and to have a close, supportive, and caring team. 

 

Ms. Amber Holland, skip. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

members of the Assembly, it is my privilege to introduce to 

you Ms. Cindy Street, third. 

 

Cindy is 17 years of age and has been curling for seven years.  

Cindy says, Mr. Speaker: my mother and father have had the 

most influence on my curling career.  I watched them curl for 

years and then decided to try it -- the rest is history. 

 

Cindy says the key to their success at the world junior 

championships was compatibility and focusing on 

their shots.  Her hobbies, other than curling, are volleyball, 

listening to music, and going for walks. 

 

Cindy's future curling goals are to curl in the Scott Tournament 

of Hearts, and to win once more with her sister Angela.  Her 

future plans are to go to university and be educated. 

 

Ms. Cindy Street, third. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, and members of the 

Assembly, it's my privilege to introduce you to Tracy Beach, 

second. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Tracy is 18 years of age and has curled for nine 

years.  She's also assisted with curling clinics.  Tracy remarks: 

my mom and dad have had the most influence on my curling 

career.  They got me started and keep me going supportively 

and  -- get this, Mr. Speaker -- financially. 

 

Tracy says the key to success at the world junior championship 

was curling the best that you can and having fun doing it.  Her 

hobbies, Mr. Speaker, other than curling, are reading and 

biking. 

 

Tracy's future curling goals are getting to the Scott Tournament 

of Hearts and winning the gold.  Her future plans are now to go 

on to university, again perhaps with the financial assistance of 

mom and dad. 

 

Members of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, Tracy Beach, second. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, members of the Assembly, it's 

my privilege to introduce to you Ms. Angela Street, lead. 

 

Angela is 18 years of age and has been curling for nine years, 

with one year of coaching experience.  Angela says: my parents 

have had the most influence on my curling career.  They got me 

started in curling and coached me along the way.  Everyone in 

my family curls, so I receive a lot of support. 

 

Her hobbies, other than curling, are piano lessons, which she 

has taken for five years.  Angela's future curling goals are to be 

part of the Scott Tournament of Hearts and to be a world 

champion.  Her future plans are to attend university and major 

in marketing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Angela Street, lead. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Members of the 

Assembly, it's my privilege to introduce Maria McKenzie, 

alternate. 

 

Maria is 17 years of age and has been curling for seven years, 

Mr. Speaker.  She has assisted in numerous curling clinics.  

Maria says: our coach, Merv Fonger, 



May 25, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1929 

has had the most influence on my curling career.  He helped me 

to become a better curler than I ever was before.  With his help 

I've made it where I am today. 

 

Her hobbies other than curling include reading, watching 

movies, bike riding, and walking.  Maria says the key to their 

success at the World Junior Championships was to keep 

focused on their goals, to be strong and consistent, and to keep 

team communications at a high level. 

 

Maria's future plans include studies at SIAST (Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology) to become an 

accountant.  Mr. Speaker, members of the Assembly, Maria 

McKenzie, alternate. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, members of the Assembly, it's my 

privilege to introduce to you, Mr. Merv Fonger, coach.  Merv is 

a teacher at Peacock Collegiate in Moose Jaw.  He has 29 years 

of competitive curling experience and is a certified NCCP 

(National Coaching Certification Programme), level 3 coach. 

 

He has many achievements in curling including being an 

eight-time competitor in the southern men's playdowns; 

coaching gold medal high school champions in 1993; bronze 

medal, high school, in 1992; and the coach for the national 

junior women's silver medalist team in 1993. 

 

Merv is loved by all who come in contact with him, especially 

those he coaches.  He is the mother hen of the group and keeps 

everyone on schedule.  Merv loves to curl and golf, and he can 

be found eating lunch at the club most days and watching the 

Flintstones. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and ladies and gentlemen of the Assembly, Mr. 

Merv Fonger, coach. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, members of the Assembly, it's 

my pleasure to introduce to you, Mr. Gary Gregor, the team 

psychologist.  Gary Gregor has been the team psychologist 

since January 1992.  He helped the Saskatchewan junior 

women's curling team become Canadian champions in 1992 

and Team Canada junior women to become the 1993 silver 

medalists in world curling.  He has worked with many amateur 

and professional teams with tremendous success throughout his 

career. 

 

Gary accompanied the team to the nationals and two overseas 

competitions, including the worlds.  Gary has paid his own 

expenses and asked no monetary return for his time and 

experience, proving his unselfish dedication to the love of a 

sport. 

 

Gary was the sports psychologist with the Saskatchewan 

Roughriders in 1989 and is known as the mystery man behind 

the Riders' success in winning the 1989 Grey Cup. 

Gary's specialty is winning; he knows how to create winning 

organizations, teams, and individuals.  Gary has developed a 

course consisting of effective planning and hard work.  He has 

given presentations to thousands of people throughout the 

country, teaching them how to leave it all on the field and feel 

better about themselves.  Gary farms 12 miles south of Moose 

Jaw and operates his own consulting business.  Gary is a 

neighbour of mine and we actually played on the same slow 

pitch team for a number of years until -- was it the back or a 

leg, Gary, that gave out?  Anyway he is a very good neighbour 

and someone that I'm very proud to call friend. 

 

So, ladies and gentlemen, Mr. Gary Gregor, team psychologist. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Before orders of the day, I'd ask for 

leave to make a statement regarding Child Care Week. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Child Care Week 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I'm honoured to proclaim the week of 

May 24 to May 30 as Child Care Week.  The Saskatchewan 

Child Care Association requested recognition of Child Care 

Week and I'm pleased to support them in their efforts to 

promote high quality child care for Saskatchewan families. 

 

Child Care Week is being proclaimed to promote 

understanding of quality child care services.  I want to take this 

opportunity to acknowledge the dedicated work of people who 

provide child care services.  Child care staff, family child care 

providers, parent volunteers, boards of directors, and child care 

advocates are committed to improving the quality of child care 

services and promoting the importance of high quality child 

care for children whose families must work. 

 

Obviously, Mr. Speaker, our children are our future.  Child care 

continues to be of extreme importance to our government, and 

a review of child care services is currently in progress.  An 

interdepartmental review team including representatives from 

the Department of Social Services, Education, Economic 

Development, Labour, Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat, 

and the Women's Secretariat is presently studying child care 

issues in the province. 

 

Consultations with major stakeholders are currently taking 

place in a number of locations, and these consultations will 

provide direction for future development of child care 

initiatives and legislation. 



1930 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1993 

The Saskatchewan Child Care Association has been planning 

and promoting Child Care Week activities.  Many local events 

will be held throughout the province including mall displays, 

children's films, training workshops, and many other activities 

encouraging public participation. 

 

I would like to acknowledge the endeavours of the 

Saskatchewan Child Care Association and wish them much 

success during Child Care Week.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I would 

also like to say a few words in recognition of this very special 

week. 

 

I understand, Mr. Speaker, that throughout Child Care Week 

there are a number of special activities put on by child care 

centres and homes in the province.  And I trust that the children 

enjoy these special events and that everything takes place as 

intended. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, I would like to extend a hearty thank you to 

all the child care givers across not only our province but across 

our nation -- those individuals who give of their time to reach 

out to provide a loving atmosphere for the children of our 

province and of our nation, children who in many cases, Mr. 

Speaker, use child care services because their parents are 

working and providing for their physical needs. 

 

And while I'm on my feet as well, Mr. Speaker, I would also 

like to ask the Assembly to recognize the second annual green 

ribbon of hope campaign, commemorating National Missing 

Children's Day.  Child Find Saskatchewan must be commended 

for again participating in this national program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the abduction of children is a national tragedy and 

there is no higher calling that the search for missing children.  

My heart goes out to those parents with missing children.  For 

the parents and friends of these children, suffering never ends.  

And as a parent, I know how painful that uncertainty may be 

although I'm certainly thankful for the family we have, and we 

don't face these circumstances. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, hope must continue for these victims.  

The green ribbons we wear today signify that hope.  Education 

is the key.  Public education programs like the green ribbon 

campaign draw people's attention to the problem.  If more and 

more people become involved, more and more children will be 

located.  As they say, Mr. Speaker, a missing child is 

everyone's responsibility. 

 

On behalf of the official opposition, I wish Child Find 

Saskatchewan the very best today on Missing Children's Day 

and a successful month as they participate in the green ribbon 

campaign.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

join with the minister in recognizing Child Care Week and as 

well acknowledging National Missing Children's Day. 

 

As a mother and a grandmother, I can only imagine the pain 

experienced by thousands of children and their families and 

friends when a youngster is abducted.  And I think this is why 

the green ribbon program and others like it are essential to 

educate the public on a topic of abduction prevention and to 

assist in the search and the process of finding missing children. 

 

(1500) 

 

This is part and parcel of acknowledging how much our 

children do need to be provided with good, proper day care and 

that the people who provide those kinds of services can get the 

acknowledgement that they deserve.  If only one child is not 

receiving the appropriate kind of services, then it means that 

we're not doing our job well enough.  And if only one child is 

reunited with his or her parents because of campaigns like the 

green ribbon campaign, then that too is well worth it. 

 

So for this reason I stand proud in my place to join you, 

Madam Minister, as well as to proudly wear my green ribbon 

of hope.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to join my 

colleagues this afternoon as we take a moment to 

commemorate National Missing Children's Day.  This day has 

been set aside to formally recognize the need for every member 

of society to work together to ensure the safety and well-being 

of children.  We're all deeply affected by stories of missing 

children.  No matter where such events occur, the tragic results 

of these incidents strike a common chord of outrage and of 

concern. 

 

Another less sensational, but no less striking concern, is the 

number of child abductions relating to custody battles between 

embittered parents.  Both of these threats to the security and 

well-being of our children must be addressed. 

 

Children are our future.  We must continue our efforts to try 

and ensure the stability of our families and make the welfare of 

our children our first priority always. 

 

Secondly, we work towards the day when every member of 

society recognizes his or her responsibility to ensure the safety 

of our children as they live and grow in our communities.  The 

health of our society depends upon the safety of our children. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: --  Mr. Speaker, with leave, and I 

think with prior agreement, I would move that the House move 

to government orders. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 



May 25, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1931 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 88 -- An Act to amend The Provincial Court Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise today to 

move second reading of The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 

1993.  Mr. Speaker, the focus of these amendments is to ensure 

that benefits for provincial court judges and the method of 

determining those benefits adequately respect the independence 

of the court and the judges of that court.  These amendments 

that are before the Assembly in this Bill have been discussed 

with the provincial court judges and agreed to by them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, amendments were made to The Provincial Court 

Act in 1990 to establish a commission to review and make 

non-binding recommendations respecting judges' salaries and 

benefits.  The amendments proposed today build on those 

amendments by giving the commission the power to make 

binding recommendations respecting judicial salaries, 

allowances, and vacation leave. 

 

Provincial court judges have agreed to forego any salary 

adjustment for the three years considered by the earlier 

commission, 1990 to 1992.  This adjustment amounted to 

$14,000 per year in terms of salary.  And in our fiscal situation 

in this province, the government felt that we couldn't pay any 

of this amount and the judges were good enough during our 

discussions to forego that proposed adjustment. 

 

Under this Bill before the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, the 

commission is also given the authority to make non-binding 

recommendations respecting other benefits for provincial court 

judges, including pension benefits.  It may also make 

non-binding recommendations respecting court resources and 

judicial independence issues.  The fact that an independent 

commission with the ability to make binding recommendations 

will be considering matters of judicial compensation will help 

to ensure that judicial independence will indeed be preserved. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these amendments also make changes to the 

pension and disability benefits for provincial court judges.  The 

disability provisions currently give the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council the discretion to determine whether a judge should 

receive a disability pension; that raises independence concerns.  

The proposed provisions move away from the pension model 

on disability and create a disability income plan with rules 

similar to those found in disability insurance plans.  The 

judicial council will apply those rules to determine entitlement 

in individual cases. 

 

The pension provisions are rewritten to remove a number of 

problems with the existing provisions.  A number of sections 

are revised to bring them in line with the provisions of other 

public sector pensions.  For example, pension entitlement will 

vest after 2 years of service rather than after 10 years of 

service, as is currently provided. 

The basic rules respecting calculation of judges' pensions are 

unchanged.  However to recognize the hard work and 

dedication of long-serving judges, a new early retirement 

option is provided. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Supreme Court of Canada has stated that there 

are certain hallmarks of judicial independence which are 

essential.  One of these hallmarks is financial security, which 

the Supreme Court described in these words, and I quote: 

 

The essence of such security is that the right to salary and 

pension should be established by law and not be subject to 

arbitrary interference by the Executive in a manner that 

could affect judicial independence.  In the case of pension, 

the essential distinction is between a right to a pension and 

a pension that depends on the grace or favour of the 

Executive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm confident that these amendments strike an 

appropriate balance between the necessary level of judicial 

independence and recognition of the fiscal realities facing our 

province. 

 

I move second reading of An Act to amend The Provincial 

Court Act. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, up front it 

would appear that there isn't a lot in this Bill that really we 

would want to question and quiz, but it would seem to me that 

it would be appropriate to at least review it a little more in 

depth. 

 

Not being a lawyer and having a legal mind, it's hard to 

understand all the legal technicalities to a Bill such as this, but I 

would at this time move adjournment of debate to allow further 

review of the Bill to take place.  Thank you. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 87 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Calvert that Bill No. 87 -- An Act to 

amend The Mental Health Services Act be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, as I 

indicated the other day, one of the major concerns we have is 

the fact that this Bill might just go a little too far and may be 

intruding on to people's rights. 

 

Now the minister in his second-reading speech indicated that 

there were provisions in the Bill to recognize and not infringe 

on people's rights. Certainly when the . . . a person could, due 

to having some mental problems, be put in . . . placed in an 

institution against their will, one would wonder whether or not 

their rights have been infringed upon.  And it would be 

appropriate I believe, Mr. Speaker, for 



1932 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1993 

us to raise that concern, raise that question, indeed follow up on 

the remarks that the minister has made to be certain that 

people's rights are respected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we feel that a number of the questions and this 

question in particular can be dealt with quite adequately in third 

reading of the Bill.  Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move that we 

move this Bill through to committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Vote 50 

 

The Chair: -- At this point, I would ask the minister to please 

introduce the officials who have joined us here today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, thank you for that.  I want 

to introduce first on my right the president of the Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation, Brian Kaukinen; on his right, the 

vice-president of water management, Wayne Dybvig.  Behind 

Brian is Al Veroba, the vice-president of operations.  And 

immediately behind me is Wayne Phillips, the vice-president of 

finance and administration. 

 

Item 1 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Agreed. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Oh, we can't do that.  This is a big, this is a 

very big department.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Minister, I do really have a few more or less housekeeping 

kind of questions.  One of the things I'd like to ask you, Mr. 

Minister, how many employees do we have in SaskPower? 

 

(1515) 

 

An Hon. Member: -- SaskPower? 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Or Sask Water Corp. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, as of March 31, 212. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  How does that 

compare with the previous year, '90-91? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- In 1992, Mr. Chairman, there were, on 

March 31, 215. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  This is going to be . . 

. should be easy for you to handle because you're involved in 

both sides of the question.  What is the new environmental 

parameters, how is that going to impact on the Water 

Corporation? 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, one of the things . . . and 

maybe what the member is referring to is the new construction 

of the department and the approach of government now.  As 

you may be aware, the Department of Environment and 

Resource Management have been linked while the Sask Water 

Corporation is an independent corporation.  It is also under my 

jurisdiction. 

 

One of the things I've asked to be developed in the big picture 

of policy in Saskatchewan is a cooperative look between Sask 

Water and the Department of Environment and Resource 

Management, to look at the water issues in Saskatchewan both 

from a quality and a quantity standpoint.  I think the emerging 

issue of the '90s may well be water supply, both in quantity and 

quality, for Saskatchewan farms and homes and businesses. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Would you have any 

idea as to the financial impact that will have on the Water 

Corporation to meet the new environmental regulations that we 

see coming and I'm sure are necessary? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, it's very difficult to 

quantify the impact of the water circumstances as much as 

water policy on the costs of living and doing business in 

Saskatchewan.  As the member is aware, we have suffered a 

number of droughts in the last number of years and this has had 

a profound impact on flows.  It's had an impact on river levels 

and levels of lakes in northern Saskatchewan.  It's had an 

impact on the state of forest fire risk that's here. 

 

The work of Sask Water specifically is really in the area of 

supply within the quality parameters that the province has.  We 

have a wide range of water quality being offered to the 

province.  The impact is often not on Sask Water, who are in 

the delivery business, but often the impact is at the home or the 

farm or the business level. 

 

If I think of our own farm where the water quality has 

deteriorated substantially in the last few years, whether that 

will require a new well or an alternate supply, who knows?  

That will be an impact that I will have to deal with. 

 

If there is a water quality issue in an urban environment, then 

those who pay for their water in those environments will have 

to see to it that that bill is paid. 

 

I know in the case of SaskPower, who is a major water user, as 

the temperature of their cooling waters increases in their 

holding areas and as the quality of the supply of water 

increases, it affects their power generating capacity in their 

coal-fired plants.  As the flow in the South Saskatchewan basin 

decreases, it affects that amount of power that we can generate 

from that source and therefore causes us to have to go to higher 

cost energy generation mechanisms. 

 

But it's not most often Sask Water that suffers the additional 

costs.  It may be in the power generating 



May 25, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1933 

capacity at the dam because we can sell less water for 

generating power. But generally the costs of quality and 

quantity restrictions are borne by the user, and Sask Water is 

simply the agent of delivering. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Minister, I take it from that, you don't see a 

large impact on the financial side which is good, because my 

next question, could you outline to me and this side of the 

House where we are with the grants for water wells and 

dugouts? You mentioned drought and of course it's still out 

there to a certain extent in some places.  Could you outline 

where you are now in terms of what your grant structure is? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, as the member opposite 

may recall, there has since the time of the previous government 

not been any support offered for water well drilling other than 

the technical support to farmers, and of course there's some 

assistance provided for dugout pumping where water supply in 

a dugout is low. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- I understand, Mr. Minister, there's no grant 

assistance for water wells, but you do assist in pumping water 

into dugouts.  Could you tell me how many of those you have 

at the present time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, there are about 1,500 

dugout pumping activities annually supported, and it's 

supported on a cost recovery basis by the corporation.  The 

corporation has the equipment and provides it, but it's billed out 

at cost to the user. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Is the reason that 

you're not supporting the grant system, was that because of a 

cut-back in finances to your department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, it's my understanding that 

the program for capital support was cancelled in 1990-1991 

year when your party was in government.  And there was . . . 

The ongoing program was a relatively small program.  There 

had been a larger-scale program introduced in 1988, in the face 

of the drought at that time, which ran then for two years.  And 

basically the extended program and the basic program were 

both terminated in 1990-1991. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, could 

you then outline to me a little bit as to what impact that change 

has had on irrigation and the irrigation projects we have in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the question of the 

irrigation development is quite independent of the water well 

dugout capital assistance program that used to exist. 

 

There is money both in Sask Water's annual budget and in joint 

agreements with the federal government for irrigation 

development, although that has from both sides been annually 

reduced and again suffered reductions from the federal level 

this year. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I wanted to 

establish the connection there because we have some more 

questions we'll need to know. 

 

Mr. Minister, could you send me over a copy of all tenders that 

you've let out in the Sask Power Corporation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the member 

could just clarify the request.  The Sask Water staff have here 

with them a list of the tenders for supplies within the 

corporation.  But if the member is referring to tender calls 

issued on larger projects, is it the tender calls that the member 

would like copies of? Or if you could just clarify what the 

request is. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I guess what I 

should have said was capital calls -- capital tenders. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, what I will commit to here 

-- and if this is not what the member asked for I will ask for 

him to add to what he requests -- I will commit to sending to 

him on another day the list of tender calls for capital projects 

by Sask Water for the period reporting here.  Okay, thank you. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I would appreciate 

that.  On that list, would it also indicate who received the . . . 

who were awarded the tenders?  Will that be on there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, that information as to 

whom the contract was granted will also be included. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  One more thing as to 

tendering.  Does Sask Water have an open tendering process -- 

it goes to the lowest bidder?  Or do you have a preference to 

union contractors? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the policy Sask Water is 

pursuing is a policy of offering projects to qualified tenders 

according to criteria that will result in balance in terms of union 

contractors and non-union contractors having access to projects 

in the province.  And that's a policy that's presently being 

developed, though there isn't anything in final form. 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I want to get this 

straight.  You're saying you don't necessarily accept the lowest 

bidder; you accept the bidder who has a balance in union 

workers and non-union. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the condition of all of the 

tenders, as the member will see, will be that the tender is not 

necessarily issued to the lowest tender.  And this is consistent 

with my experience from another life as well where the ability 

of the contractor to meet the needs of the contract under the 

conditions established is the basis for which a tender is offered.  

Sometimes that means tenders will go to union firms and 

sometimes it means they will not. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Then I think I 

understand you to say that you will look at the 



1934 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1993 

capabilities of the contractor, if he's able to do the job.  And it 

doesn't matter whether he's non-union or union, as long as he 

can do the job, there's no preference either way? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- That will depend on what call goes out in 

the tender call.  Sometimes there is tendering based on a 

balance of a union and non-union workforce.  There are . . . 

sometimes there are conditions attached that will require a 

certain amount of local hiring.  The question of whether the 

tender, the contract, is offered to one contractor or another will 

depend on the specific conditions of the tender call as it is 

offered in a particular case. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Well I guess I'm a slow learner or something.  

You're talking about a balance, which I appreciate; I have 

nothing . . . You also said the ability of the contractor.  Now 

you're saying that it depends on how the contract is written . . . 

or the bid offer is written.  Is that what you're saying, that 

sometimes you offer a contract under different circumstances? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Sask Water's objective is to put into place 

projects in a timely fashion at the lowest possible cost under the 

circumstances that they judge to be most timely.  If the member 

may be making some broad references to the Melfort contract, 

that has not yet been offered. 

 

But with respect to the way in which that tender was most 

recently advertised, the request was for a balance of union and 

local workers for the project.  And bidders then bid on that 

basis.  Now as I say, that contract has not yet been let, so the . . 

. that is still under consideration. 

 

But there was an effort in that case to recognize the importance 

of the local workforce, the importance of the cooperation of the 

organized workforce in Saskatchewan working cooperatively 

with contractors in order to achieve the objectives for that 

pipeline. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Minister, I was not trying to allude to any 

one particular contract.  I'm trying to find out what your 

tendering policy is.  And now that you brought the subject up 

about the Melfort one, there was a little bit of a kerfuffle there, 

and you're saying to me that you were asking for a balance 

between the two. Well is that on the first tender or the second 

tender? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, that was on the retender.  

The conditions I described were the conditions of the retender. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, could 

you then explain what was wrong with the first one?  Why did 

you find you had to retender it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Sask Water felt it was important to use a 

balance from the workforce in order to maintain a circumstance 

in the contract where both union and non-union workers had an 

opportunity, where local 

workers had an opportunity to share in the project development 

as it was tendered. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  How do you intend 

to do that?  I get the feeling that you're telling me that you want 

to have equal opportunity for both the union and the non-union 

sector.  Now how does your second tender . . . What did you 

change in there to make the difference so that we will get this 

balance that you're talking about? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- What was changed in the second tender 

was a requirement that 50 per cent of the hiring for that project 

be local, that was the new condition in the contract. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  How does that hiring 

locally satisfy you and your department that we'll end up with a 

50/50 split on the two? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, as I have already said, this 

contract has not yet been let, but the conditions under which the 

contractors were invited to bid in the retender was a condition 

under which they would hire 50 per cent of their workers 

through the building trades and 50 per cent locally. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

think I know what you said but I want to clarify it.  Fifty per 

cent of the workers on this project, when the tender is let -- and 

I understand it's not let and that's fine with me -- will be 50 per 

cent unionized, 50 per cent non-unionized, and you're saying 

that 50 per cent is hired locally. 

 

Explain to me where the differential is between hiring locally 

and through the . . . let's use the term, union hall, which may 

indeed be right there.  How do you get that split?  Would you 

just explain that for me please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, it is 50 per cent, as the 

member has stated, is hired by the union hall in this case as 

compared to the original contract which . . . under which a 

contractor could have brought their whole workforce in from 

wherever they were bidding. 

 

In this case, 50 per cent of the workers . . . the contract was 

asked to be bid on the basis that 50 per cent of the workers 

would come from the union hall and 50 per cent would come 

locally.  And I said that those bids are now under review. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I think I have it.  

We're saying that 50 per cent would then for sure be 

Saskatchewan people.  At least. 

 

Now the other 50 per cent, as I understand it, would be the 

contractors would have the right to hire who they like.  But we 

didn't put no restriction as to whether they could be out of 

province or not.  Is that the way I understand it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- No.  Mr. Chairman, let me try to make it 

clearer.  It's anticipated that 100 per cent of the workers would 

be Saskatchewan workers -- 50 per cent from the union halls in 

the larger centres and 50 



May 25, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1935 

per cent local, as in the Melfort case, from Melfort and Melfort 

and area.  So that it actually . . . the requirement under the offer 

was that contractors provide 50 per cent of their labour from 

the local area.  But as I said, those bids are now under review. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Yes, I understand.  All right.  I'm pleased to 

hear that, you know, we will keep it within the province.  I 

think all of us are of the same point of view. 

 

So the way I understand it then is that there will be 50 per cent 

through the unions hall as a criteria and 50 per cent will be 

local.  If there's any overlapping of that, is there any 

mechanism in there that would not allow 60 per cent to come 

from the Melfort area if, say, 10 per cent happened to come out 

of the union hall and happened to be union people so that you 

would have 50 per cent local?  And if it just happened that 

there was another 10 per cent in that area, would that be 

allowable? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Not only would it be allowable, it would 

be desirable.  And it's expected that in a case like that where 

workers are being identified in the union hall in Saskatoon, that 

a number of them would be as well from the Melfort area, and 

therefore the percentage may well be above 50 per cent from 

the local area. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I appreciate that.  I 

think we're kind of on the same wavelength on this.  I think 

we're both wanting to be sure that it's fair.  And one more 

question.  Then the other 50 per cent -- this is the contractor 

himself -- if it's his decision to hire any place else in 

Saskatchewan to make up his 50 per cent, it does not 

necessarily have to be non-union either, does it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- To clarify again, all of the labour force 

hired outside of the local community will be from the union 

hall, so that the contractor will use 50 per cent local labour and 

the other 50 per cent is union hall labour, which is identified by 

the union hall, in terms of who is in place in order to provide 

the required services. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- So in effect what we're really and truly trying 

to do here is make it a 50/50 split.  And you've got the 

mechanism in that to in your mind, I suppose, do that.  Is that 

pretty well where we're at? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- We believe that the terms under which the 

contractors were invited to bid here provides an assurance of 

(a) Saskatchewan labour; and (b) significant involvement by 

the local people in the community in the project.  That's 

correct. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I appreciate you 

bringing up the Melfort thing.  I wasn't going to get in with 

that.  I think I have a little better handle on what you're doing 

there.  I think some of my colleagues have some questions, so 

I'll just allow them to take over for a while. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, I believe that Sask Water is now responsible for 

Souris basin operations.  Is that not true? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could 

provide us with a copy of the Jack Chapman report.  I've asked 

you this a number of times, and it seems I have not yet received 

that copy.  I wonder if it would be possible to receive that, 

please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, we'll provide that. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I hope you'll 

follow through on that in short order. 

 

I wonder if you could please tell us what the cost of this study 

was. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the final paid cost for the 

contract was about $9,000, some piece below the contracted 

price. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- The total cost for this study was $9,000.  

That included all the costs of the transportation, the running 

around, the labour costs, the meeting costs, everything that was 

involved in it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, that was the total cost for Chapman's 

contract for the report. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- How about all the other associated costs, 

though, Mr. Minister?  We had Mr. Mills there.  We had one of 

your assistants there, that were there, all the meetings 

themselves, the transportation to and from the meetings, the 

transcribing, the whole total cost for that report. 

 

(1545) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, depending on what 

information the member wants, I'll try to outline what happened 

and then maybe the member can ask for additional information 

which the corporation is pleased to compile. 

 

The travel costs of Mr. Mills and those sustenance costs were 

paid for under the Chapman contract, that Mr. Chapman had 

required support from Mr. Mills.  And Mr. Mills was provided 

by SaskPower for a couple of weeks in order to assist Mr. 

Chapman, and those costs, the salary cost was borne by 

SaskPower.  And as you are aware, Mr. Mills had previous 

experience with the SBDA (Souris Basin Development 

Authority) and was valuable to that process. 

 

If the question is what happened after Chapman into the public 

hearing phase and those other processes beyond that, that's 

another question.  And if you have an interest in kind of the 

broadening of the piece, if you just define the parameters that 

you'd like the corporation to accumulate into that, we'd be 

pleased to provide that as well. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, what I 



1936 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1993 

would like to have for information is how much total cost was 

involved in the entire Chapman report -- studies, completion, 

publication, everything.  From the time that the decision was 

made to have Jack Chapman look at the project till the time that 

he finally submitted his total, completed report, the total cost 

for everybody involved in that, that the government, that the 

taxpayers paid for. 

 

Now you say $9,000.  Now if that's $9,000 for Jack Chapman, 

that's one issue.  If it's $9,000 for Jack Chapman and Gordon 

Mills, that's something else.  But $9,000 . . . we went through 

the public hearings on the Environment Committee and that 

was a significant amount of dollars for only about half again as 

many meetings.  So, Mr. Minister, $9,000 isn't anywhere near 

close to what the cost of this report was. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the sincerity of 

the member's questions and I appreciate the work he did on the 

broad committee's report on the charter, but the hearings were 

held much more broadly with large groups of people. 

 

I think there is a comparison to the total bill that the hearings 

on the charter incurred and the $9,000 in this case, because in 

the calculation of costs for the standing committee's report, 

there were no departmental costs billed, for example, in terms 

of advice to people on the standing committee.  That was just a 

part of the functioning of the department. 

 

Well in this case the functioning of Sask Water in its ongoing 

work has not been added into that amount, but the $9,000 

represents fully the cost to the Saskatchewan Water 

Corporation for the preparation and delivery of the Chapman 

report.  The only additional cost that would be added to that in 

the way you've described what you're looking for for 

information would be two weeks of Mr. Mills's time paid for by 

SaskPower.  That would be the total public corporation, Crown 

corporation cost for the Chapman report. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, while the Chapman 

report was being done, touring the public hearings, there was 

approximately six bureaucrats there at every one of those 

meetings.  There was equipment for recording.  That cost 

money.  There was transportation to and from these meetings, 

because all of those . . . There was written reports and there 

was verbal presentations, and all those verbal presentations 

were recorded. They were then transcribed, accumulated, 

deciphered, and then presented into this report that we have yet 

to see. 

 

So there is a significant amount of money there, Mr. Minister, 

and I don't believe that $9,000 covers the cost of this project. 

Because when you start looking at the bureaucrats that were 

there, when you start looking at the people that were doing the 

transcribing afterwards, there's some significant costs there, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, it is the nature of 

the work that Sask Water does, whether it's talking about the 

Langenburg east project or the Battle Creek project, or name 

your projects that are ongoing, where there is a component of 

the work of Sask Water which involves public hearings, 

because the public is very, very interested in this work and it 

needs to meet the criteria of the public standard that's expected. 

 

So it is part of the ongoing work of Sask Water to do those 

kinds of things which include the transcribing you described, 

and those kinds of issues.  So if it is the information on the 

Chapman report you require, I think I've given it roughly fully. 

 

If you want the department to estimate additional costs and 

efforts expended relative to this question and project as you 

might be able to isolate project expenses relative to another 

one, if you take a percentage of staff time and the billings of 

certain kinds of services that they provide for other kinds of 

projects, they can accumulate that kind of an estimate.  But 

there was nothing unusual about the work that Sask Water 

engaged in after the receiving of the Chapman report.  It is in 

the nature of the Sask Water Corporation to deal with the 

public through that process that would be identical to the 

process you're describing. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, we feel it is very 

important that Sask Water go out and meet with the public 

when they're discussing a project, but the people in my area 

feel that this Chapman report was not needed had the 

government not brought forward that proposal that they did to 

deal with the Tetzlaff brothers. 

 

So the people in my area are very interested in knowing what 

the total cost involved in that report was.  Once the proposal 

had come forward, then the people were very pleased to be able 

to participate.  But that participation only came about indirectly 

because those meetings were to be held in private, by invitation 

only, and the people themselves came to those meetings and 

demanded to be able to have representation there.  And that 

was very significant, Mr. Minister. 

 

The fact is at the last meeting that was held in Oxbow, the 

people there demanded that they have the right to stand up and 

vote on what they thought should happen to this proposal.  And 

they voted overwhelmingly -- about 95 per cent disapproved of 

the government's proposal.  So they are interested in what those 

costs would be because they did not feel that those costs were 

needed. 

 

How many people attended those hearings, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the member opposite raises 

the question of why Sask Water would have attempted to 

provide an alternate solution to the legal entanglement that had 

begun to block progress on this project.  As the member 

opposite is probably aware, the Tetzlaffs had an injunction with 

respect to preventing the use of the lands that they had owned 



May 25, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1937 

for the purposes of letting the Alameda dam fill. 

 

The legal processes to disentangle that may have taken, who 

knows -- three, four, five, six, however many years people can 

keep things tied up in the courts, so it was necessary to find a 

solution.  The solution that was initially proposed did, as the 

member opposite correctly identifies, not meet the needs of the 

local community.  And that probably had a lot of impact on the 

negotiations from that point, I think.  It's my understanding that 

the Tetzlaffs responded positively to an alternate proposal after 

the Chapman report was issued. 

 

So it was in the spirit of good public process that a better 

solution was identified, as it was in the spirit of good public 

process, as the member is familiar, with respect to the Charter 

of Environmental Rights and Responsibilities that in response 

to a proposal by government and a taking out in an impartial 

public forum, that the public spoke and said, we would like this 

kind of legislation to be constructed very differently. 

 

That happened in this case as well, and I think that's a tribute to 

good public process and the good work Sask Water does in that 

regard. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, there's one good 

thing I can say about the Jack Chapman process, and that was 

indeed that the government did finally listen to what the people 

had to say in the area and did not proceed with that proposal, 

because that proposal would not have changed anything.  It 

would have extended the time period for 10 to 15 years and we 

would have been back into the court process again, providing 

the Tetzlaff brothers wanted to carry it on.  Because they were 

going to be given that opportunity, if they did not agree with 

the proposals from Sask Water, that they could go back to 

court. 

 

And that is mainly what the people disagreed with.  The people 

in the area said, let's go to court and settle it once and for all, 

even if it does take two to three years. 

 

But they were upset with the way Sask Water went about 

handling these meetings.  Sask Water initially came out with 

the proposal that they would meet with the stakeholders, only 

the municipalities and only the landowners in the valley; that 

the general public in the area were not going to be invited to 

these meetings.  And, Mr. Minister, I took it on myself to 

advertise those meetings and that's why the public was there, 

not because Sask Water put any ads out saying, please come to 

these meetings.  I did it. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, when you talk about the openness of Sask 

Water's meeting process, then you should open it up and allow 

people to attend these meetings, just as we did do with the 

Environment Committee hearings.  We invited everybody to 

attend; we invited everybody that we thought could be a 

stakeholder in the whole process to attend.  And those who did 

not receive invitations had notices in the papers that these 

meetings were being held, where and when, and 

please come and attend. 

 

Now when Sask Water has some meetings, Mr. Minister, will 

you open it up to whomever wishes to attend? 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the officials inform me that 

the original meetings were set up for stakeholders, landholders, 

local governments to participate in a hopefully peaceful 

atmosphere in those discussions, and that opening up those 

meetings facilitated the attendance of something like 400 

people.  And I think the outcome has been positive. 

 

But I want to respond to the member's comments with respect 

to the desire of those to fight these things out in court.  I think 

that has as much public acceptability on this issue today as the 

member found when he went out with the standing committee 

on the issue of the Charter of Environmental Rights and 

Responsibilities.  The public, I believe, is tired of fights around 

environmental questions.  I think the public wants to meet 

around a table cooperatively to talk about how to resolve these 

things in which we each have a common interest. 

 

And I think it was that kind of a result, whether it would have 

been from the original identified stakeholders in that 

discussion, or the larger public attendance which was also 

positive, but it was out of a spirit of finding a solution that was 

positive and cooperative, and not the fighting out in the courts. 

 

Because it doesn't matter what issue you take, whether it's 

issues in this area or any other area in life, the end result of a 

court battle might well have been that the province of 

Saskatchewan would not have had access to the lands required 

to be flooded to have water in the Alameda dam.  At which 

point, what would the consequence then be?  What price would 

one have to pay having lost that legal battle for accessing those 

lands should the courts at the end of a long and bitter fight 

decide what is the spirit of cooperation going to be at that point. 

 

I think the route chosen by Sask Water was a positive one.  It 

made a proposal.  The proposal was examined through the 

Chapman report.  Public hearings were held on that.  And the 

public gave a direction that has been since incorporated into the 

negotiated agreement.  And we think there's a win-win situation 

in the result of the public process that was engaged in. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  

Cooperation is indeed what the people of the area wanted.  

They wanted to be able to negotiate, but they didn't want to 

give away the farm in that process.  And that's what that 

proposal did.  It moved things 10 to 15 years down the road but 

it did not settle the court case.  If the Tetzlaff brothers 15 years 

down the road were still unhappy with the proposals from Sask 

Water, they could go back to court.  Nothing had changed.  

Their case had not been diminished at all. 



1938 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1993 

And that's what the people found wrong with this proposal, is 

all it was doing was postponing a decision for 10 to 15 years, 

leaving the river dry.  The only positive benefit would have 

been that the dam itself would have been completed.  But it 

wouldn't be a dam; it would simply be an earthen work to grow 

grass on.  Or as one person said, that under this proposal all 

you'd have was an $80 million cow pasture, because that's what 

it would have amounted to. 

 

And that's why the people in the area were opposed to it and 

that's why they were prepared to allow it to go to court for a 

final decision.  And they felt that the case was strong enough 

that they would win. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, in this proposal, the final settlement on the 

Alameda project, what have the Tetzlaffs received? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, it is interesting to me that 

on this theme, as in others raised a day ago with respect to 

other issues whereby items under my responsibility had to be 

corrected from actions of the members previous, that the 

member would continue to refer to an in-between proposal 

where this government attempted to rectify the lack of 

agreement resulting from six years from the time the project 

was initiated, six years from the time was initiated. 

 

And when we inherited the project, there still was no 

agreement.  The entanglement was there at that time.  The court 

fight was on.  And therefore we proposed a solution which we 

then took out to the public, and the public spoke.  And in 

response to what the public said about our proposed solution, 

we negotiated a changed solution to fix the problem begun by 

the members opposite six years before.  I don't know why the 

member opposite continues to want to identify these failings of 

their administration that we have had to spend our time 

correcting. 

 

The solution to that, the solution to the problem left by the 

members opposite was the win-win situation we described 

where the floodgates are now closed.  The water level will be 

allowed to rise to the recreational level for the benefit of the 

community.  And then after five years, we have the right to, in 

response to the will of the public in the area, raise the water 

level to the level that is publicly desirable by leaving the gates 

closed. 

 

In the interim, the Tetzlaffs are compensated with $244,000 to 

pay for land that they give up for a railroad relocation, to pay 

for an oil well that is going to be covered over in the process of 

the dam filling, to pay for easements in lieu of land purchase so 

that we will have the use of land till the year 1998 at which 

point the Government of Saskatchewan, the Sask Water will 

purchase the required lands at the market price of the day. 

 

Now that is a good and well negotiated solution.  On behalf of 

the people of the province, that serves the interest of the 

Tetzlaffs for the circumstances they have been put in and 

serves the public interest in 

terms of assuring the ability to use the facility into which too 

much money has already been poured as a result of the 

ineptitude of the members opposite. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you can claim it's six 

years of a problem but that court case was aided and abetted by 

the members opposite in that whole time that this project was 

taking place.  It was your members that were out there giving 

advice on how the Tetzlaff brothers should fight this.  The fact 

is, is one woman stood up at the meeting in Oxbow that night 

that Jack Chapman was there and wondered how much money 

the Tetzlaffs has provided your party to help in this fight. 

 

You talk about $240,000 for land, for oil wells, and for 

easements.  I think perhaps you have missed one small piece on 

there.  Do the Tetzlaff brothers have right to run cattle down to 

the water's edge? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I find it interesting that the 

member opposite is asking questions about a fair settlement 

with a couple of ranchers who have been inconvenienced by 

the lack of adequate process by the members opposite on a 

$244,000 settlement for real circumstances for which they 

deserve compensation, when the Government of Saskatchewan 

has had to write off $144 million against this project that the 

members have created.  I find it ludicrous that they should be 

asking these kinds of questions about a legitimate agreement 

when they have put the province in hock $144 million on that 

question alone. 

 

Yes, in answer to your last question, there were . . . the 

Tetzlaffs do have the right to run cattle to the water's edge as 

do others in the area. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, you have given everybody 

then who has leased land along the water's edge access to have 

cattle down to that water? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the previous policy of 

SBDA was in fact to restrict access relative to that.  But 

grasslands were made available for people away from the water 

to graze at no charge.  The present policy is that users who 

request the right are given the right to graze cattle at the water's 

edge and they will pay appropriate pasture rental fees, again a 

correction in a good business fashion of a problem that existed 

earlier. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, what kind of grazing 

rights have they been given?  What kind of an operation are 

they now allowed to run down to the water's edge? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The arrangements under which, Mr. 

Chairman, the arrangements under which these rights to graze 

exist would be similar to any other grazing arrangement where 

the people who are using the pasture pay a lease fee.  There is 

no ability for them to over-winter on those lands.  There is no 

ability for them to set up an intensive livestock operation.  This 

is a grazing lease that's provided in a normal grazing lease 

fashion. 



May 25, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1939 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  On the lands 

that the Tetzlaffs still own, those that they're giving you 

easements on, what other kind of operations can they run on 

there besides a cattle operation?  What rights do they have on 

their own land? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the Tetzlaffs continue to 

have all of the rights that you or I would have as land owners.  

What they have given Sask Water is the right to bring up the 

water level to the required publicly desirable level. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So, Mr. Minister, the Tetzlaff brothers 

then could set up a whole resort industry on the lands that they 

own, and utilize the water for their own personal benefit in that 

sense under this agreement.  Is that the case? 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- We've had a bit of a discussion trying to 

figure out exactly what the problem is the member is posing, 

Mr. Chairman.  It's pretty unlikely that anybody would want to 

make a major investment on the shores of a body of water that 

is likely to rise and flood the resort on an agreement with the 

province. 

 

We encourage private investment in tourism.  We encourage 

private investment in the development of recreational resorts in 

Saskatchewan.  I know a number of rural development 

corporations are interested and striving to set up new initiatives 

that will attract the public to any range of public activity. 

 

I know in my area there's a very active group looking at 

enhancing a ski hill facility, of looking at further development 

of a golf course to take advantage of natural circumstances in 

our area in order to attract business and to make Saskatchewan 

. . . to add one more positive development to Saskatchewan. 

 

Why someone would be concerned that the Tetzlaffs might also 

want to do that is beyond me.  I think I would encourage them 

to try to establish within the province an investment that is 

within our collective interest.  But on the specific question of 

putting a resort at the edge of a lake which is going to be rising, 

I suspect that's not likely. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well to start off with, Mr. Minister, I'm 

pleased to hear that you feel that the Alameda dam is indeed 

going to have a significant amount of water in there, because I 

think that's probably the first time that a member from your 

side of the House has finally admitted that. 

 

One of the reasons why the people in the area are concerned 

about one or two people having the right to have access to that 

water privately is that no one else along the whole system is 

allowed to have that.  Will you in turn turn around and sell 

those lands back to the private individuals in the area whose 

land is not flooded, whose land is only partially flooded, and 

allow them to have the access to the water to the resort 

capabilities that the Tetzlaff brothers are now going to have 

under your agreement?  It's only the Tetzlaff brothers, under 

your agreement, that have that right.  Nobody else has that 

right.  It's only those.  So will you give that right to the other 

people, the other stakeholders in the area who own land? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the Tetzlaffs would have to 

submit to the zoning circumstances of the area both 

recreationally for Sask Water and with the municipal rules that 

are established locally.  But my officials inform me that they 

would be pleased to offer any of the other landowners a similar 

arrangement to the Tetzlaff arrangement to pay back to the 

province the money they received for their lands and to lease it 

back to the province.  They would encourage recreational 

development. 

 

We have miles and miles and miles of undeveloped recreational 

space along along Diefenbaker lake.  We would invite 

investment from people locally, from people outside of the area 

to make proposals which could be considered for recreational 

development. 

 

On the question of which dam has water in it and which dam 

does not, I think the member opposite ought to be aware that if 

he were to have a look at the Rafferty dam, you would still 

have a lot of trouble getting stuck in the mud very far away 

from the basic structure.  And I think it's been recognized that 

there are more reasonable flows into Alameda than there ever 

are expected to be in the short term into Rafferty. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  We also . 

. . the people of Saskatchewan also realize that southern 

Saskatchewan has faced about 10 years of drought.  And that's 

not the excuse that can be used over at Milden where the 

previous government built about 20 miles of irrigation ditch 

that's never held much for water.  So, Mr. Minister, we all have 

our problems. 

 

The land along the Rafferty and Alameda projects, particularly 

the Alameda project, the court said that that land was to be 

purchased and used for mitigation purposes.  Will that now be 

changing under your proposal of sell the land back to whom 

ever wishes to buy it?  What will happen to the mitigation 

portion of this project? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the waters about which 

we're talking, both in the case of the Tetzlaffs and in the case of 

should . . .  where I was figuratively describing the other 

circumstance, is land that is intended to be flooded when the 

dam fills up.  So this is not mitigation land.  This is in fact land 

that is going to be covered by water and the mitigation lands 

are outside of that area that is presumed to someday be under 

water and those mitigation lands are part of the agreement and 

will remain. 

 

But the lands we're talking about when we're talking about the 

agreement with the Tetzlaffs and the agreement that anybody 

else might want to make in terms of the use of the particular 

lands has to do with 



1940 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1993 

land that is intended to someday be under water if we ever get 

enough water to put it under water. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, it's not a question of 

getting enough water.  It's a question of closing the floodgates 

and allowing the water to be stored. 

 

The land that you talk about along the waterway that will be 

flooded is one issue.  That land will not be available for any use 

after it's flooded.  But some of those mitigation lands do go 

down and border on that waterway.  Will those lands, as you 

described, be allowed to be sold?  And if that happens, what 

happens to the mitigation projects? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, no.  Mitigation lands are 

there on an agreement to provide alternate habitat for the area 

that's going to be covered by water.  We were very clearly 

discussing the areas in the agreement which are subject to 

flooding so that there is an interim process in terms of land 

ownership for land that will not be flooded now but hopefully, 

when there is water and the circumstances allow, will be 

flooded. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, not all of the 

Tetzlaff land will be flooded.  They will continue to have 

access to that water's edge; they will continue to have access, 

under what you have described, to put up a resort on their land 

because it's their private land.  If they put up a resort on it, all 

of a sudden you're not buying pasture land. 

 

You talk about the Tetzlaff brothers as ranchers.  They feed 

cattle; there's not a cow-calf operation.  They go down to the 

local auction mart and buy calves and feed them out.  That's the 

kind of ranchers you're talking about.  They're not ranchers in 

the sense of the word that the media has tried to portray them 

over the period of time. 

 

So they will continue to have access to that water.  They can 

turn around and build a resort on that land.  That land is now 

changed from agricultural land to resort land; it'll have a higher 

tax base; and it will sell at a higher value than agricultural land 

will because it's been developed.  And so when you turn around 

and pay fair market value for this land, you're not paying for 

agricultural land any more, Mr. Minister.  So what kind of a 

price are you looking at?  Are you going to pay them for fair 

market value of agricultural land?  Or are you going to pay 

them for fair market value of developed land if they turn 

around and develop it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, if I may restate, having 

confirmed what I had said earlier, and to state again, that Sask 

Water has the right to purchase the lands required.  They will 

buy land presuming that seven-eighths of the land they buy will 

be under water and there will be a residual amount for flood 

conditions, so that the land that Sask Water will buy will be 

that land that a private owner could not safely have access to 

under certain conditions of water should we be fortunate to 

have the dam full. 

 

There are other owners around there who have similar 

access to . . . from their existing private lands that have already 

engaged in the sales agreement.  The basis . . . the formula for 

purchasing the land which has been used for other people who 

have sold their land is the same formula that will be used for 

purchasing these lands at the time -- in 1998 or whatever year it 

is -- and subject to the market fluctuations in that formula, 

which is basically the price of agricultural land. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you talk of . . . that 

you're purchasing seven-eighths of this land that will be 

flooded and you'll have one-eighth left for flood conditions.  

But with the other people's land, they don't have the same 

access to the water that the Tetzlaffs have.  Up till now they 

haven't had the access.  You've changed that and given them 

access to water for agriculture purposes for cattle grazing only, 

not for extensive livestock, and for no other purpose.  But the 

Tetzlaff brothers still have access for whatever reasons they 

want to have access to that water for, which the other people do 

not have.  Is that the situation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I do not know what the 

member opposite has against the Tetzlaff brothers.  They are . . 

. as the member opposite indicates with respect to our dealings 

with respect to access to water by others, there is one more 

thing we've fixed; and I hope the member opposite gives us 

credit for the number of things that we have fixed and we've 

had to fix, and the number of things that we will continue to 

have to fix that got left for us to fix. 

 

But I don't understand what the dilemma is with respect to what 

the Tetzlaffs could do there.  I mean the land that their cattle 

are going to be grazing on is going to be flooded within a very 

few years, we hope.  It is all of our collective expectation, or at 

least our collective hope, that someday it will rain and the dam 

will fill, and someone would not want to have facilities 

drowned out by a dam which someday hopefully fills. 

 

What they do in the meantime is . . . I do not understand the 

problem that the member is posing.  If they were to have some 

development a mile from the water's edge, it would have to 

meet the same conditions for recreational development and 

zoning that every other development would have.  It would 

have to pass an environmental assessment if it was deemed to 

have environmental impact. 

 

I don't know what the question is the member is asking, in a 

society that basically believes in land ownership and the right 

to do things creatively.  If the member is worried that the 

Tetzlaffs have more creative business sense than everybody 

else in the area, I guess the member may want to continue to 

express concern about it. 

 

But in my mind if the Tetzlaffs or anyone else around that area 

wanted to develop a recreational spot that attracted tourist 

dollars and made the communities in the area healthier and 

provided more access for recreation for local people and people 

from far away, I would welcome them to do it. 



May 25, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1941 

(1630) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, that's the problem 

here.  I would encourage everyone to take advantage of that 

situation, but under your agreement they don't have that 

opportunity.  The Tetzlaff brothers have the opportunity, but 

the other people do not have that opportunity because they 

don't have access to the water.  They have access to the water 

for cattle but not for recreational purposes. 

 

And that's the problem here.  One group of people -- the 

Tetzlaff brothers -- have gained a special condition because 

they stood up and fought expropriation. 

 

Now does that mean that if you're putting in a power line 

between here and Saskatoon and I happen to own some land in 

there and you want to put a power line across my property and I 

fight it based on environmental concerns, that you'll give me 

some special conditions, that I could perhaps get my power 

cheaper or free because that power line happens to run across 

my property? 

 

And that's what you're doing in this particular case.  You're 

giving these people special conditions because they fought 

expropriation.  The other people said no, there's a law here 

about expropriation; we understand it; we are prepared to sell 

for a fair market value; and we accept the conditions involved. 

 

This particular two people said no, we're prepared to fight it.  

And because they fought it now you are giving them special 

considerations.  And that's the problem here, Mr. Minister, is 

that they have the special condition of being able to set up a 

resort where the other landowners in the area do not have that . 

. . are not in a position to access the water in the same manner 

that the Tetzlaff brothers are.  And if you're prepared to give 

the other landholders in the area the same access to water that 

you're giving the Tetzlaffs, then it's not a problem. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I may be unusually dense 

today in trying to figure out what the problem is.  I've asked my 

staff to tell me what they think it is the member is asking, 

because it is my firm belief, from everything I have said and 

heard, that there is nothing the Tetzlaffs could or would do that 

somebody else could not equally do. 

 

Now if the member is suggesting the Tetzlaffs could build a 

confectionery down by the water's edge, which might be on 

skids, that somebody might come and buy some pop and ice 

cream and that on Sunday afternoon when they came to puddle 

in the water, someone else who is leasing property in another 

location could apply to Sask Water for the right to establish that 

confectionery on skids like everybody else.  If you wanted to 

lease a boat launch, that consideration can be given. 

 

And in the event that you don't want to do it that way and you 

wanted to do it the same way Tetzlaffs are doing it, the 

corporation has said that they would 

happily take back the money for the money paid for the lands 

and restore the exact agreement that the Tetzlaffs have with 

everybody else -- lease the land back to them, recognizing the 

land's going to be flooded in five years. 

 

So there is every opportunity, as far as I understand it, under a 

different set of conditions, because granted, the Tetzlaffs 

presently have retained ownership, but if someone on a piece of 

leased property at another side of the water, as long as there's 

water and wanted to do it, they can make application to Sask 

Water and say we want to build a confectionery near the water.  

And that would be given just consideration, as I believe the 

Tetzlaffs would have to be before they built it because it would 

have to do with rights with respect to the recreational area 

around the lake. 

 

So if the member could more accurately identify the problem, 

we could possibly more accurately answer it.  But there does 

not seem to be a circumstance here where anybody would be 

under a disadvantage.  The lease to the Tetzlaffs is an 

agricultural lease.  They continue to . . . They've retained it for 

agricultural purposes rather, and the leases in the other areas 

are for agricultural purposes, and it's my understanding that if 

someone wanted to develop a resort-like facility on skids so 

they could drag it back when the water came up -- if the water 

came up -- then they could make application to do that at any 

point around the lake. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well I perhaps have to agree with you, 

Mr. Minister, about your capabilities to understand my 

questions today. 

 

The problem that has been expressed to me is that individuals 

who may wish to participate in resort development in the area 

do not have the same access to the water that the Tetzlaffs have 

because they have been able to retain ownership of their land.  

That's the problem, that the individuals have to go to Sask 

Water to get permission to do whatever it is they wish to do 

whereas the Tetzlaffs do not have that constraint.  And that's 

where the problem lies, Mr. Minister. 

 

On the deal with the Tetzlaffs, the $240,000, how much land 

was taken for the railroad? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- To quickly answer the previous point, for 

those people who believe that the Tetzlaffs have a better deal 

than they have, I would invite them to contact Sask Water to 

establish the exact same deal with Sask Water as the Tetzlaffs 

have, because it is of no financial consequence to the 

corporation. 

 

The amount of land for the railroad is 16 acres. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Did you just purchase the 16 acres or 

was there a larger parcel of land in that portion that was 

purchased? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, just 16 acres. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- And how much land are you gaining in 

the easement, that you have an easement to 



1942 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1993 

for the five-year period? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The easement is for the lands required 

when the area floods.  It is . . . and if you can tell us what the 

water levels will be, we can tell you the number of acres that 

will be covered by it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- The water level, Mr. Minister can go up 

to 562 -- if you're interested -- meters . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . It will. 

 

The oil well, what was the quality of the oil well that you paid 

for? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- SBDA hired a consultant to evaluate all 

the oil wells in the valley, where there were oil wells affected, 

for their negotiated agreements.  And the same consultant, on 

the basis of the same calculations, has done for the other wells 

in the valley the same process for establishing the value was 

used. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- I wonder if you could put a dollar value 

on this oil well.  And is this oil well totally abandoned, or has 

some other things happened to it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the oil well is under water 

and therefore abandoned by all but the aquatic life. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, do the owners of this oil 

well have access to those mineral rights again? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The basis for assessing compensation for 

all owners of lands on which oil wells existed in the valley was 

the damages suffered by the owners for no longer being able to 

use the particular well in question for these people and for other 

people in the valley -- same basis. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So they will still have opportunities to 

access that oil if they wish to make use of those? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- As in all other oil well developments, it 

would not typically be the owners of the land that would do the 

development -- although I know of some people that do that -- 

it would be another company who would judge their prospects 

in accessing that oil on whosever property . . . under whosever 

property it happened to be. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So then what you're paying for is 

actually for the drill stem and the site preparation and the 

values of that rather than the reserves in the ground? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- What's being paid for here, Mr. Chairman, 

is simply the damages suffered by owners for their inability to 

access their lands; so that their capacity to earn revenues from 

the traditional damage payments that farmers receive is what's 

being compensated for in the oil development. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  So 

approximately 2,000, $2,500 a year on surface 

payments is then what you're talking about.  Is that the value 

that you're talking?  Or what value did you pay to the Tetzlaff 

brothers for the loss of this particular oil well? 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, in trying to identify closely 

the number of the compensation here . . . the value of the 

compensation for the surface lease that was determined by the 

formula that was applied generally was about $6,000. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay, Mr. Minister.  So from what I've 

gathered, you've paid $6,000 for the oil well.  Say we value the 

16 acres at $400 an acre for pasture land -- and that is fairly 

high for the area -- you're looking at another $6,400.  For the 

easement on a quarter section of land, which is basically what 

is being flooded to start off with, is a very small portion of that 

quarter section, at cattle leasing rates of about $1,200 a quarter 

for five years, you're looking at another $6,000.  You're at 

about 18, $20,000 of value that the Tetzlaff brothers have given 

up or are receiving from the government.  So what is the other 

$220,000 for? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the land costs -- I'm not 

familiar with the details of the arrangements with other 

expropriated lands in the area -- but the land cost that was owed 

to the Tetzlaffs was $400,000.  That was according to the 

arrangement that had been there prior.  And the calculations 

that were done based on that amount of money owing 

projecting into seven years into the future was that the amount 

paid, together with the damages and the special rights already 

described, would be the appropriate compensation that would 

parallel the costs of Sask Water paying out the actual amounts 

owing on the expropriated land in that period of time. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So does that mean, Mr. Minister, then 

when it comes time five years down the road, you don't have to 

pay them any more money for the lands that you only have an 

easement on?  Or are you going to turn around and pay them 

another large sum of money for the lands that you just had the 

easement on?  They were initially talking of five quarters 

involved here, and you've bought 16 acres.  So are you going to 

turn around and buy the other 784 acres at fair market value 

besides paying them the $240,000? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  And if the member 

opposite knows anything about the opportunity cost of money, 

it would make no difference to the corporation whether the 

Tetzlaffs had the $400,000 and the cost accrued to us having 

paid out the $400,000 or whether Sask Water retains the 

$400,000 and pays an annual amount into a collective 

agreement as it has done and then at the end of the period of 

time purchase it for a fair market value of the time. 

 

It would be parallel, Mr. Chairman, to the member opposite 

renting a house, paying his lease payments 



May 25, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1943 

annually, and then expecting, I think by the question, to 

somehow have seven years of house payments deducted if you 

were to choose to buy it at the end of the period.  It's reasonable 

to compensate them for the amount of money they would have 

had in their pockets had the land been paid out. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, perhaps part of your 

equation has forgotten the opportunity costs that the Tetzlaff 

brothers now have at $240,000 plus the opportunities that they 

have in still owning that land.  They're not paying you any rent 

on that land; they're gaining the benefits of ownership for it.  

Have you taken that into consideration in your numbers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the Sask Water 

Corporation has considered all factors in coming to a fair and 

reasonable settlement that allows the province to repair the 

damage of the conflict that existed, that did not allow the 

development of the dam and the recreational facilities that 

could grow up in the area.  And they have engaged in 

negotiations considering all of the things around the questions 

you've asked, come up with a fair value of compensation so 

that the Tetzlaffs are not treated significantly differently than 

anybody else in the area, and so that the public has the potential 

for recreation in the area once . . . now that the water level is 

allowed to reach recreational levels in the dam. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well it's a nice answer, Mr. Minister, but 

you didn't answer the question.  Opportunities on $240,000, 

was that part of your considerations, and the opportunities of 

land ownership?  Yes or no. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Well yes, all those things were considered.  

Mr. Chairman, I find it ludicrous for a person supposedly with 

a knowledge of business to think that when I . . . if you rent my 

house that somehow you should consider the opportunity . . . 

that you should consider my benefit from the opportunity cost 

of me having your rental payment.  This gets into an insane 

little ping-pong game about when this consideration stops.  It's 

clear that the Tetzlaffs could have $400,000 in their pockets for 

the land which they do not have because they chose to retain 

ownership.  Sask Water has $400,000 that they would have 

paid out, so part of the calculation of the total benefits to the 

Tetzlaffs is the consideration of that same arrangement that 

anyone else . . . everyone else in the area has had relative to the 

value of their land. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I find that very 

difficult to believe.  The Tetzlaff brothers had opportunities for 

$400,000, and you've paid them 240,000.  Then you're going to 

turn around five years down the road and pay them another 

large sum of money at fair market value for the land.  Those 

opportunities were not given to the other landowners -- not at 

Rafferty-Alameda, not at Nipawin, not at Diefenbaker -- just 

the Tetzlaff brothers, the only ones that have that opportunity. 

 

Mr. Minister, if they wanted the $400,000 all they had 

to do was sign on the dotted line.  But they're getting a special 

condition here.  You're going to turn around and pay the 

$400,000 or plus for the land when it comes time to sell it 

because you're going to pay fair market values.  They also had 

access and use of that land for five years.  Now as a farmer I 

know that sometimes that does not work out to a lot, but they 

have access to water use now which they did not have before 

on that land, so that makes that land more valuable to them.  

And they have the interest or the value off of that land, those 

opportunity costs that you talked about, and you haven't 

included that.  At 5 per cent, Mr. Minister, you're not looking at 

$400,000 over five years being worth $240,000 plus all the 

extra they would have got out of from their own production. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm sure the people of 

Saskatchewan are beginning to realize why we inherited this 

entangled mess over there when they listen to the member 

opposite discussing this without the knowledge of the 

circumstances that were there. 

 

There are people in that area who have had the equivalent of 

the Tetzlaff's $400,000 for five years already.  And they had it 

when interest rates were at 12 per cent.  I mean to make these 

kinds of comparisons and try to judge that somebody's been 

treated better than someone else is very, very difficult to do.  

The fact is that with one client because of one circumstance an 

arrangement parallel to all of those made with the others has 

now been made and the rights are similar in every case. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

Vote 50 agreed to. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Loans, Advances and Investments 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Vote 140 

 

Item 1 -- Statutory. 

 

Vote 140 agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank my 

officials for their support in providing answers to the members 

opposite.  I'd like to thank the members opposite for the wide 

range of questions on an interesting range of topics of public 

interest to people in Saskatchewan and for their cooperation in 

facilitating the public discussion of the estimates of Sask Water 

Corporation.  Thank you both. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I too would like to, 

on behalf of my colleagues, thank the staff for helping us 

through this.  We certainly appreciate your knowledge and we 

certainly appreciate you having the answers for us when you 

came before us.  Thank you very much. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:58 p.m. 

 


