




















































Hansard: April 05, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 843 

 April 5, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

introduce to you and to members of the Assembly, 19 grade 7 

and 8 students from the Sacred Heart community school here in 

Regina in the constituency of Regina Elphinstone. With them 

are their teachers, Dan Folk, Jim Braun, and Len Kleisinger. I 

want to welcome them all here to the Assembly and look 

forward to meeting with them shortly after question period. 

Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Health Policy Advertising 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question this morning . . . or this afternoon is to the minister 

responsible for the closing of hospitals, the Minister of Health. 

 

Madam Minister, unfortunately the bunker mentality of you 

and your government on this issue is becoming more and more 

apparent. Not only do you refuse to attend the meetings that are 

being held all over Saskatchewan to discuss your plan for 

massive bed closures; now you're starting to run costly 

newspaper ads designed to sell your destructive plan. 

 

And I ask, Madam Minister: isn't this the exactly the kind of 

costly political advertising you promised as a government to 

eliminate? How can you justify spending thousands of 

taxpayers' dollars preparing and running this type of 

advertising that is clearly designed to promote the 

government's political agenda and nothing else. 

 

How can you justify spending this money at the same time that 

your funding reductions are causing hospitals to close all over 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the 

member's question, I want to say first of all that over the course 

of the past few days I've had much opportunity, I myself and 

the minister responsible and others in this government and 

caucus, have had much opportunity to be meeting with people 

who are involved with health reform across this province. 

 

I had two very good meetings up in the area around Turtleford, 

Glaslyn, Spiritwood, and people are enthused and informed. 

They are anxious, Mr. Speaker, of course, to have as much 

information as they can have as they go about their 

decision-making process. And it's our intention as government 

to provide that information. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the hon. 

member I say, this political ad that I was referring to, that you 

refuse to answer, provides no answers to serious questions 

being asked by Saskatchewan people. What hospitals are going 

to close? How far will I have to drive to the nearest hospital if 

there's an emergency? How many jobs will be lost in my 

community? 

 

Instead this costly political ad paid for by the taxpayers is 

designed solely to put the best face possible on your betrayal of 

health care in this province. And if that's not a big enough 

waste of taxpayers' money, the ad which ran on Saturday — 

Saturday — had an 800 number. And I know people who 

called that 800 number. And, Mr. Minister, do you know what 

happened, what type of answer they got? The same as when we 

talk to the Minister of Health. There was no answer. 

 

Madam Minister, or Mr. Minister, whichever one of you 

decides to answer, how many places did this political advocacy 

ad run? How much did it cost, and how do you justify spending 

taxpayers' money to sell the NDP (New Democratic Party) 

agenda when you say your government is cutting back on this 

kind of advertising? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is, is 

the members opposite have been spreading misinformation and 

using scare tactics throughout the province. For example, the 

member from Kindersley had said at a meeting in Eatonia that 

only 20 per cent of the health care budget for Saskatchewan is 

spent in rural Saskatchewan. That's what he said, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The facts, the true facts are, Mr. Speaker, that 43 per cent of the 

total health care budget is spent on rural Saskatchewan, 56 per 

cent on Regina and Saskatoon of which 44.9 per cent goes to 

rural residents, being a total of 70/30 in favour of rural 

Saskatchewan. Those are the facts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — The members opposite, however, are 

using scare tactics out there with respect to people. And it is 

important for us to get the message out that there will be 

emergency acute care services for people throughout 

Saskatchewan when they need them, that there will be 

improved community-based services, Mr. Speaker, and that 

health care is not being destroyed in rural Saskatchewan, as the 

members opposite are attempting to have everyone believe 

through their misinformation. The government has an 

obligation to reassure people that they will have access to 

quality health care services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



844 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 1993 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I'm glad 

that the Minister of Health got on her feet to answer that 

question. Madam Minister, you talk about the meeting in 

Eatonia as if you knew what you were talking about. Madam 

Minister, you were as far away as possible from that public 

meeting. You chose not to attend after being invited. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, I'm talking about this ad and I'm told 

that that ad in the Leader-Post alone cost a thousand dollars. 

That's, Madam Minister, enough to supply insulin and all other 

supplies for a diabetic for five months. And that's not to 

mention, Madam Minister, all the other places that this ad ran 

as well. 

 

Madam Minister, people in communities in this province are 

asking us to ask you to slow down this destructive process. 

They're asking for more time, for more information, for more 

input. Yet your political ad tells people to hurry up. It says . . . 

your political ad says we must speed up our transition. The 

sooner the better, your ad says. If you are so certain that all is 

well with your wellness plan, then why not give more people 

time to understand and provide input? 

 

Madam Minister, will you organize and will you attend public 

meetings so that you can hear firsthand people's concerns? Will 

you postpone your artificial August 17 deadline and give 

communities more time to consider their options? Will you do 

that, Madam Minister? Or is this ad designed to set the stage 

for your government to ram this destructive legislation through 

this legislature with as little debate as possible? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, this legislation is not 

destructive, and the members opposite know that. 

 

But the misinformation campaign that they have going right 

now is absolutely reprehensible. They are saying that people 

are going to be driving hundreds of miles in order to get acute 

care. The fact of the matter is, in many of these small 

communities people go into a hospital, get stabilized, and go 

into a larger centre in any case. That happens in a very large 

number of cases. So I mean it is just total misinformation. 

 

We have received letters from the Saskatchewan Association of 

Special Care Homes, from the Saskatchewan Home Care 

Association, from the Saskatchewan Health-Care Association 

urging us to get the legislation through as quickly as possible. 

 

There are very, very . . . Mr. Speaker, there are very, very 

difficult decisions that have been made in this budget and in 

this fiscal year. And it will result in reductions to acute care 

beds in the province and therefore it is important for people to 

get organized on a district basis in order to be able to deal with 

the budget decisions that have been made by the Government 

of Saskatchewan in this budget. 

 

So it is urgent that we get into districts in order for us to do a 

needs assessment on a district basis and in a 

rational way be able to afford acute care services and other 

health care services to all members of the district. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It's kind 

of ironic when Miss Information gets up to chastise us for 

misleading the people. It's interesting to note at the same time, 

Mr. Speaker, that if this is going on, if this went on in Eatonia, 

why were you not there to give your side of the story? Why do 

you refuse to meet with them, Madam Minister? 

 

You're talking about saving money and then you waste 

thousands of taxpayers' money on an ad that has no other 

purpose but to promote the NDP agenda. Well, Madam 

Minister, I'm going to tell you a way in which you can send 

that information out and it won't cost you a thin dime other 

than gas to go to a meeting. Tonight, Madam Minister, in 

Brock there will be a public meeting involving the people of 

Eston, Kindersley, and Dodsland — three communities whose 

hospitals are on the chopping block due to your wellness 

model. 

 

Madam Minister, on behalf of the people of Brock I ask you, 

will you come to Brock? Will you end your expensive 

propaganda campaign and instead come out and listen to the 

real concerns of real people? Will you come to this meeting, 

Madam Minister? Or should we tell the people in these three 

communities that you have turned your back on them as well? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the health 

reform across the province, the Health department officials and 

the Minister of Health and the Associate Minister of Health as 

well as MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) and other 

cabinet ministers will be meeting with communities in the 

weeks to come. There will be consultation with people in 

Saskatchewan so there will be attendance at some meetings and 

there will be other meetings that we will be attending in 

addition to some of the ones that are mentioned here in the 

legislature. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there has been a lot of consultation over the 

weeks and months preceding with respect to health care reform 

and with respect to getting organized on a district basis, which 

is essential. We have to get on with that. We will have further 

consultation in the weeks and months to come. 

 

The fact is, however, is that rather than the members 

attempting to raise fear in people, attempting to . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. The member from Morse, 

please come to order. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Rather than the members opposite 

attempting to raise fear for their own political agenda, people 

incidentally who have . . . for example, let me give you an 

example. These members opposite who claim that they're 

saving medicare, Mr. 



April 5, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 845 

Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Next question. Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 

all I can say is that the people of Saskatchewan are beginning 

to have real concerns why you are so afraid to meet with them 

openly in an unorchestrated kind of fashion, a public meeting, 

Madam Minister. Because they are beginning to tell me that the 

champions of medicare are fast becoming the champions of I 

don't care. That's the impression they're getting. You would 

rather spend thousands of dollars on a propaganda machine 

through newspaper advertising rather than meeting with the 

people themselves. 

 

I'm going to give you another chance now, Madam Minister, a 

serious other chance. You've been invited to a meeting in 

Weyburn tomorrow night to discuss the uncertain future of the 

Souris Valley Regional Care Centre. 

 

Madam Minister, the people at Weyburn don't understand why 

you are doing this to them. One of the employees of Souris 

Valley said, and he's quoted in the Leader-Post actually, and I 

quote: right now nobody knows what will happen and I hate 

living in fear. Unquote. 

 

How does that feel, Madam Minister? How does that feel to 

know that because of you, people in this province are living in 

fear? And that's not my fearmongering, it's the people saying 

that. 

 

Madam Minister, will you come to Weyburn tomorrow night 

and explain your actions to the people of that community? Or 

do you prefer to stay in Regina where it's nice and safe, and 

buy more political propaganda in the hope the problem that 

you've created is somehow magically going to disappear? Will 

you come to Brock tonight and to Weyburn tomorrow night, 

Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, I have said repeatedly that 

we will be meeting with the people across Saskatchewan. We 

will be meeting in the days and weeks to come. 

 

The members opposite . . . I would like to ask the members 

opposite, who say today that they are going to save medicare in 

this province, where they were when their federal counterparts 

decided to offload some $4 billion in the '91-92 fiscal year. I 

would like to know where they were when 1.7 billion of those 

dollars was related to health care, and why? It translates into 

some $540 million this year in direct federal program cuts, and 

which impacts on health care enormously. 

 

Where were the members opposite when their federal 

counterparts decided to bring in drug patent 

legislation that increased health care costs in this province from 

6 to $10 million? Nowhere. In fact they supported drug patent 

changes back in '87-88 and they remained silent during federal 

offloading. 

 

These same people stand in their places and try to represent 

themselves as being champions of health care in this province. 

Where were they when they created a $15 billion deficit that 

makes it necessary for this province to take some very tough 

decisions and to make hard choices? 

 

If they wanted to save medicare, why didn't they . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Next question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister has 

now lit her blame thrower once more, and obviously all her 

cohorts are trying to give her some kind of moral support on 

something that's not morally defensible, Madam Minister. Not 

only are you refusing . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Will the members please allow 

the member from Rosthern to ask his question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Madam 

Minister, as if it's not bad enough, I'm now being informed that 

you are turning your back on another group of people in this 

province. Hemophiliacs who have contacted HIV (human 

immunodeficiency virus) through blood transfusions want to 

meet with you as well, Madam Minister. 

 

But the other day when this issue came up you refused to talk 

to the media. And the hemophiliac who was interviewed on 

CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) says that he was 

not surprised; that you had refused to meet with this group on 

numerous occasions and you have turned a deaf ear on their 

concerns. And they really have to wonder why, Madam 

Minister. 

 

Who are you meeting with these days? First you refuse to meet 

with communities whose hospitals you are closing. Now you 

aren't meeting with hemophiliacs. 

 

And before you light the blame thrower once again, Madam 

Minister, and delve into the past, will you at least meet with 

this group to discuss their concerns or are you going to say, 

well the toy minister's meeting with them or we'll be running 

another ad to tell them why you will not meet with them, 

Madam Minister. Could you explain that to them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, this is a very difficult issue 

and I want to put on the record that the government has met 

with hemophiliacs in the province. The fact is this . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Just a minute. This fact is this. 

There is a lawsuit pending. There are also confidentiality 

provisions respecting that and it is highly inappropriate for us 

to be discussing here in this Legislative Assembly what is 



846 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 1993 

taking place in that situation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SGEU Contract Offer 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 

NDP government has steamrolled just about the entire society 

of Saskatchewan with this iceberg budget of theirs — its rural 

Saskatchewan, its towns and villages. They've attacked senior 

citizens like they've never been attacked before in this recent 

budget and they've taxed the ordinary taxpayer to the hilt. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, they asked us the other day to spread the 

sacrifice around. That was the message from the Minister of 

Finance — spread the sacrifice around so that everyone was 

treated equally. Well now we find out, Mr. Speaker, that we 

aren't all equal. It seems some of the friends of the government, 

the union leaders of this province, the people that helped them 

win the last election, get a little bit of help. 

 

In the middle of all this sacrifice, Mr. Speaker, it appears a two 

and a quarter per cent increase has been given to the friends of 

the government. Now that two and a quarter per cent increase 

in my calculations comes out to 56 to $60 million, Mr. 

Speaker, and this doesn't include the other benefit costs that are 

going to go along . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Does the member have a question? I'd 

like to ask the member to direct his question please. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the Minister of Labour. Mr. Minister, given your relentless 

attack on everyone else in society, how do you justify another 

$60 million to your union-leader friends? How do you do that, 

sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, collective bargaining is of 

course a very difficult and very dynamic process. When we 

came to office we found that practically all of the collective 

agreements were then open, or became open within the matter 

of the next few months. 

 

As we learned the dimensions of the fiscal disaster that our 

friends opposite have left for us to cope with, it became 

apparent to us that we would not be able to pay a wage increase 

in the first year. We bargained in our initial months with that in 

mind, and we had in mind trying to put something into the 

second year of the contract. We found as the dimensions of the 

disaster became even more apparent, as we discovered some of 

the hidden bombs laying around the piece that hadn't been 

brought to the attention of the Saskatchewan people, that we 

weren't able to pay a wage increase in the second year either. 

So we bargained from that point of view. 

 

Now at some point, at some point we reached the 

stage where we had to ask the public servants of this province 

to . . . or we had to say that we can't ask them to keep giving up 

forever. They had already lost something like 16 per cent of the 

cost of living during the 1980s and by asking then to take two 

more hits of zero, we felt that we had asked them to pay 

enough. So we said in the third year of a contract we are 

prepared to consider a small wage increase, and we bargained 

on that basis and arrived at the position of the settlements that 

were approved in the Crowns. The present recommendations 

respecting the public service, the SGEU (Saskatchewan 

Government Employees' Union), reflect that as well. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Question to the 

same minister. Mr. Minister, the third year is now. You've hit 

senior citizens in this budget like seniors have never been hit in 

this province before. 

 

Net farm income in this province is as low as it was in the 

l930s. Mr. Minister, one or two points for lots of those people 

makes a really big difference. It's not zero for them, it is minus. 

 

Now you have chosen, Mr. Minister, knowing full well that 

we're into the third year, you've chosen to help out your 

union-leader friends. 

 

Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Will the member from Regina 

Rosemont please come to order. That pertains to the member 

from Estevan as well. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, given 

that everyone else in the province has taken less than zero, 

would you tell the folks today if you have budgeted for this 

extra $60 million in this budget year, and does that mean that 

there has to be an extra $60 million from every year on forward 

from now. Is that true, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The settlements across the piece 

include the public service proper as well as the Crown 

corporations, will include teachers, will include health care 

workers. 

 

Each of these collective agreements have a different date, so 

that the increases we're talking about will come into effect at 

different times for different units. As of the moment, I think it 

is correct to say that none of them have yet come into effect. 

Some of them may have budgetary implications in this budget, 

and if so, they have been taken care of. Some of them of 

course, with the Crown corporations and the health care side, 

have not. 

 

The member will also know that in preparing a budget, it is not 

customary to build in the cost of anticipated increases from 

collective bargaining, because you simply don't indicate your 

bargaining position in your budgetary documents. So there is 

some effort to ensure that those figures don't get released in 

that way. And the hon. members will know 



April 5, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 847 

that from their own experience in government, if indeed they 

paid any attention to their financial situation while in 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A question to the 

same minister. Mr. Minister, the money has to come from 

somewhere. Your Minister of Finance has been standing in this 

legislature for the last three sitting days, saying that she has 

projected out four years in advance. There is nowhere in there, 

Mr. Minister, for $60 million extra this year or 60 million the 

year after or 60 million the year after. 

 

There is only one place it can come from. And that's increasing 

taxes or cutting seniors or cutting agriculture or cutting 

somebody else, Mr. Minister. You've got to come up with $60 

million to settle this agreement. Mr. Minister, please tell us 

where the extra $180 million is going to come for the next 

three years because of this settlement you just made. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, the member's figures are 

not accurate, and he knows they're not accurate. He knows the 

amounts involved are nothing like $60 million. He knows that 

for a fact. I've already explained that these agreements come 

into effect at different times so that the impact on this budget 

will be a lot less than that. And the member well knows that as 

well. 

 

Now what I want to also say to the member is that the fact of 

the matter is that departments are going to have to come in 

within their budgets. What they're going to have to do to do 

that, if people in their bargaining units get wage increases, 

they're simply going to have to cope with that. And there's no 

question about that. 

 

We are in a position, as a result of the mess that you left us, 

where we have to achieve our budgetary targets. If we don't 

achieve our budgetary targets, then this province is really going 

to suffer. You created that situation; we didn't. We're trying to 

manage it as best we can. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Speaker, people in Saskatchewan know 

all about cuts. People in rural Saskatchewan today are up in 

arms because they're being reduced to 1.5 beds per thousand, 

when they may have to drive hundreds of miles and see their 

communities close down because they're losing their facilities. 

They know where the money's coming from, Mr. Minister, to 

satisfy your union-leader friends. 

 

What they want to know: are they going to get cut again? Are 

seniors going to get cut again? Where are you going to find the 

extra money? Are you going to increase utility rates and taxes 

again, Mr. Minister? Come clean and tell us where you're going 

to get the extra money from, right now. 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I tried to tell the member, 

and if the member would just listen to the answer instead of 

preparing his next question, it might not be necessary to keep 

repeating the answers to the same question. 

 

The fact is that these increases, as they're negotiated, will come 

into effect at different times in different bargaining units. They 

will have a greater impact in some bargaining units than in 

others. 

 

The reality also is that we must achieve our budgetary targets. 

And that means that our departments and the agencies must 

achieve those targets. How they do it will be a matter 

depending upon what the management of those departments in 

consultation with the ministers responsible decide to do. 

 

We can't sit here and say in a general way how they're going to 

do it. We can only say that they have to do it, Mr. Member. 

They have to do it. We're going to require them to do it, which 

is a far sight different than the way you ran your departments 

when you were the government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 21 — An Act to amend The Labour-sponsored 

Venture Capital Corporations Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to 

introduce to the House, for consideration, The 

Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment 

Act, 1993. 

 

Last fall, Mr. Speaker, I announced the Partnership for 

Renewal economic strategy for the province of Saskatchewan. 

An important component of that strategy is the involvement of 

Saskatchewan working people in developing their economic 

future. 

 

I am pleased, Mr. Speaker, to inform you that measures 

announced in 1993-1994 provincial budget speech strongly 

support this objective, and the labour-sponsored venture capital 

corporations program will continue to play an important role. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the labour-sponsored venture capital program 

offers tax incentives to encourage Saskatchewan labour and 

employee groups to make equity investments in 

Saskatchewan-based small- and medium-sized business. 

Individuals investing in the shares of labour-sponsored venture 

capital corporations or LSVCCs are eligible for both, first, a 

provincial tax credit equal to 20 per cent of the cost of the first 

$5,000 of their investment per year; and secondly, a similar 

federal tax credit. 

 

(1430) 



848 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 1993 

Mr. Speaker, the investment stipulated by this program creates 

new jobs, protects jobs that might otherwise be lost in 

Saskatchewan because of decisions made in head offices 

outside the province. 

 

Last year, Mr. Speaker, this government introduced legislation 

to streamline the program, add compliance features, increase 

maximum contribution limits, and maintain compatibility with 

the federal government legislation. There is still more that can 

be done to build on the productivity and creativity of 

Saskatchewan workers through this program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill will add compliance features to protect 

the interest of Saskatchewan taxpayers with regard to tax 

credits. There will also be amendments to maintain harmony 

with the federal legislation. And the program will be 

strengthened to make type A corporations more economically 

viable in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a type A LSVCC (labour-sponsored venture 

capital corporation), Mr. Speaker, is a broadly based 

investment corporation sponsored by a labour union or group 

of labour unions which invests in capital raised from investors 

into a number of different eligible businesses. There are also 

type B corporations or single-purpose LSVCC corporations and 

national corporations. 

 

This Bill was prepared after extensive consultation with 

various government departments, unions, industry, and other 

interested users of the programs. Mr. Speaker, this Bill will 

permit type A corporations to raise capital from any resident of 

Saskatchewan instead of only employees in the province. 

 

It also increases the maximum amount of equity that type A 

corporations can raise to $10 million annually, with the 

maximum aggregate consideration of $35 million to be 

prescribed in the regulations. 

 

These amendments, Mr. Speaker, will enhance the ability of 

Saskatchewan corporations to raise equity capital which will 

create, protect, and maintain jobs, as well as allowing 

corporations to diversify their activities. They will also make it 

more possible for type A corporations which will ensure the 

capital raised from Saskatchewan residents is invested into 

Saskatchewan businesses to create Saskatchewan jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now present The Labour-sponsored Venture 

Capital Corporations Amendment Act for second reading. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Labour-sponsored 

venture capital corporations have been in existence for a 

considerable period of time, Mr. Speaker, and were initiated by 

the Conservative government when they were involved in 

running the province. And I agreed with the concept at that 

time. 

Mr. Speaker, we are going to take a serious look at some of the 

amendments to see whether they flow with the benefits 

provided to the people who are involved in it, and whether the 

security risks are reduced or in fact enhanced by and whoever 

the security is held by, and is the risk greater for the 

government or is it reduced; is it greater for the individuals 

involved in it or is it being reduced. And that is what we're 

going to take a serious look at and we'll be discussing through 

the debate that follows. 

 

I just want to say that and then move the adjournment of 

debate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 32 — An Act to amend The Family Maintenance 

Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise today 

to move second reading of The Family Maintenance 

Amendment Act, 1993. These amendments resolve issues 

which have arisen since The Family Maintenance Act was 

passed respecting maintenance for offspring over the age of 18 

years. 

 

A new section is proposed dealing with maintenance for these 

young people. If one parent is supporting such a son or 

daughter because they are unable to support themselves 

because of illness, disability, or other cause, a maintenance 

application may be made by that parent to require the other 

parent to contribute to the support of that son or daughter. This 

obligation will not extend to step-parents. And the Minister of 

Social Services will not be able to make the application on 

behalf of these young people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these amendments address a number of concerns 

that have been raised about the current provisions. By adopting 

the federal Divorce Act wording, they ensure that children of 

parents who have never been married will be treated in an 

equivalent manner to children of divorced parents. 

 

They allay the concerns of adults with disabilities and their 

parents that the government intended to use the Act to reduce 

the social assistance benefits available to these young people. 

The government did not so intend and these amendments make 

that clear. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Family Maintenance Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This Bill I will 

move to adjourn. I just want to say a couple of things though 

before that, and that is that these are very serious concerns that 

need to be addressed. They are the evolution of the 

maintenance family . . . or The Family Maintenance Act, the 

evolution of it, and the evolvement of it is an important part of 

an ongoing society. And I think that we need to take a 

consistent look; we need to take a look that progresses along as 

society moves. 



April 5, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 849 

Our critic for the family maintenance isn't here today, so I'm 

going to adjourn debate, and we will allow him to have those 

words to say to you and what his concerns are later on. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 33 — An Act respecting Security Interests in 

Personal Property and making Consequential and Related 

Amendments to Certain Other Acts 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise today 

to move second reading of The Personal Property Security Act, 

1993. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1980 this Legislative Assembly enacted The 

Personal Property Security Act in an effort to consolidate the 

regulation of all personal property security transactions into 

one comprehensive piece of legislation. This legislation was at 

the forefront of innovation in this technically complex area of 

the law. It served as a model for subsequent legislation in 

Alberta and Manitoba as well as for the Uniform Personal 

Property Security Act prepared by the Uniform Law 

Conference of Canada. 

 

Notwithstanding this apparent success, the time has now come 

to modernize this legislation. Alberta and British Columbia 

have recently introduced third-generation personal property 

security legislation to address certain legislative oversights and 

to reflect evolving commercial practices. 

 

In addition, the final report of the Law Reform Commission of 

Saskatchewan recommends a new personal property security 

Act because of the desirability of substantially uniform 

personal property security legislation in western Canada and 

the need to modernize our Act to address certain policy 

inconsistencies. 

 

In the last session of this Assembly, this Act was introduced as 

a first reading Bill to allow the widest possible consultation 

with interested parties. That has happened, Mr. Speaker. The 

Bill that I am introducing today reflects the final report of the 

Law Reform Commission and includes certain minor 

amendments which were made as the result of consultations 

conducted over the past winter and spring. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in general terms this legislation has the following 

purposes: to modernize the existing Act to reflect evolving 

business practices; to harmonize our Act with the personal 

property security law of western Canadian jurisdictions; to 

accommodate intended innovations in computer technology to 

offer remote computer access and registration to clients; and to 

address judicial decisions inconsistent with the intended policy 

of The Personal Property Security Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the enactment of this legislation will ensure that 

Saskatchewan continues to be at the forefront of personal 

property security legislation in Canada. Mr. Speaker, I move 

second reading of An Act respecting Security Interests in 

Personal Property. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, this Act has a lot of 

implications and ramifications in relating to many and various 

kinds of security instruments and relating to personal property. 

 

And I've looked through it — part of it — already, Mr. 

Speaker, and it's very complex. And I know that the minister 

will be answering a lot of questions in Committee of the Whole 

in this one in regard to the amendments that he's making and 

adjustments he's making. 

 

And I'm going to move adjournment of debate today so that our 

critic will have an opportunity to lay some of these things 

before you, and we will review them in Committee of the 

Whole as well. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd move adjournment. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 41 — An Act respecting the Financial 

Administration of the Government of Saskatchewan 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 

second reading of Bill No. 41, An Act respecting the Financial 

Administration of the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

This is a new Bill, Mr. Speaker. While many of the existing 

provisions have been retained, this Bill makes substantial 

improvements to government accountability. The most 

significant of this is the adoption of accrual accounting. As part 

of the government's commitment to restore open and 

accountable government, the government agreed to adopt 

accrual accounting in 1993-94. The proposed changes in this 

Bill give the government the authority to make this significant 

accountability improvement. 

 

The adoption of accrual accounting satisfies a major 

recommendation of the Financial Management Review 

Commission. In addition, the Public Sector Accounting and 

Auditing Committee of the Canadian Institute of Chartered 

Accountants and for several years the Provincial Auditor have 

recommended that the government adopt accrual accounting. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the switch to the accrual basis of accounting puts 

the province in line with and in some instances ahead of how 

other jurisdictions are accounting. Currently eight other 

provinces are using accrual accounting, and some of these 

provinces have been doing so for more than a decade. The 

adoption of accrual accounting also brings Saskatchewan in 

line with the accounting practices used by businesses and 

responsible governments around the world. 

 

The government and the public will both benefit from the 

adoption of accrual accounting. The major benefits of accrual 

accounting are that it provides a more accurate description of 

the province's financial position at the end of the year; reports 

financial obligations as expenses as soon as the obligations are 



850 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 1993 

made — today's obligation's can no longer be recorded as 

future costs; it enhances management's ability to make sound 

financial decisions; and it holds the government more 

accountable for how tax dollars are spent. In short, it means the 

government giving away or tearing up its credit card. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another key accountability change concerns the 

financial statements of the government. Prior to 1992 the 

Public Accounts only contained the Consolidated Fund 

financial statements. As you are aware, in response to a 

recommendation of the Financial Management Review 

Commission, summary financial statements were included in 

the March 31, 1992 Public Accounts. 

 

Through this Bill a requirement to prepare and include 

summary financial statements in the Public Accounts of the 

province is being entrenched in law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, various sections of The Revenue and Financial 

Services Act have been moved into this Act. The sections 

dealing with the powers and duties of the Provincial 

Comptroller and the Public Employees Benefits Agency are 

now included in this Act. This Act will now include all matters 

related to financial administration of the government. The 

Revenue and Financial Services Act will contain only issues 

related to tax collection. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to the major accountability 

improvements, this Bill makes a number of minor policy and 

housekeeping changes to enhance the financial processes of the 

government. Two examples of these are: first, changing the 

name of the government's operating fund from the 

Consolidated Fund to the General Revenue Fund. This 

amendment will ensure that there is no confusion between the 

General Revenue Fund and the summary or consolidated 

financial statements. Secondly, providing authority for the 

government to bank with trust companies — this is an 

important amendment for trust companies because they will 

now have the same status as a chartered bank when it comes to 

dealing with the government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill demonstrates that the government's 

commitment to open and accountable government is ongoing. 

These changes will come into force on the day to be fixed by 

proclamation by the Lieutenant Governor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act respecting the 

Financial Administration of the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And to the 

members opposite I notice that there was quite a bit of 

discussion from the minister's comments dealing with accrual 

accounting. I know that chartered accountants and auditors 

across the province and across Canada and other places are 

going to that 

method of accounting, and it definitely makes sense to move 

that way. 

 

The minister said that government benefits from this 

accounting practices, and I hope that the consumer of 

government and the user of these funds will also get the 

benefit. I know that the critic for the finances of this province 

will want to have a lot more to say about this and we'll 

probably discuss it very firmly and intensely with the Minister 

of Finance. And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I would 

have leave of the Assembly to return to ministerial statements. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

World Curling Champions 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the 

members of the opposition allowing us to revert to ministerial 

statements. 

 

This is a very important occasion for the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, as I rise today to honour the 1993 

women's curling champions. I know all members will want to 

join with me in congratulating them here in the House today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, after winning the 

Scott Tournament of Hearts in Brandon last month, skip Sandra 

Peterson and her team won the honour of representing Canada 

at the world championships in Geneva, Switzerland. 

 

Thousands of Saskatchewan fans watched the championship, 

cheering on Sandra and her rink mates. We couldn't be more 

proud of their outstanding performance, and commend them for 

the hard work and dedication that led to this important 

achievement. 

 

Their victory became doubly sweet for all Canadians when 

Russ Howard and his Ontario team captured the men's world 

curling title as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of all Saskatchewan people, I want to 

extend warmest congratulations to Sandra Peterson and her 

Callie rink mates, Jan Betker, Joan McCusker, Marcia 

Gudereit, and the team's fifth, Anita Ford. 

 

I'm sure all members will want to join with me in extending 

congratulations and best wishes to Sandra and the Canada team 

on their outstanding accomplishments. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 5, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 851 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And yes, 

Government House Leader, the opposition certainly wants to 

join in with you and other members of this House in extending 

our congratulations to Sandra Peterson and her rink, and to 

Russ Howard and his rink. 

 

And if I recall correctly, some of the comments made on TV, 

Mr. Speaker, this has not occurred since 1989, where there was 

literally a clean sweep of the curling throughout the world. And 

I think that's something to be very, very proud of, even though 

Sandra did beat in the final game, a former Reginian as well. 

The skip of the other rink was also from Regina at one point. 

 

And Sandra, at the same time, Mr. Speaker, is a native of the 

Biggar area, which is my neck of the woods. And after this 

victory, I can certainly imagine what Biggar is going to be 

saying now on their sign — we are now even Biggar, with a 

person like this coming from there. 

 

So I was certainly very pleased, having skipped a few games in 

my life too, Mr. Speaker. I really could feel for Sandra when 

that last shot was not necessary because I missed a lot of big, 

important last shots. But it was a good idea that the game 

turned out as it did. And we have something to be very, very 

proud of in this province at this time, Mr. Speaker; indeed all 

of Canada. So I want to join with the Government House 

Leader in extending the official opposition's best wishes as 

well. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Does the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone have leave? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thanks to 

members of the Assembly. 

 

I too would like to add my heartiest congratulations to those 

expressed by the government and the official opposition. I 

listened to the interview this morning with Sandra Peterson and 

her attitude and that exemplified by her team is one that should 

be emulated by us all — to not take anything for granted and to 

make sure that one puts one's best effort forward at all times. 

So team Peterson is truly a tremendous model for our province 

and country and I think we've all expressed how very, very 

proud we are of them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before we move to another item, I just want 

to remind members that this was really not a ministerial 

statement. It was a statement that a member wanted to make by 

leave, and that can be done at any time. It's not a ministerial 

statement. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

Bill No. 4 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 4 — An Act 

respecting Local Improvements in Urban and Northern 

Municipalities and to Effect Certain Consequential 

Changes be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It has been a few 

days since we first addressed this Bill but I'm sure that those 

members that are interested in the subject matter of this Bill 

will recall that we went into some length and depth on the 

things that we felt that weren't exactly the best in the Bill. 

 

There are numerous things in here. As people can see, the Bill 

is very long. But it does a lot of housekeeping types of things 

throughout it. Some of the implications in the Bill probably are 

more fearful than the actual housekeeping parts of it. The 

attempt by this administration, Mr. Speaker, to take over a 

dictatorial kind of control on behalf of each of the ministers of 

the Crown is probably the most objectionable part of these 

types of Bills. I think we outlined that to some extent the other 

day. 

 

We also went through the Bill to quite a bit of an extent in 

terms of analysing what our feelings are about the intent and 

the direction that we are taking the province with these Bills. 

 

So the reality being then that having made those remarks and 

the fact that they are in Hansard for those people that are really 

curious about what we said, they can get the Hansards back out 

and read those. 

 

So rather than to repeat all of that, I want to say that there are a 

lot of things that we will want to question the minister on. And 

because we need to get answers rather that just dialogue, we 

are going to be suggesting that we allow this Bill to carry on to 

the next stage of the process so that we can get into the 

questioning part of it. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 5 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 5 — An Act to 

amend The Planning and Development Act, 1983 be now 

read a second time. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 5 is very 

much similar in its content and approach as far as principles are 

concerned. There's quite a bit of housekeeping involved in it, 

and yet at the same time we did note that that same trend that I 

mentioned earlier is evident in all of the Bills. 

 

There is seemingly a rather heavy-handed push by 



852 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 1993 

government to achieve more and more control and more and 

more power for individual ministers. We believe that this has 

gone beyond the point of good government. We believe that 

this has gone beyond the point of being beneficial to the 

taxpayers and to the citizens of our province. 

 

And we make note of this fact publicly here so that people will 

realize that we haven't missed what's going on, but realizing of 

course at the same time, Mr. Speaker, that there's very little that 

we in a small opposition can actually do in the long run to stop 

this trend until we of course get to another election. 

 

We feel that we must then go on to the point in the process of 

legislation where we can get answers, where we can pose our 

questions and get the ministers to explain in detail what exactly 

it is that they're saying so that we can get on the record for 

those people that want to look back on to Hansard to find out 

what the intention of the Bill is rather than just the actual 

writing. 

 

Because sometimes as life goes by, people who find 

themselves in conflict with an interpretation of an Act will 

come back to Hansard to find out what the minister has put in 

his words of the general intention of the Bill to be. And it will 

be important for us to achieve that goal of getting the minister's 

explanation so that the spirit of the law and the intention of the 

law, as explained by the minister, will be apparent to the people 

who need to know those kind of things. 

 

Having gone through the Bill to some extent on our last 

occasion when we discussed it, leads me to think that those 

people who want to know what our views were, should in fact 

be able to do the same thing. They can go back in Hansard 

again and read up on it. 

 

And rather than to take a lot of time of the Assembly today to 

repeat myself, I think in the interests of good government and 

in the interests of showing the government side that the 

opposition wants this administration to achieve some direction 

in getting some work done . . . We want them to be accountable 

and we want to ask those questions, but we also want to show a 

spirit of cooperation. And in that spirit of cooperation, we're 

not going to dwell on this matter further today but will allow it 

to pass on into the next stage of government so that we can ask 

the questions next time. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 8 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 8 — An Act to 

amend The Uniform Building and Accessibility Standards 

Act and to make Related Amendments to Certain Other 

Acts be now read a second time. 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We've already 

discussed this Bill to a certain extent. There are a number of 

changes in here which we do have some concerns about. And 

some of these changes, while they may appear fairly frivolous, 

are going to be expensive to the government, particularly when 

they're just changing names. 

 

There's also some implications for the buildings owners of this 

province that everyone needs to be aware of. But we feel that 

we can bring forward those concerns and hopefully the 

government will answer the questions when we pose them in 

Committee of the Whole. So I propose, Mr. Speaker, that we 

allow this Bill to go to committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

(1500) 

Bill No. 9 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 9 — An Act to 

amend The Emergency Planning Act be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I did want to say 

just a few words about Bill 9 before we allow it to go on. 

 

Here we've got a situation that is becoming evident again with 

this administration, Mr. Speaker, that is unnecessary, totally 

unnecessary. What this Bill, a large part of it, does is change 

the name of our EMO (Emergency Measures Organization) 

system; and to change the name and to cause all of our 

residents now to have to try to think of a new word or a new 

term or a new expression to describe something that they've 

become used to over many, many years gone by. To do that 

without any actual real benefit coming to the people seems to 

me to be a confusion that is unnecessary and causes people to 

have less esteem within our own province and within 

themselves. 

 

Something like EMO has almost become as synonymous with 

certain things that happen in our society as, say, the RCMP, 

Royal Canadian Mounted Police. That term is know by 

everyone. It's got pride and respect because everybody knows it 

and understands it. 

 

EMO is the same thing — Emergency Measures Organization. 

Everybody's known that since I can't remember how far back. 

And all of a sudden a government decides that this explanation 

of a whole process that we are used to in our society, this 

explanation is no longer to be with us or to be used. We are 

now going to call it something new. 

 

And why? So that this government can brag that they started 

something new when obviously an emergency measures 

organization can never been anything different than what we've 

done in the past. It's an 



April 5, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 853 

organization to take care of emergencies. 

 

We have structures, all kinds of things taken care of here that 

are taken care of and evolved through necessity. And yet we 

now say we're going to go to the trouble of trying to re-educate 

everybody to learn and know a new title for something that has 

been around for many, many years. 

 

It seems like such a waste of time and such a waste of money. 

Everything that has EMO on it will now have to be painted 

over and a new sign put on it. All of the books, all of the 

literature will have to be destroyed. How many millions of 

dollars will it cost simply to entertain the whim of somebody in 

this government who decides that we want to have a new name 

on EMO. 

 

Millions of dollars just squandered and wasted away, and we 

stand in this Assembly day after day listening to this 

administration telling us how hard up we are, how we can't do 

the things that we should be doing because we don't have the 

money. We can't have prescription drugs for sick people 

because we're broke, but we've got millions of dollars to 

change the name of EMO and to change all of the literature, all 

of the documentation, all of the signs. And for what? 

 

It's a total, absolute waste of money. Not to mention the 

confusion that it puts into the people's minds having to now, 

every time they refer to anything to do with these kinds of 

problems, thinking of a new name and trying then to relate 

back and explain to everybody, but what we really mean is the 

old EMO system. 

 

Why don't we just leave our hands off of those things that aren't 

broken and stop trying to fix them? We don't need to fix this. 

It's not broken. There's nothing really wrong here. Changing 

some of the problems within the Bill, well I mean 

housekeeping is housekeeping. It's natural; it will be an 

ongoing process and that's the way a democratic society is, Mr. 

Speaker. And that's okay. We don't mind seeing some 

housekeeping done and some updating brought about. 

 

But to change the name, and then at the same time to once 

again have this Bill as the other ones I talked about earlier 

today — and it's a general trend now through almost everything 

that's done — there is this trend to try to bring about more 

power for the minister in charge. And that's really what it's all 

about. 

 

And it's extremely objectionable that we find ourselves in a 

situation where each minister is becoming a dictator in his own 

right. That goes against the very fundamental basis of a good 

democracy. The dictatorial control by a minister is not only not 

necessary in order to achieve the things you need to achieve, 

but it takes away from the very essence of the parliamentary 

process that we are working under in this Assembly. 

 

If a minister has dictatorial control through legislation to do 

whatever he pleases, why will we need a 

legislature after a while? In fact it will also follow true that you 

won't need the legislature because it'll be circumvented. The 

ministers simply will take every controversial issue, wait until 

the Assembly is no longer in session, and then in those days 

when people are most likely to all be somewhere on holiday or 

not paying attention, you slip your ministerial order into effect 

and you make the changes that you want to make that might 

otherwise have been debated and changed in a proper 

democratic forum. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, there are some very, very sinister things 

going on in these Bills. And yet to stay here all day debating 

that part of it and to talk about it for ever isn't going to change 

that. If the people want to maintain and have a democracy in 

this province, they will have to be aware of what's happening 

and make that change in the next election. 

 

And so again, with the spirit of cooperation, we will allow this 

Bill to continue into the next stages of government, but we 

want the people to know that we do it very reluctantly and we 

do not like what the government is doing. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 7 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No. 7 — An Act 

respecting Social Workers be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we 

discussed earlier when this Bill came forward, this Bill deals 

with the establishment of a professional body for social 

workers. And while we feel that is a good idea in itself, we do 

have some concerns as to how it will be implemented and 

administered. 

 

This new professional body should be able to police itself, Mr. 

Speaker, and we hope that it will in fact be able to do so. But 

our concerns include who will be allowed to join such an 

organization and at what cost. What will the fees be, and will 

these fees be paid by the government for those social service 

workers within the government's employment, or will they be 

deducted from that person's pay? 

 

There are various other professional organizations across this 

province such as the SMA (Saskatchewan Medical 

Association) which are allowed to police themselves, and this 

is the proper manner in which to do it. 

 

The member from Arm River would have liked to have been 

able to join this debate on this particular Bill but is again 

receiving medical attention this week. 

 

One thing that's very interesting though, Mr. Speaker, is that 

the Social Services' budget since October 1991 has gone up by 

$119 million — $119 million, Mr. Speaker, when most areas of 

this province are 



854 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 1993 

receiving cuts. 

 

So when the professional body is put in place for social service 

workers, will they also be ensuring that the province receives 

value for its dollar spent? And I believe that's very important, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We wish to ask further questions on this and we will do so in 

committee, so we are prepared to allow this to move on to 

committee, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Interim Supply 

 

The Chair: — Order. The business before the committee is the 

motion moved by the Minister of Finance: 

 

 Resolved that a sum not exceeding $340,881,000 be granted 

to Her Majesty on account for the twelve months ending 

March 31, 1994. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I wonder, Madam 

Minister, one thing I neglected to ask you the other day in our 

short questions, is if in this one-twelfth Appropriation Bill and 

the money that you've allocated for your department to do 

analysis and that type of thing, if you have any costs included 

here for a further issue of the Saskatchewan savings bond 

which you promoted soon after the budget last year and which I 

presume that the government will be doing once more, and if 

you have allocated any funding for the development and 

promotion of another savings bond issue. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, thank you very 

much for that question. We have announced that we are going 

to issue Saskatchewan savings bonds again this year but we 

don't anticipate any costs associated with that to be accrued in 

the month of April. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — I wonder, Madam Minister, just as a point of 

interest if you could remind the House of what the return was 

on that particular instrument last year and are you expecting 

similar types of returns in the coming budget year. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, the return last year 

was 7 per cent on the annual basis. We sold 567 million of 

them last year. We anticipate issuing them in June this year. 

The rate will be determined closer to the time in light of what 

market rates are. We're estimating $250 million in sales this 

year. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — I wonder, Madam Minister, if you could 

enlighten us as to why you think that your return will be half of 

last year and maybe a ballpark — given some of the projections 

that you made in your budget analysis of rates, I think you've 

set a 9 per cent rate for 

yourself as far as borrowing across the piece in government — 

I wonder if you could give us a ballpark figure of where you 

think those rates might come in at. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, in response to that 

question, $250 million is a conservative estimate but we want 

to be cautious in what we're estimating. It depends on the 

nature of the issue. 

 

The short-term rates right now are about 7 per cent; long-term 

rates are about 9 per cent. Because these instruments tend to be 

short term in nature, we will tend to be closer to the short-term 

rate, but we want to leave that issue of the rate open because 

rates are falling. So we want to reserve judgement on the final 

number there. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I think last 

year you used about the same projection of around that 200 to 

250 million on the bond, and then you were pleasantly 

surprised when it went to the level that it did. Would your 

budget analysis that you have been doing indicate that the 

Saskatchewan economy is strong enough to go to that upper 

end again if people are so inclined? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, last year the 

estimate was 150 million. This was uncharted waters. We had 

no idea what to expect. We do estimate 250 million, but you 

have to remember as well that we've already sold $567 million 

worth. And we don't expect significant cashing in of those 

particular bonds. So it's difficult to know exactly what the 

limits are in Saskatchewan for that particular market. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I wonder if 

you could tell me — last year you closed at seven on your issue 

— what the spread was at the time vis-a-vis prime and give me 

an indication what prime is at this year. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, all that we know is 

that it was close to prime. But I can get that number for you 

and we'll have it for you by tomorrow. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 

Minister, the Government of Saskatchewan borrows various 

amounts of money in different market-places on an ongoing 

basis and you break that up into different categories. You have 

short-term borrowing and long-term borrowing. I don't know if 

the . . . sometimes I think the Crowns do what they call 

mid-term or mid-length borrowing. 

 

Madam Minister, has the Government of Saskatchewan been in 

the market-place recently for any significant amounts? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — The most recent issue was $250 

million U.S. (United States) which was to replace SaskTel, 

SaskPower issues. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Madam Minister, has the . . . or 



April 5, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 855 

maybe I should ask first, could you share with the House what 

the rates were that this last issue with the 250,000 U.S. was? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — The rate was seven and a quarter, 

all in U.S. funds. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — And what was the exchange on that, Madam 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, it was in the 

neighbourhood of 79. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Madam Minister, has the Government of 

Saskatchewan borrowed in Deutsche Marks to a significant 

amount in the last little while? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, yes, we had an issue 

recently that was in the German mark and in Deutsche Marks. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Madam Minister, could you tell us what the 

rate was on the Deutsche Mark buy? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — The amount involved was 154 

million Canadian. The rate was 9.055 all in cost Canadian 

dollars. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Madam Minister, would that be considered 

long-term borrowing or short term? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, medium — it was a 

10-year issue. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Madam Minister, given that the Deutsche 

Mark has remained relatively strong compared to other 

currencies over the last period of time and that you have 

entered into a fairly long-time agreement here for nearly 10 per 

cent Canadian, why would you go to the market for that 

amount when you're anticipating offering Saskatchewan people 

7 or less to our market-place here? It seems to me that that's 

very expensive money given that you have access to U.S. funds 

and Saskatchewan funds at a lot lower rates. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, first of all I want to 

clarify something. It has a swap involved, so there's no 

currency exposure; that is, we are not at any risk if the currency 

fluctuates, it's swapped right into Canadian dollars. The other 

thing that has to be considered is you have to compare it to 

what's available at that particular time in Canada. 

 

And what you have to do is you have to diversify the 

borrowing so that some of it is 5, some of it is 10, some of it is 

15, some of it is 20, so that they come due at different times. So 

in light of that, this was very attractive. This was a very 

attractive opportunity. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well I can appreciate, Madam Minister, that 

you wish to diversify your market approach but I would 

consider 10 per cent Canadian, given the expectation of 

Saskatchewan investors particularly, whether it's GICs 

(guaranteed investment certificate), RRSPs (registered 

retirement savings plan) 

. . . I mean you can go across the piece here and I would think 

that you could offer just about any instrument available out 

there today at three points less than what you've paid with 

Deutsche Marks at nine five five Canadian and be able to offer 

people just a heck of a deal. 

 

So I'm wondering when, if you expect this to be such a good 

deal and it's convertible, when you'll be doing this conversion 

back to Canadian funds? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, I want to clarify that 

again. The conversion has already occurred. This is in 

Canadian funds. There's no foreign currency risk involved. But 

I want to make the distinction. This money is locked in for 10 

years, so therefore it's worth it to pay a somewhat higher 

interest rate relative to when you just have money locked in for 

one year. The interest rate . . . this is not as an attractive 

proposition for the government because we don't have the 

security that we have that money for that period of time at that 

particular rate. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Madam Minister, you said on the 250 

million U.S. it was seven and a quarter U.S. all in. What was 

the term on that? What was the length of time? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — It was a 15-year issue. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Is that particular amount of money 

convertible at any time, Madam Minister, back into Canadian 

funds? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, it would be 

convertible through a swap at any time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Madam Minister, given your projections 

here in the budget and the, obviously the borrowings that you're 

into, are you basing some of your budget projections on the 

fact that the Canadian dollar is slightly undervalued? Would 

that be a reasonable statement to make? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, I would refer the 

member opposite to page 29. What we're assuming throughout 

is that the Canadian dollar will be 81 cents U.S., but also on 

page 51 we're assuming that the majority of our borrowings are 

going to be in Canadian dollars. 

 

So that's not . . . that 81 cent figure has no direct relationship to 

our estimates as far as the deficit and the borrowing goes. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well, Madam Minister, you must be 

projecting some value of the Canadian dollar. And I refer you 

back to page 40, where you have forecast a number of 

growth-related potentials here in saying that your budget 

numbers are smack dab on the money because these are the 

projections. 

 

Now at some place there, Madam Minister, you must have 

pegged the Canadian dollar at some value. You're buying in 

U.S., 250 million, you're buying in Deutsche Marks, you're 

saying that all of these things 



856 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 1993 

are a good buy for you at around 10 per cent Canadian over 

long term. And I would think if you're converting back into 

Canadian dollars, as you've done with the Deutsche Mark, 

immediately in a swap that you would have pegged the 

Canadian dollar at some place here. And if it's not 81, what is 

it? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, I can clarify that. 

The Canadian dollar is pegged at 80.9 for 1993. It's pegged at 

82.6 for 1994. It's pegged at 83.9 for 1995. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — For 1993 that was 80 point . . . Madam 

Minister, do you anticipate . . . My calculation is about . . . 

you're into the market in these two transactions for about $440 

million mid and long term. Do you anticipate, beyond the 

Saskatchewan savings bond, going into the market much 

beyond that in the current fiscal year? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, our borrowing 

requirements are anticipated to be 250 million Saskatchewan 

savings bonds, 275 million short-term promissory notes, 971.8 

million medium- and long-term bonds for a total of one point 

four nine six eight hundred. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Madam Minister, the short-term promissory 

notes, those will be bought in Canadian funds in Canadian 

market-place, is that your anticipation? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, that's correct. 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Madam Minister, given some of your 

rhetoric during the budget process here about how we shouldn't 

be going and borrowing money from these other jurisdictions, I 

still don't understand how you can quite square paying 10 per 

cent in U.S., paying 10 per cent in Germany when you're 

saying to Saskatchewan people that you aren't going to have 

the opportunity to participate beyond $250 million here, that 

you'll go into the Canadian market-place above 9 per cent for 

your short-term promissory, and that you will go 

internationally for around 10 per cent on longer-term stuff. 

 

Wouldn't you consider, Madam Minister, re-evaluating the type 

of package that you might put together for Saskatchewan 

people, given that today at the bank on savings rates that 

they're probably between 4 and 5 per cent return on investment, 

that there isn't an opportunity here for Saskatchewan people to 

participate in Government of Saskatchewan financing beyond 

what you're anticipating for them? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, I want to clarify 

that. It doesn't mean that they can only buy 250 million. If the 

projection for last year was 150 million, this is just the 

projection; this is the estimate. So we're estimating that they 

will buy 250 million. Last year we estimated that they would 

buy 150 million. 

It doesn't mean that if they want to purchase more that they will 

not be able to, because indeed they can. Last year, although we 

estimated 150 million, they in fact bought 567 million. 

 

Just with respect to the rates, as I said before, we haven't 

locked in any rate. But there is a difference between somebody 

committing to give you money for 10 years, and you have that 

assurance and you have that guarantee, and so that if rates go 

up they can't pull the money out. 

 

Then there's a different situation between somebody giving you 

money for 10 years and somebody giving you money for one 

year, but we have not fixed the terms and conditions for this 

particular Saskatchewan savings bonds issue. And I can assure 

you, we will do everything we can to encourage people to 

invest in their own province. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well, Madam Minister, I know some people 

that would take your 10 per cent for 10 years at the drop of a 

hat. There is a lot of money in Saskatchewan savings accounts 

and investments that are at a heck of a lot less rate than this that 

would be very happy to have a 10 per cent yield on investment 

over the next 10 years. And I suspect they would subscribe to 

this in overwhelming numbers. 

 

Madam Minister, I don't think it's fair for you to criticize the 

past administration for borrowing money as they did in Swiss 

francs and in Deutsche Marks and in American funds, turn 

around and do it yourself at 10 per cent, and then say to 

Saskatchewan people that we aren't going to do this any more, 

that we're going to borrow locally, but we're going to make 

sure that the rates are much lower than what we offer the 

international investment house. 

 

No one in Saskatchewan has ever had the opportunity to invest 

in a 10-year instrument at 9.55. You simply haven't offered it to 

them. 

 

And I think you're being a little bit hypocritical blaming the . . . 

saying to the former administration, you went out and 

borrowed money in all of these different markets places. We 

turn around and do the same thing, we do it at high interest 

rates, and yet we don't offer them to Saskatchewan people. And 

I think you offer us an explanation of why you would say that 

politically when you're doing it yourself, and then turn around 

and just do the opposite when you're in government. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, several points here 

to clarify. I certainly have personally criticized the members 

opposite for many things. I am nothing on record as far as your 

borrowing and where you borrowed money. So what you're 

referring to there, I have no knowledge of. I have never made 

any comments on where you borrowed the money. Lots of 

comments on what you did with the money after it was 

borrowed and about the amount you were willing to borrow, 

but nothing on the record as far as where. 

 

I want to clarify these numbers. What we're talking 



April 5, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 857 

about is 9.05. So not 10, not close to it — 9.05 and seven and a 

quarter U.S. 

 

Then the final thing I want to clarify is we haven't said that 

we're not going to give people the opportunity to participate in 

a longer-term issue. What we have said is that if it tends to be 

in the short term, then the rates will be close to the short term. 

If it's in the longer term, the rates will reflect the longer term. 

 

If indeed there is a belief that there's a market in Saskatchewan 

for 10-year locked-in bonds, we certainly have no problem 

responding to that particular demand. As I said, we will do 

everything we can to encourage Saskatchewan people to invest 

in their own economy. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well, Madam Minister, I unfortunately . . . 

we refer you back to the closing budget speech made by the 

Premier, where he did make in his statement about 

Saskatchewan people borrowing money under the previous 

administration from all of these bad European and American 

folks, and the New York banks, and all of that type of thing. 

Simple fact of the matter is, Madam Minister, that by making 

your projections unrealistically low, it always looks better for 

you politically when the issue is oversubscribed, number one. 

 

And the other thing is that I think that you are being 

hypocritical with Saskatchewan people — very hypocritical. 

These opportunities to invest at higher rates have been 

available to your government ever since the last budget. And 

yet you've gone into the market-place, okay, better than 9 per 

cent, when no one in Saskatchewan has had any opportunity 

even close to that. 

 

I remember when the potash bonds became available. And the 

potash bonds were at a certain rate and there was 42,000 

Saskatchewan people subscribed to potash bonds. Last year 

38,000 people subscribed to your Saskatchewan savings bonds 

issue and you said it was a hallmark issue that so many 

Saskatchewan people would put their faith in our province. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, that's 4,000 less than bought potash 

bonds, which were a fairly long-range instrument, were tied to 

the privatization of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 

And in fact there were more people bought into that than into 

your Saskatchewan savings bonds. And you criticized that 

roundly. And yet the rate offered on potash bonds, Madam 

Minister, was a lot more realistic to the market-place than what 

you have offered today. 

 

No, it was far more realistic, Madam Minister, to what the 

actual market-place was doing. And I think that you've been 

short-changing Saskatchewan people, all in the name of 

participation and politics, that you have short-changed 

Saskatchewan people roundly. 

 

I'd further bet you, Madam Minister, that the 38,000 people that 

bought Saskatchewan savings bonds last year are probably 

many of the same thousands of people that bought 

Saskatchewan potash bonds; that 

they would be one and the same. 

 

So, Madam Minister, given the fact that the same amount or 

greater bought potash bonds at a higher rate, which was a lot 

closer to what the market really was, don't you agree that 

maybe you've been short-changing Saskatchewan people a little 

bit with what you've been offering them in the way of them 

participating in our economy? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, now I am going to 

severely criticize the previous government. They talk about 

their handling the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. It is a 

black mark on the history of this province. 

 

If you think you're getting a benefit to Saskatchewan people by 

selling off shares in a corporation at under their value so that 

the vast majority of the people of Saskatchewan find out that 

the assets that they had sold were sold at fire-sale prices so a 

very small group of people who could afford to buy those 

shares benefited and the taxpayer of Saskatchewan lost over 

$300 million — if that's what you're talking about — no, we're 

not participating in that approach at all. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well you see, Madam Minister, we get the 

same old dogmatic speech out of you people that we always get 

in here. The very fact that you had a book-value number on the 

Potash Corp which had no relation to the actual value of the 

creature, the fact that the shares went up in price afterwards 

means that Saskatchewan people had the opportunity to invest 

in a Saskatchewan company, in the Government of 

Saskatchewan at a reasonable rate of return. More people in 

fact invested than in your Saskatchewan savings bonds. 

 

What I'm just simply saying to you, Madam Minister, is: give 

Saskatchewan people some confidence and give them an 

instrument to invest in that is closer to reality and let them take 

risks along with the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

My guess is, Madam Minister, that you are probably going to 

come out at less than 7 per cent on the next issue of the 

Saskatchewan savings bonds. You would give people in the 

international community much more. You would give 

Saskatchewan people less. And in fact, Madam Minister, we 

both know that all of that money — all of that money — stays 

in the province of Saskatchewan and turns around in our 

economy. 

 

So I think you have some pretty simple choices to make here. 

That you can start coming clean with Saskatchewan people 

about what it actually costs you to invest and you can say to 

them, we have an opportunity here to displace some foreign 

debt as the former administration did with potash shares, which 

was basically money borrowed in the United States of 

America, or in the case of Cameco, money borrowed in other 

places and loaned back by the government at no interest; that 

you have an opportunity to displace some of that foreign 

capital at rates favourable to Saskatchewan people over 

long-term times. And you have clearly indicated that you 

would rather play 



858 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 1993 

politics with this thing than you would with the actual helping 

out of the Saskatchewan economy. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, a couple of remarks. 

Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan shares were sold at $18 

even though Gass in his report says the government was 

advised not to sell them because the shares were going to go 

up. And in fact they managed to sell off potash of 

Saskatchewan corporation shares at $18; they're now worth $23 

— a loss to the taxpayer of over $300 million. 

 

And it was that kind of financial decision that got this province 

into the mess that it's in. And you're standing there and saying 

given the chance you'd do it again. I don't understand the 

thinking. 

 

It's an asset owned by everybody in the province and you're 

going to sell it at the lowest value to a small group of people 

who happen to have the money to afford to buy it. You're going 

to sell it at 18, even though worth 23, and you were told it was 

going up. You're going to do that and you're going to say it's in 

the best interest of the province, to benefit a small group of 

people and to cost the treasury of Saskatchewan $300 

million-plus. That's what you're saying. 

 

I would also point out exactly what the members opposite were 

saying about a year ago about the rates for the Saskatchewan 

savings bonds. What they were saying is they were criticizing 

the government because they thought we had the rate too high. 

Now this year, before we've announced a rate, they know that 

the rate is too low. Before we announced the term, they know 

that that is wrong. All I've said is that the rate will be a fair one. 

We will look at the length of time that is appropriate and we 

encourage people in Saskatchewan to invest in their economy. 

Yet somehow or another the members opposite already know 

that this is hidebound ideology and it's wrong, when I haven't 

announced anything. I can't imagine what's going to happen 

when I actually announce something. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Madam Minister, last year you didn't tell 

anyone in Saskatchewan what you were borrowing at 

internationally. I don't think any Saskatchewan person out there 

today would realize that you're borrowing in Germany and 

borrowing in the United States, borrowing all over the place at 

above 9 per cent and saying to Saskatchewan people that you 

have to accept less. 

 

Last year the government was criticized a lot because of the 

hypocrisy that they've displayed in former government 

initiatives. Madam Minister, the mortgage on my farm isn't 

paid off, and I don't own that farm until the mortgage is paid. 

The people of Saskatchewan didn't own the Potash Corporation 

of Saskatchewan. They didn't own SMDC (Saskatchewan 

Mining Development Corporation) because the mortgage 

wasn't paid. 

 

And one of the reasons, Madam Minister, that the value, that 

the value that you placed wasn't true is 

because you borrowed massive amounts of money in the U.S. 

market-place in the 1970s and then you attached a 

non-interest-bearing mortgage, a non-interest-bearing loan to 

those entities. Well you know what, Madam Minister, if my 

farm had a non-interest-bearing mortgage, I suspect that it 

would be paid off too. 

 

So don't give us this garbage about the people of Saskatchewan 

owning the Potash Corp or owning SMDC when you have 

borrowed lots of money. If I remember the rate, some of it was 

at sixteen and three-quarters. And you turned around and lent it 

to SMDC, for instance, at zero interest — at zero interest. 

 

(1545) 

 

Now, Madam Minister, did that difference between zero and 

sixteen and three-quarters just disappear into the night-time air 

of Saskatchewan? I don't think so. That's a cost that Donald 

Gass didn't talk about in his report that probably should've been 

talked about. 

 

And you did the same thing with the Potash Corp of 

Saskatchewan. You advanced hundreds of millions of dollars in 

non-interest-bearing loans when you borrowed at 11 per cent 

U.S. minimum. Now, Madam Minister, if we're going to get 

into truth and tell here, we should tell the whole truth about 

where the interest was or wasn't. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, what we are simply saying to you is, 

you have gone to the market-place already for over $400 

million, that you've gone much higher than what the average 

Saskatchewan citizen can expect for a rate of return. What I'd 

like you to give the commitment today in this interim supply 

motion is that your figures and your borrowing rate will be 

much closer to reality for Saskatchewan people, whether it be 

short term, mid term, or long term, than what you've offered in 

the past; and that you'll bring that issue forward to this 

legislature for debate at some point in the near future. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, before we leave the 

analogy with the house and farm — you may not feel you own 

your farm because it has huge mortgages on it, and other 

people may not feel that they own their house because it has a 

huge mortgage on it. But I'll tell you, your children are going to 

be awfully angry at you if you get it assessed, and they say it's 

worth $50,000 if you only wait for six months; and you say, no, 

no, no, I've got this neighbour I really like and I'm going to sell 

it to them for 35,000. That's when your kids are going to be 

mad. And that's why people in this province are angry with 

some of those transactions. 

 

Now getting on to the rates. The rates will be announced when 

the issue is forthcoming. What I would point out about last year 

is, if there was a criticism of the rates, it was that the rates were 

too high, and in fact that $567 million were sold because the 

rates were too high. 

 

So what I'm saying is we will look at the situation. We 



April 5, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 859 

will look at the length of time that we're asking people to lock 

in their money. We will look at the competitive situation and 

we will decide a rate that's appropriate. I would finally point 

out that one of the reasons we get to pay such high interest 

rates — 9.05 Canadian; seven and a quarter U.S. — is because 

of the problems we inherited from the previous administration. 

Because our credit rating is low, we end up having to pay a 

premium; we pay more. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Well, Madam Minister, that should make you 

reflect a little bit about what you paid for money when you 

bought the potash mine at sixteen and three-quarters, and never 

even took the time, Madam Minister, to think about the 

consequences of that in the economy of Saskatchewan. 

 

That, Madam Minister, was a whole lot more than you're 

crediting it for. And that, Madam Minister, is a very, very 

serious problem. That's why we have a serious problem and 

financial difficulties, and that is exactly the reason why. 

 

And if the member from Regina Rosemont wants to ask the 

minister some questions, he can go right ahead. I'll sit down 

and wait for him. But I want to say, Madam Minister, that at 

sixteen and three-quarters, which you borrowed the money at 

to buy the potash mines, did have a significant impact in the 

economy in Saskatchewan — a negative impact. 

 

And if you take and calculate, you will find that every year 

from 1971 till 1982 your cost of your government went up 

$200 million every year in a time when that was a whole lot of 

money, at a time when there was significant impact on . . . and 

sixteen and three-quarters per cent interest was very, very 

significant. 

 

I want to ask a question about a news article, a news release 

that your Minister of Agriculture had, and that he said that 

$126 million was going to be paid out in GRIP (gross revenue 

insurance program) payments. Would you explain to us and to 

this Assembly how that function works in relation to the fact 

that you only have $26 million budgeted in interim supply in 

relation to this? Have you got the rationale that you use in 

sending out $126 million and only asking us for 26? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, it's because we're 

only one of three parties involved in GRIP. The premiums 

come from the producers, the province, the federal government. 

All of those premiums are paid into a pool. The pay-out comes 

from that pool. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Well as I understand it, Madam Minister, the 

premiums are paid by the federal government, the premiums 

are paid by the provincial government, and the premiers are 

paid by the farmers . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Premiums, 

yes. The premiums of each of those participants, the two levels 

of government and the producer are all paid. Then where is the 

$26 million going? Is any of that money going into premium at 

the Sask Crop Insurance or is it all going to go? Or how does 

the Department of 

Finance handle the payment that is going to come out of Crop 

Insurance today at $126 million? I asked this last week and I 

didn't get a satisfactory answer. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, again each 

department is being allocated one-twelfth of its budget to cover 

expenses associated with the month of April. 

 

To return to the central point I keep making, it is up to the 

department how they spend that one-twelfth, whatever their 

obligations are for the month of April. Crop Insurance works 

on the same principle as GRIP; premiums are paid into a fund, 

the pay-out comes from that particular fund. 

 

Mr. Martens: — The payment come from that fund, Madam 

Minister, but the Department of Finance will issue the 

payments to Crop Insurance. Are you taking some of the 

investments that you made or other people made investments or 

you went and borrowed the money, or are you using that now 

to supply Crop Insurance with the money to provide to the 

people of Saskatchewan the 126 million you're going to spend? 

Give me the scenario that you go through in order to develop 

that process. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, the answer is 

essentially what I said before. Premiums are paid by the 

provincial government, the federal government, by farmers, 

into a separate fund. Then payments are made to the farmers 

from that fund. Whether or not some of the one-twelfth being 

allocated to the Department of Agriculture right now is going 

to help pay premiums, I don't know. That's the kind of question 

that you should ask the Department of Agriculture when you 

have them here for their estimates. 

 

But the process is one that is, as I have said twice, all 

governments or all parties — the two governments and the 

farmers — pay their premiums into a fund. The payments then 

are made from that fund. 

 

Mr. Martens: — And, Madam Minister, where does Crop 

Insurance get the $126 million for the month of April to pay 

farmers, as was announced today? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, that comes from the 

crop reinsurance fund. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Well, Madam Minister, you're making my 

point and the point that the member from Estevan has made for 

a long, long time about GRIP and where this money comes 

from. On an actuary basis over 20 years this money was 

supposed to come in and flow through on an insurance program 

to deal with reinsurance on an actuary basis, that over 20 years 

it was supposed to pay for itself. 

 

And, Madam Minister, what you're going to do now is create a 

very, very serious problem. And this problem is, Madam 

Minister, that you have now said to the federal government that 

you're going to opt out of the GRIP program in two years. You 

do not allow the farmers in the province of Saskatchewan to 

opt out at 



860 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 1993 

this point in time. You don't even allow them to opt out in two 

years. You, Madam Minister, have the authority to keep them 

in GRIP for three years. 

 

And what would the purpose be to keep them in the insurance 

program for the third year, the year beyond the two years that 

you have said that you're going to opt out in — what's the 

purpose of that, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, the member 

opposite is getting into very technical details about a program 

in the Department of Agriculture. Again what I would go over 

is this is interim supply in which general questions can be 

asked about one-twelfth of the budget allocations. 

 

If you want to get into detailed questions about particular 

programs, particularly particular programs two years in 

advance, there is an appropriate time and place for that, and 

that is when the Department of Agriculture is here going 

through the estimates. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Well, Madam Minister, I believe that the 

decision to get out of GRIP was made in your department. I 

honestly believe that from the very bottom of my soul. 

 

And your Department of Finance made the decision to get out 

of GRIP. It wouldn't have been the people in Agriculture, 

because I know the people in Agriculture and I've been 

involved with them significantly longer than you have. Not 

only did they understand the program, they knew what its 

implications and consequences were. I believe that the 

Department of Finance told you to get out. 

 

And I'm asking you, as a part of the Department of Finance's 

recommendations to the Department of Agriculture, where — I 

think it is where it happened and I want to know from you — 

did your Department of Finance recommend that you allow the 

farmers to stay . . . you force the farmers to stay in for three 

years and then collect all of the premium load back that they 

have not paid? 

 

And as I noticed in Crop Insurance in the reinsurance program, 

in the 1991 annual statement GRIP was 155 million over 

budget. So they had to go back to the reinsurance, Madam 

Minister, to get the 155 million. 

 

My estimates are — and I believe this to be accurate — that 

your Department of Finance has told Crop Insurance what the 

actuary and what the farmers are going to have to pay in so that 

they they can . . . the government can be out of the program in 

two years. And that, Madam Minister, is going to heavily 

weigh on every person in the province of Saskatchewan who's 

involved in agriculture. 

 

Madam Minister, my question to you is this. Did the minister 

. . . did the Department of Finance give you an estimate of the 

volume of dollars required to get rid of the GRIP program in 

the next two years? Have they given you an estimate of the 

volume of dollars to get rid of the program? And from that we 

will deduct 

whether the farmers' premiums are going to go up this year, 

whether they're going to go up next year to deal with that 

exactly. 

 

And that, Madam Minister, is not made out of the Department 

of Agriculture; it is not made out of Crop Insurance; it will be 

made out of the Department of Finance. And that's why we're 

asking you the question. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, that is very 

convoluted logic. You believe that the Department of Finance 

made this decision, and you believe we told the Department of 

Agriculture to do this. Now the fact that this is dead wrong 

doesn't matter. The rest of the question just goes on those 

assumptions. The Department of Finance has no power to make 

those decisions. The cabinet makes those decisions. The 

recommendations come from the departments involved and the 

analysis is done by the departments involved. 

 

The Department of Agriculture has no difficulty defending its 

decision to withdraw from GRIP because they see it — as the 

minister has said again and again — as a badly flawed 

program. This province withdrew from GRIP because the 

Department of Agriculture, the Minister of Agriculture, 

believes it's a badly flawed program that doesn't suit the 

interests of Saskatchewan farmers — based on production, not 

targeted, going to self-destruct before 1995, farmers paying 

more in premiums than they get in pay-outs. So please go back 

to the Department of Agriculture. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 

back to the question my colleague asked you. You in this 

one-twelfth have budgeted a certain amount of money. It's 

nowhere close to what the Minister of Agriculture says is 

coming on this GRIP payment in April, $126 million. 

 

Now all farmers in the province have paid . . . at least I have, 

I've paid my premium because they took it out of my first 

payment. This is the second payment due under the program. 

Now what you're saying, Madam Minister, is that there's a 

hundred million dollars coming out of the reinsurance fund 

then, that your department has come to the House for a supply 

of 26 in this one-twelfth, that you will make up the other 

hundred million out of the reinsurance fund, and I presume at 

some point in time in the other eleven-twelfths you will also 

make provision for some more money for the third payment if 

it would come in this fiscal year. 

 

Can you tell me why you would budget anything then in this 

interim supply Bill and not take the entire 126 million out of 

this reinsurance fund? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, again you're mixing 

apples and oranges. The payment to farmers does not come out 

of the allocation to the Department of Agriculture so there's no 

relationship; it's a separate fund from which payments to 

farmers come. So this is 



April 5, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 861 

just allocating to the Department of Agriculture one-twelfth of 

its annual budget. But the payments do not come from that 

budget. The premium payment, the share of the premium paid 

by the province comes from that budget, but the pay-out to the 

farmer comes from a separate fund. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — No, I understand, Madam Minister, on page 

25 that you have budgeted $94 million under gross revenue 

insurance and that will be the province's contribution to the 

premium load as far as the program goes. 

 

Now the other issue is that the province of Saskatchewan is 

liable for certain amounts of money under the program. You've 

made one payment already, 30 per cent. You're going to make a 

40 per cent payment in the month of April, and then you're 

going to make another 30 per cent payment after the pooling 

accounts close — sometime in 1994 would be my guess. 

 

That is going to require, Madam Minister, a significant amount 

of money. As you said, it's up to the Department of Agriculture 

to get their money wherever they wish. Will that sum of money 

which is due Saskatchewan farmers, will any of that be 

borrowed, or is that money already in existence in a pot? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, my understanding is 

that it already is in existence in the pool. But again, this is a 

very detailed question that should be asked of the Department 

of Agriculture. Interim supply we ask general questions about 

the overall picture of the budget. If you want detailed, technical 

questions answered, what I would suggest is that this wait till 

estimates. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Well, Madam Minister, we want to point out 

to you and to the people of Saskatchewan what crop insurance 

has always been about anyway; it's an insurance policy. And 

we always said it was an insurance policy. And there's a reason 

why insurance policies have to pay out on the basis of the risk 

and the calculations that determine comparison between the 

risk and the payments and the volume of risk and whether the 

risk is significant to make the premiums go up and all of those 

kinds of things. 

 

And we understand that, and we have said right from the 

beginning the people in the province of Saskatchewan, the 

agriculture producers in the province of Saskatchewan need to 

have some of that risk reduced. And what they ask the 

provincial government to do was to reduce that risk. And, 

Madam Minister, you're going to take and reduce this risk over 

two years and come back with nothing for the farmer except 

that he's going to have to, number one, increase his premium 

load. 

 

Have you taken into consideration in any of the studies that you 

have done in assessing whether . . . when you had made the 

decision to get out of GRIP program, have you made any 

assessments as to what the farmer is going to have to pay in 

order for you to 

break even? Are you going to have a premium load in there 

that is significantly higher than the context of what they're 

paying today? Are you going to force the farmers in the next 

two years — when their wheat is scheduled to go down in price 

— are you going to force them to have more premium load, to 

be in the program, and then try and get the money out of them 

in the first, second, or third year? Are you going to try and do 

that to them? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, this government 

announced its intention to withdraw from GRIP, because GRIP 

is a fatally flawed program. It is a program which from the 

farmers point of view will self-destruct anyway. They can 

foresee the day when their premium is going to be higher than 

their pay-outs. 

 

Our Premier said from the beginning, GRIP is going to be the 

shortest-lived long-term program in the history of 

Saskatchewan. So we're getting out of GRIP because it is a 

fundamentally flawed program. 

 

What we have said to the farmers of Saskatchewan is that there 

is a two-year period in which there will be consultations with 

them and their farm organizations and with the federal 

government about putting in place an effective safety net 

program. That's what this government has said. 

 

If you want to get into the technical details of debating GRIP 

and Crop Insurance and funds, then there is a wonderful time 

and place for that to occur, and that is during the estimates in 

the Department of Agriculture. 

 

Mr. Martens: — I have a question about . . . you talked about 

the federal government, earlier on, offloading on health care, 

offloading on social services, offloading on education, onto the 

provincial government. 

 

And I want to ask you this question: the $420 million that the 

federal government gave to GRIP in crop insurance '91-92, 

they gave this province $420 million to go into agriculture. 

And where is that going to come from in GRIP '93 and GRIP 

'94? That's what the farmers are asking us. They want to know 

where this money is going to come. 

 

And if you close the door on every program that the federal 

government has involved with the other prairie provinces, 

they're going to get the $420 million in premium load. But 

where do the farmers in Saskatchewan go? They go downhill 

all the time. 

 

The federal government has told you over and over again that 

you should put more premium in so that you get more premium 

into . . . from the taxpayers in Canada into the program. 

 

And that's where the farmers in the province of Saskatchewan 

are being short-changed everywhere you go in Saskatchewan. 

When Alberta gets the benefit, and we have to compete with 

them with federal tax dollars, it almost makes it impossible for 

us to do that. And then the people in the province of 



862 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 1993 

Saskatchewan are going to get a whole lot less this year. 

 

Will you tell this Assembly what the volume of dollars that 

your reinsurance is going to have to accommodate when you 

get a reduction in the volume of dollars coming from the 

federal government in premium load? You're going to get less 

premium from the federal government. Can you tell me what 

that difference between 420 million and what we're going to be 

expecting? Can you tell me the difference between that? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, I gather the 

members opposite are not able to go through a session without 

talking about GRIP. 

 

I would say two things to them: with respect to agriculture, the 

largest single offloading in the area of agriculture onto a 

province was the offloading accepted by the previous 

administration. In 1988 100 per cent of farm safety net 

programs were paid for by the federal government; 1993-94 

we're paying over 40 per cent. The tune of the federal offload 

in agriculture this one year alone is $220 million. 

 

Now what I would say to the member opposite is if he wants to 

get into a detailed debate on GRIP, the time and the place is 

when we get to the Department of Agriculture estimates. That's 

where the debate should occur. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thanks, Mr. Chairman. I want to go back to 

this money, Madam Minister, that's going to be paid out in the 

month of April. My calculation is that the provincial 

government's responsible for thirty-one and a half million 

dollars if you use the existing splitting formula on revenue 

insurance. 

 

Now you have said that this money is in place and that there is 

nothing in this one-twelfth here that you have to go to the 

House for in order to put that . . . that money's already in place 

in a fund. You've also said that the fund is in a deficit, that 

there's a deficit position there. Well that's one of the reasons 

that your ministers have given for getting out of it is because it 

isn't, in the words of your minister, actuarially sound and that 

you've got a deficit in place. 

 

But the fact is, Madam Minister, that the money has to come 

from somewhere. Now obviously your government has 

borrowed some money to make sure that this payment in April 

happens. Money has to come from somewhere. You're writing 

cheques and those cheques have to be honoured. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, where . . . and perhaps maybe some of 

this recent borrowing that you've done, perhaps some of that is 

going into this money that you're going to pay out in April. 

There's got to be . . . if the pool of money's there, you must 

have got it from somewhere. Could you tell us where your 

contribution to the reinsurance fund came from? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, again the member 

opposite put words in my mouth. We did not 

say we were getting out of GRIP because of a deficit. What we 

said, we're getting out of GRIP because it is a fatally flawed 

agricultural program. It does not meet the needs of farmers. It 

is going to self-destruct at any rate because farmers are going 

to be paying more in premiums than they're going to get in 

pay-outs. 

 

So with respect to where the money is coming from and what 

the details are about how the Department of Agriculture is 

going to spend the money that it's being allocated, that question 

is a question to be asked of the Department of Agriculture 

when it appears to discuss its estimates. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — That's absolutely right, Madam Minister, the 

Department of Agriculture will talk about those things. But 

they don't get money on their own. I mean there isn't an 

agricultural program out there, whether it be a livestock cash 

advance or pasture rates . . . all of those things are paid to the 

Consolidated Fund. And one of the arguments that people in 

agriculture have made for years and years and years is that, for 

instance, on the provincial pasture program, if they could have 

paid their money in, their yearly dues, to a dedicated fund, then 

that particular program would never run into any trouble 

because it would be self-supporting. 

 

But the fact is that they pay all of their money to your 

department; everything goes into the Consolidated Fund. You 

then reimburse through a budget process back to the 

Department of Agriculture. But those cheques don't go to the 

Department of Agriculture, they go to the Consolidated Fund. 

Okay? Madam Minister, the Department of Agriculture don't 

have any of their own funds. They get everything from you. 

And you in turn provide those funds through borrowing, 

through taxation, through lots of different means. 

 

The simple fact is, Madam Minister, that the money being 

allocated in the month of April to Saskatchewan farmers has to 

come from the Department of Finance. It doesn't come from the 

Department of Agriculture; it comes from your department and 

your department only. 

 

Now you may not personally have said that there's a deficit in 

the account. But I heard time and time again last summer in 

here when we debated GRIP, the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose and others saying that one of the reasons 

Saskatchewan had to get out of it was because there was going 

to be this huge deficit in the account and Saskatchewan 

couldn't afford to have this huge deficit any more, that we 

couldn't be responsible for this huge deficit that would occur in 

the account because of the way the '91 program was structured. 

 

Madam Minister, you're going to cut some cheques here for 

$126 million in the next few weeks, we hope. The money can't 

come from the Department of Agriculture; it's got to come 

from you. You must have borrowed it somewhere or gotten it 

somewhere to provide that money. All we're asking you is: how 

did you get it, and how are you going to disperse it? 



April 5, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 863 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, the Government of 

Saskatchewan will not be cutting cheques because the 

Government of Saskatchewan does not run the crop insurance 

program; it is a tripartite arrangement which there are farmers, 

federal government, provincial government. So that will not 

flow through the Department of Finance or through the 

Consolidated Fund. 

 

With respect to GRIP, why we got out of GRIP, I told you 

again and again that we got out because it was a fatally flawed 

program. But if you want to get into the debate on GRIP, what 

I suggest is that you wait till the Department and the Minister 

of Agriculture are here during estimates, and I'm sure he would 

welcome an opportunity to discuss at great length GRIP and its 

flaws. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Madam Minister, in Saturday's paper, 

Murray Mandryk writes an article about a farmer in Arcola, a 

Mr. Hookenson: 

 

 . . . particularly angry these days with the prospect of rural 

Saskatchewan hospitals closing — thinks the time has come 

for the urban-based, social democratic government in Regina 

to reassess some of these so-called traditions before rural 

Saskatchewan withers away altogether. 

 

And he talks about, Madam Minister, he talks, Madam 

Minister, about what it personally meant to him. He got $12.37 

and under GRIP '91 he'd have got $38. 

 

Now we have a very, very serious problem in this province, 

Madam Minister, and that problem is related to the very fact 

. . . You said that GRIP was flawed right from the start. Well, 

Madam Minister, I along with other individuals met at the 

request of the University of Saskatchewan. University of 

Saskatchewan professors including the now deputy minister 

were at this meeting. There was a significant amount of us. 

And the minister attended. And they gave the grading, 

government, what the opinion of the government was for '92, 

'91 and various other aspects of the revenue insurance program. 

They gave the taxpayers' perspective of it. 

 

Do you know where the problem, Madam Minister, is? And 

that is exactly what Mr. Hookenson is talking about, and the 

problem occurs, Madam Minister, in defending the farmers in 

the province of Saskatchewan. There's nobody defending them 

in your government. There's nobody defending them on the 

basis of the input that they have and the benefit that they would 

have received and the economic boost it would have been in 

the province of Saskatchewan if this insurance policy would 

have been allowed to come full circle. 

 

That, Madam Minister, is a fact. It wasn't me that did the 

assessment; it was the University of Saskatchewan, economics 

branch. And they said, 

Madam Minister . . . they gave a grading, and that grading said 

over and over again, if you talk to the farmer in the province of 

Saskatchewan, he is the one that is going to get the benefit. 

And that is a fact, Madam Minister. That was a fact 

established, and one of the reasons why we went with that is 

that we had to have some security over the long haul. 

 

Mr. Hookenson is correct in his assessment. You are taking it 

out of rural Saskatchewan. You're going to take . . . The 

premium load that the federal government was going to provide 

into the province of Saskatchewan, you are taking that 

premium load and saying, I don't want that any more. You're 

saying, okay I can reduce my liabilities in relation to the 

program because you have absolute authority. Last year you 

came into this Assembly and said, I'm going to even rule out 

these people going to court. And you, Madam Minister, stood 

in your place and voted against every farmer in the province of 

Saskatchewan, and likewise did all the rest of you. 

 

And that, Madam Minister, is causing a very, very serious 

problem, and that's what leads me to say to you that your 

estimates of the economic upturn in the economy of the 

province is all wet. It is not accurate. Your volume of dollars in 

looking at one little thing . . . One thing — check out the 

housing starts in Medicine Hat, Alberta, as compared to 

Saskatchewan, and you will find, Madam Minister, that there 

are more housing starts in the city of Medicine Hat than there 

are in Saskatchewan. 

 

Can you tell me that? Is that actually a fact? And, Madam 

Minister, can you give me that analysis? If you have that 

analysis then you've got some other analysis that we've been 

asking for also. And that, Madam Minister, is a fact. If you 

would take out FCC (Farm Credit Corporation) and Crown Life 

out of Saskatchewan, you would have been almost bankrupt of 

housing starts in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And that, Madam Minister, has caused serious concerns on our 

part in relation to the estimates that you have done in economic 

growth in the province of Saskatchewan. We don't think that 

they're there. And we see all of the indicators, as you've 

expressed them, somewhat flawed because of the high cost of 

your taxes to the province of Saskatchewan. The people can 

take their money elsewhere. People are leaving Swift Current 

day by day. People that I know are leaving. So the people that I 

don't know — and there'd be very few of them — but people 

are also leaving for Alberta. And what they're going to do, 

Madam Minister, they're going to run their business out of 

Alberta into Saskatchewan. And so that's what causes us a real 

concern. 

 

On your retail sales, Madam Minister, your sales are going 

down as we progress through the next two or three years. And 

that, Madam Minister, is also a concern of ours. 

 

Personal income is going to go up. Madam Minister, farmers in 

the province of Saskatchewan are 



864 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 1993 

having their . . . farmers in the province of Saskatchewan are 

having their incomes decline and their net incomes are 

declining faster than anything, especially when they have to 

pay higher power bills and higher gas bills and higher 

telephones rates, all of those things. Those are all going to 

decrease the economic benefit in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Madam Minister, if you take 60,000 farmers and move 

them out of the taxpaying base, that is going to have a 

significant impact. And that's why we say your numbers here as 

you have forecast for the economy of the province of 

Saskatchewan are not accurate. 

 

Are you including some of the things that I just got on the 

weekend in Grain Matters, that the wheat is not going to go 

up for the next two or three years? Have you taken that into 

consideration and the impact that that will have? As the rural 

people cannot pay their interest and that accumulates, you'll 

have less and less net return from the income tax paid by 

farmers. It will just decline on a slope that is downhill all the 

way. 

 

You don't have the income that you have said you're . . . you 

won't have the income that you said you're going to have in the 

taxes payable because people can't afford to buy the things 

today. They can't afford to buy those new vehicles. They can't 

afford to buy lumber. Lumber just doubled in price in two 

months. 

 

And so people are not going to have that confidence that they 

can say that from my earnings and from my salary I'm going to 

have that volume of income, enough to generate so that I can 

have tax payable. It's not going to be there. Your retail sales 

and your personal income are going to be less than what you've 

projected. They won't be going up at the rate you've projected. 

 

And then today, Madam Minister, you tell everybody in the 

province of Saskatchewan, tighten your belt, and you give your 

friends, the union, the SGEU, $60 million this year — $60 

million. And that comes, Madam Minister, from a statement 

that the Minister of Justice made in the Leader-Post on 

Thursday last week: every avenue was explored, Mitchell said, 

but the province's financial position dictated it couldn't offer 

public sector employees any wage increases. 

 

But, Madam Minister, it says here, it goes on to say: a 1 per 

cent raise in wages, calculated across the public sector, would 

cost the government $24 million, he says. 

 

Twenty-four million for one point. And it went up two and a 

quarter, or better than two, so that you've got 48 million plus a 

third of a . . . or a quarter of a point. So you've got another 8 

million or $6 million more than that. So you've got 56 to $60 

million that is going to come out of the economy, the growth, 

the wealth creation sector of this province, and it's going to be 

put into the public sector in the salaries to individuals. 

 

Madam Minister, this province can't afford $60 million. One 

point in E&H (education and health) gives you $60 million. 

You said the increase in the volume of the one point from 8 to 

9 per cent, and the 

change in the volume of exemptions, would collect $122 

million. Well, Madam Minister, if you only collect $90 million 

out of that because the economy is going opposite, or in a 

different direction than you're saying, you're not going to have 

the money to come pay those people in the public sector. 

 

That is a fact, Madam Minister — $24 million dollars for every 

point. You gave it . . . you've given it to SaskPower, SaskTel. 

You've given it now to SGEU. Is this what the teachers are 

going to get as well? So that now they can say that this is a 

trend going across the province? And then, Madam Minister, 

you have said that you've already said, I'm not going to raise 

the grants to school boards. You're going to say to them that 

they've got to pick up this two and a half or two and a quarter 

per cent increase in their salaries? 

 

Madam Minister, $24 million for every point is a lot of money, 

a lot of money that has to come out of this 1 per cent interest 

that you raise. And we expect, Madam Minister, that your $296 

million at the conclusion of this fiscal year is not going to be 

accurate, because we don't believe that the retail sales, the 

personal income tax, are going to be achieving that mark that 

you have set for them — not this year nor next year. 

 

And that is going to be a serious deterrent and a detriment to 

the economy of the province. What you've missed, Madam 

Minister, is the opportunity for wealth creation in the province, 

allowing people the freedom to independently make wealth in 

the province. And you haven't done that. You haven't given 

them the reason to do it and having any confidence in what 

you're doing. That's a problem. And we believe it to be a 

problem and a significant problem. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, it's needless to say that we won't be 

supporting the motion for interim supply. However, we see a 

lot of flaws in each one of those items that you've got there, 

enough that we question whether you have the competence 

even to run the Department of Finance, Madam Minister. And 

the items that we see in your forecasts — 4.2 per cent increase 

in retail sales — I just can't hardly believe that. A personal 

income . . . from income tax, a 6 per cent increase. Well, 

Madam Minister, there is where some of the hurt really comes 

in the province of Saskatchewan. And that is that 6 per cent . . . 

a .6 per cent increase in income tax is likely the volume that 

you're going to pay the public service. 

 

It's like inflation in the province of Saskatchewan is now only 

there because of taxes. Inflation is zero probably in 

Saskatchewan, and your taxes are making it go in an inflation 

cycle. That's what we need to point out to you, and the people 

of the province need to understand that as well. 

 

And therefore, Madam Minister, we don't have any confidence 

in the numbers that you've presented to this Assembly — none 

at all. We ask you to prove it, and you wouldn't do that. You 

wouldn't prove it from your assessments and your analysis. 

You wouldn't 



April 5, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 865 

show them to us. You don't have any way to prove that your 

analysis would show that any of these numbers are real or that 

you just didn't pick them out of your hat. And that, Madam 

Minister, is exactly what we're pointing out to you and to the 

Assembly and to the people of the province. We don't think 

that they're facts. We think that they're a figment of your 

imagination. And that, Madam Minister, is exactly what the 

people of the province think about it. 

 

You come to the west side of the province, and you will see a 

downturn like you've never seen because 9 per cent . . . there's 

a 9 per cent difference in what the materials cost that you do 

anything with . . . between our province and Alberta. And that, 

Madam Minister, is a significant amount. And you are going to 

have to deal with that in a very significant way; otherwise we 

have vitally shut down the west third of the province in retail 

sales. And that is going to make a significant difference in your 

4.2 per cent increase in your retail sales. That, Madam 

Minister, is why we won't be supporting this interim supply. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 4:30 p.m. until 4:35 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Wiens Serby 

Lingenfelter Flavel 

Shillington Cline 

Mitchell Scott 

MacKinnon McPherson 

Upshall Crofford 

Hagel Knezacek 

Koenker Harper 

Lyons Keeping 

Murray Kluz 

Johnson Carlson 

Draper Langford 

— 24 

 

The Chair: — Order, order. Order. It becomes very difficult 

for the Clerk to hear what it is that the members are saying in 

the vote if other members interrupt proceedings. 

 

Nays 

Swenson Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

Toth Haverstock 

— 8 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, I move: 

 

 That towards making good the supply granted to Her Majesty 

on account of certain expenses of the public service for the 

fiscal year ending March 31, 1994, the sum of $340,881,000 

be granted out of the Consolidated Fund. 

 

The division bells rang from 4:38 p.m. until 4:39 p.m. 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Wiens Serby 

Lingenfelter Flavel 

Shillington Cline 

Mitchell Scott 

MacKinnon McPherson 

Upshall Crofford 

Hagel Knezacek 

Koenker Harper 

Lyons Keeping 

Murray Kluz 

Johnson Carlson 

Draper Langford 

— 24 

 

The Chair: — Order. Again I want to ask members for their 

cooperation while the vote is being conducted. Other members 

speaking tends to make it difficult for the Clerk to hear what it 

is that members are saying when they're casting their vote. 

 

Nays 

Neudorf Britton 

Martens D'Autremont 

Toth  

— 5 

The committee reported progress. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I move that the resolutions be now 

read the first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the resolutions read a first and second 

time. 

 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I move: 

 

 That Bill No. 43, An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain 

sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal Year 

ending on March 31, 1994, be now introduced and read the 

first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — By leave of the Assembly and 

under Rule 51-2, I move that the Bill be now read a second and 

third time. 

 

Motion agreed to on division and, by leave of the Assembly, 

the Bill read a second and third time and passed under its title. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 

 

At 4:47 p.m. Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 

to the following Bills: 



866 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 1993 

Bill No. 12 — An Act to amend The Wascana Centre Act 

Bill No. 43 — An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain 

sums of Money for the Public Service for the 

Fiscal Year ending on March 31, 1994 

 

Her Honour: — In Her Majesty's name, I thank the Legislative 

Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 

 

Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 4:49 p.m. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:51 p.m. 

 

 


