




















































Hansard: June 10, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2407 

 June 10, 1993 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Speaker: -- I want to draw members' attention to a 

procedural glitch that occurred just before 5 o'clock this 

evening.  Earlier in the debate the member from Morse moved 

the adjournment of the debate.  Later the member from 

Thunder Creek moved a second motion to adjourn the debate.  

The second motion was technically out of order because there 

had been no intervening proceeding recorded in the Journal as 

required by rule 4.  While it is too late to correct the error, I am 

hereby informing members that this is not to be considered a 

precedent.  Order. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

Bill No. 79 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 79 -- An Act to 

Provide for the Division of Saskatchewan into Constituencies 

for the Election of Members of the Legislative Assembly and 

the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. Swenson be 

now read a second time. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure 

to be rising this evening to talk about The Constituency 

Boundaries Act.  In a province of fewer than a million people 

where the population is becoming more and more heavily 

weighted in urban centres, it is the responsibility of our 

government to ensure that the interests of all people are fairly 

represented. 

 

Democracy in Saskatchewan is particularly sensitive to this 

unequal population distribution because it is important to have 

rural interests fairly represented, but impractical to assume that 

this can be done without some compensation for smaller 

population numbers outside of our cities. 

 

And we are faced therefore with three fundamental issues.  

First, Mr. Speaker, is fairness and equality.  Second, integrity 

of process; and finally, efficiency and cost effect of delivery of 

services by our government representatives. 

 

Let me begin with the concept of equality, the concept of one 

person, one vote.  Now ideally this concept is the one upon 

which democracy should be based.  The problem that we have 

in the province of Saskatchewan in trying to draw boundaries is 

which . . . which have MLAs (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) representing the same number of people in each 

constituency is obviously that rural constituencies are and will 

remain too huge for an MLA to properly serve. 

 

Furthermore, part of the electoral boundaries issue has to do 

with elections.  And it is virtually impossible for candidates in 

rural areas to make contact with people over such extreme 

distances, to make themselves known.  What that does of 

course is to 

result in any incumbent MLA having far greater advantage than 

others would enjoy. 

 

The possibility of combining urban and rural voters in one 

constituency is something that has indeed been discussed and 

posed by some.  It may in fact have some merit, Mr. Speaker, 

as long as there is balance between urban and rural voters in a 

constituency.  In fact, perhaps the time has come that we would 

end up with a fostering of a greater understanding between 

urban and rural people if indeed they were represented by one 

member of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

A combined rural-urban seat which encompasses rural 

residents and the central trading area might encourage much 

greater knowledge on the issues unique to both sets of voters, 

thereby forcing people like ourselves, members of the 

Legislative Assembly, to become more informed, far more 

sensitive to issues of both urban and rural citizens. 

 

What must not happen as the result of any redrawn boundaries 

is for rural residents to be left with a feeling that they are now 

classed as second-class citizens in the province of 

Saskatchewan because of the economic situation which has 

caused out-migration from rural areas to this point in time. 

 

The previous government made decisions which often made 

people in urban centres feel that they were left out.  And people 

actually discussed, members now on the government side, 

people who are residents of the province of Saskatchewan, that 

much of that was done for purely political reasons.  That 

practice was considered by some to be grossly unfair by people 

in urban constituencies. 

 

The electoral map redrawn in 1991 was considered to reflect 

rural bias.  And prior to that, the New Democratic government 

seemed oblivious to the needs of rural Saskatchewan, and that 

too was very unhealthy for our provincial perspective.  People 

are very disturbed over any hint of manipulation, and that's 

really what this discussion is all about.  When it comes to 

boundaries, quite frankly, I believe that people are far more 

interested in a sense of real fairness than complete equality. 

 

As we all know, fair and equal are not the same thing.  It's why 

we have golf handicaps, it's why we have gate equalization, it's 

why we have child tax credits and graduated income tax: all 

things that I'm sure the members opposite, who like to speak 

out -- as one is speaking, Mr. Speaker -- I'm sure that all of 

them are quite familiar with the things that we do in order to 

create fairness. 

 

Similarly, we must take into account that making everything 

equal under the electoral map may not necessarily produce a 

better democracy, and may in fact result in 

under-representation for certain areas of our province. 

 

In speaking as I have to many people throughout 



2408 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1993 

Saskatchewan about political reform -- as the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview-Haultain has done as well -- and I've had 

many discussions about changes to the democratic process, the 

most important message from people is that they are very tired 

of those on the reins of power manipulating the democratic 

process.  This appears to be at the very root of political 

cynicism in our province and probably one could claim across 

the entire country. 

 

I believe that it is acceptable for government to appoint a 

commission and to charge them with the responsibility of a 

percentage variation, from constituency to constituency.  But 

that is, Mr. Speaker, where the line should be drawn.  I support 

an objective re-evaluation, a perpetual fine tuning of the 

electoral boundaries to account for migratory patterns.  I do not 

support having the government, elected members of a 

particular political party, dictating the types of changes which 

should be made. 

 

If we are to have an independent commission, then let's have 

exactly that -- an independent commission.  It has been a mere 

weeks since the government announced that we will have an 

electoral commission, and that that would be appointed.  And 

since then, we've had the following: the government setting the 

number of seats -- and, of course, what we've heard in this 

legislature is the fact that everywhere in Canada this has 

happened, where governments have dictated in electoral 

boundary redrawings, that the number of seats would be X. 

 

Well why is it that we should do what has always been done?  

What we're talking about is true reform.  What we're wanting is 

to get away from the way that things have been, that have 

resulted in the kind of political manipulation that's resulted in 

people having the sense of being manipulated and resulting in 

cynicism.  Why wouldn't we do things differently?  And why 

wouldn't we allow an independent commission to be truly 

independent? 

 

Secondly, what we've had is the member from Moose Jaw 

saying that there will be definitely two seats in the city of 

Moose Jaw.  We've had an announcement stating that there will 

be two northern seats and that they will remain.  We've had the 

Minister of Justice assuring us that seats in Prince Albert will 

not change and that the seat in Lloydminster will remain 

unchanged as well. 

 

What exactly is the government really afraid of will happen if 

learned people, learned people, appointed people and people 

agreed to by all three parties in this Assembly are allowed to 

make their own decisions?  It's not as if this is this massive 

majority government won't have a vote once the commission is 

finished its work, Mr. Speaker.  They indeed do hold all the 

power. 

 

As everyone knows, government controls the rules.  There isn't 

a person in Saskatchewan who doesn't know that.  They 

ultimately will be able 

to make the decisions, Mr. Speaker.  They have a 55-member 

majority government and they will ultimately be able to make 

whatever decisions they want come to fruition. 

 

Political reform is not an election gimmick.  It is not a buzz 

word.  As someone who is in the Legislative Assembly because 

I really do want to see positive change, I want to effect change. 

Political reform is a tool.  And it's a mechanism for making our 

system more responsive to the electorate, for regaining the trust 

of the people who pay taxes to finance their government and to 

finance the programs that serve them. 

 

Now I remember raising the issue of fewer MLAs during the 

televised leaders' debate in the 1991 election.  I raised this in 

the House this past week.  Both my opponents in that debate, 

the hon. member from Estevan and the member from 

Riversdale, scoffed at the idea of fewer of MLAs, on provincial 

television.  And it's on tape for all to see.  In other words, both 

basically dismissed the idea of a reduction in the size of 

government and they saw this as unnecessary when it came to 

the numbers of members of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Premier joked that maybe, and I quote him: we should 

have just one very highly paid MLA and save huge amounts of 

money.  And now, now because the public is demanding, and 

in fact they expect, a better way of doing things, the 

government has decided and appears to be wanting to get in 

step with public opinion. 

 

Ultimately it really doesn't matter to me who brings ideas to 

fruition or even who takes credit, although I would hope that 

the Conservatives would not want to argue with printed matter 

and the video tapes on the issue of who said what first.  What 

matters most is that the Saskatchewan political system begin to 

be rid of manipulation and that it begin to be rid of 

inefficiencies caused by people, claimed by some to be selfish 

in their motives and are deemed politicians with their own 

interests at heart, where they really want re-election and 

nothing but re-election and put that ahead of the public best 

interest. 

 

Therefore I do wish to say, Mr. Speaker, that I commend the 

government on taking the initiative to reduce the number of 

members, but I urge them to give the commission full mandate, 

a full mandate to determine the boundaries, a full mandate to 

determine the number of seats and to develop a process for 

setting future election dates. 

 

Now we do know that by reputation there are parties that have 

been seen as jumping on certain kinds of bandwagons from 

time to time, and it seems to go according to when someone's 

in opposition they feel one thing and when they're in 

government they feel another. 

 

We have the official opposition wanting, by what they're 

stating these days, they want electoral fairness.  And they have 

been dropping broad hints that this is important, to reduce the 

number of seats, regardless of what had been said in 1991.  

And I wish to take this 



June 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2409 

time to give credit where credit is due for them as well. 

 

No matter what people can perceive these changes, these 

switches, to be, the proposal put forward by the member from 

Thunder Creek to realign the electoral boundaries so that the 

federal and provincial jurisdictions, constituencies, are more 

compatible and as a net result reduce the number of seats, no 

matter how late the conversion is to political reform, I believe 

that their proposal should indeed be evaluated by the Electoral 

Commission. 

 

(1915) 

 

In fact I can't understand why any open government, any 

honest government, any government that's truly interested in 

finding the best way to do things, wouldn't want all things 

considered as ideas on the table by the commission.  This 

suggestion does have some merits and some possible problems 

perhaps, and in fairness, often solutions come from ideas which 

have to be reworked or revamped. 

 

As long as this is left in the control of the party in power, the 

electoral boundaries being changed only through dictums from 

the party in power, there is tremendous potential for 

manipulation -- manipulation of the electorate, the people of 

this province, and for the advantage of government over the 

other parties.  And this is not only unfair, Mr. Speaker, it is 

completely unnecessary and it must be stopped. 

 

Now I strongly urge the government to give the Electoral 

Commission a carte blanche, and in the true sense of this term, 

in order that they can begin with a clean slate, a new page, and 

do the job as they see that it should be done, not as the 

government would like it to be.  What we are doing in essence 

is saying to these respected individuals, whoever they may be 

-- and I have recommended from the Liberal Party someone 

who we see as someone very competent who could participate.  

This is someone . . . pardon me. 

 

By doing what the government is doing, Mr. Speaker, they're in 

essence saying, pick any colour, as long as it's green; pick any 

number, as long as it's 58; do whatever you think best, as long 

as it's what the government thinks is best.  And that's not 

empowerment.  In fact people would say that's more like a 

dictatorship, and dictatorship has no place, no matter how 

subliminal, in a democracy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the final issue at hand here is efficiency and 

effectiveness.  This is an area that I believe is extremely 

important but which has been sadly overlooked.  And of course 

all parties are now supporting a reduction in the size of 

government.  It's something that I campaigned on.  Others are 

supporting it perhaps because it is politically saleable.  Perhaps 

not.  And luckily for the people of Saskatchewan, it also 

happens to make sense. 

 

But there are other issues which should be part and parcel of 

this particular package of electoral reform.  If we are going to 

have the good fortune of having an 

arm's length body to determine something as crucial as our 

electoral boundaries, why would not also charge them with 

depoliticizing one or two other important decisions at the same 

time. 

 

I believe that the commission should indeed be mandated to 

begin to set election dates and they should begin by being able 

to set the date for the next election.  After elections are held, a 

boundaries commission, an objective body, could review the 

boundaries; they could set the time lines in terms of what 

would make most sense as far as population shifts, etc., for 

when these should in fact be reviewed. 

 

They could review the boundaries, decide if changes are 

required, make recommendations, and subsequently set and 

announce the date for the election which would end that 

government's term in office.  It would in fact take the 

manipulation again out of the system. 

 

I believe that all citizens, including other political parties, 

should put forward ideas to the commission.  What possible 

downside could there be, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Unless of course a party in power is worried that this would 

ultimately turn out to be the chosen method of redrawing the 

boundaries and then goodness forbid, another political party 

would get credit.  What hope do we ever have at changing this 

particular system in which we work with a mentality for people 

continuously wanting to call the shots? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the issue of electoral boundary changes is not the 

most monumental issue before this legislature today.  But it is 

of crucial importance to democracy, a word that people use far, 

far too lightly and take for granted.  As the commission 

grapples with balancing fairness with equality and does its best 

to balance fairness with efficiency and fairness with 

effectiveness, the one thing which must not be compromised is 

integrity of process. 

 

Now I do support the proposal of an electoral boundaries 

review, but I would very, very much like to see this particular 

government pull back what is being perceived by many as 

interference and over-control of the commission. 

 

Earlier today the member from Thunder Creek brought forward 

an amendment and he was wanting, I think, to have us reflect 

for a time on the kinds of things that the government has, and 

has not, been doing.  I find it most interesting, Mr. Speaker, to 

have pulled from my files the Saskatchewan New Democrat's 

caucus 1991 democratic reform paper on the Electoral 

Boundaries Commission.  And I'm going to quote from this 

document, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 The people of Saskatchewan have always valued the ability 

to participate equally in the democratic process. 

 

 They believe that each and every person in Saskatchewan 

should be treated equally.  In other words, the fundamental 

principle of one 



2410 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1993 

person, one vote must be upheld. 

 

I will interject here my own words and state that one of the 

things that I would like to do, Mr. Speaker, is to have an 

opportunity to present to the Electoral Boundaries 

Commission, once it is actually struck, a way of ensuring that 

we can have as close to one person, one vote, but also having a 

specific consideration for the specific differences between 

urban and rural ridings in Saskatchewan and I do have a 

suggestion for them. 

 

Going back to this document from the New Democratic caucus, 

1991, on electoral boundaries: 

 

 The legislation creating the 1988 Electoral Boundaries 

Commission violated that fundamental concept of fairness. 

 

 Instead, a set of rigid and unreasonable constraints on the 

development of electoral boundaries in the province were 

instituted. 

 

The government thereby undermined the independence of the 

Boundaries Commission, and that's really what I've been 

talking about here this evening, Mr. Speaker, the need for us to 

ensure that this just doesn't appear to be a hands-off 

government from the commission, but that it be it in fact; and 

that we can't simply say, because somebody did something in 

1988 the way we didn't like, we're going to do our own version 

of it, but because we're pure, you don't have to worry. 

 

I'm suggesting that perhaps the time has come that we truly 

have what's called an independent electoral boundaries 

commission, independent from the constraints of the 

government.  And it really has come time in this province 

where people can have the sense that closure is going to be put 

on a manipulative government and that people in fact are going 

to have a chance for a change to see that some things are going 

to be done with their best interests at heart -- not the interests of 

the government, not the interests of the party in power, but the 

interests of the people. 

 

A number of questions have surfaced as to whether the 

Saskatchewan Boundaries Commission will be able to redraw 

this electoral map in the province without any kind of 

obstruction whatsoever.  And I indicated this week in questions 

to the Justice minister that in fact people have raised this 

because of articles that have appeared in newspapers 

throughout the province. 

 

Now the minister states that the commission, and I quote him 

now: will work independently with no interference from 

government.  End of quote. 

 

And yet I stated earlier, Mr. Speaker, that in fact there are 

many articles and specific statements from the minister that do 

indicate otherwise.  And whether people take this seriously or 

not, the people take it seriously and we need to ensure that 

people have the sense that this entire change to the electoral 

boundaries is going to be done with sensitivity and 

with honour and with real honesty. 

 

In the May 19 edition of the Lloydminster Times, the minister 

is quoted as saying that his colleague from Cut 

Knife-Lloydminster would -- and this is a direct quote: "avoid 

the reaper if the legislation to cut eight MLAs was passed."  In 

that same news item, Mr. Speaker, the minister says riding 

redistribution, and I quote: "won't make much of a difference 

here in Lloydminster."  In the Prince Albert Herald on May 18, 

the Minister of Justice indicated that changes to the electoral 

map in Prince Albert will be, and I quote: minimal. 

 

I believe the government, Mr. Speaker, is undermining an 

independent electoral boundaries commission and their job to 

determine how this electoral map should be redrawn.  And I 

don't understand how people can see this as really unimportant 

in its content when these comments are made, because it is 

extremely important that people in this province have a sense 

that this particular commission is going to be able to do its job 

and that it's not a fait accompli of what's going to be in place, 

and who's going to be able to run where, and some people are 

protected, and others will be up for grabs. 

 

It's not only the comments of the Justice minister that are 

disconcerting.  There are also comments from his NDP (New 

Democratic Party) colleagues.  The member I commented 

about earlier, from Moose Jaw Palliser, stated in the Moose 

Jaw Times on May 22 and I quote the hon. member: "It's 

certain that Moose Jaw will continue with at least (at least) two 

seats." 

 

The NDP member from Saskatoon Idylwyld on a May 17 CBC 

(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) radio program -- I quote: 

 

 The government has an obligation to accept the responsibility 

to decide how many members the legislature should have.  

That is how it has always been done. 

 

This is an issue of reform, Mr. Speaker. It's about reform, 

member from Saskatoon Eastview-Haultain. So why is it that 

when the issue is reform, why is the fact that things have 

always been done a certain way is any basis for determining 

something that is of such great importance? 

 

No governments in Canada have been considered by the 

electorate as unmanipulative when it comes to changing 

electoral boundaries.  I mean politics is rife with people 

perceiving politicians and parties in power to do nothing but 

gerrymander. 

 

Why would we want to do things the way that things have 

always been done?  Why wouldn't we in this legislature and 

this new government for the last 19 months want to do 

something that is going to create and result in real reform?  

Perhaps if objective commissions had been empowered to 

determine the number of government members in the past, 

governments that we have across Canada would be 

considerably smaller. 

 

Now the reason why I singled out the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview-Haultain was not because this individual member was 

on any radio program about this.  It's because I know this 

particular member is interested in and committed to reform and 



June 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2411 

we have spoken about it at length.  And we presented on the 

same panel at the Canadian taxpayers association first 

Canadian convention actually in Calgary.  And I am pointing 

this out because one of the things that he is committed to is 

reform.  And I don't believe that when he thinks in terms of 

reform, he thinks of reform as something that should simply do 

what has been done in the past.  This is about an opportunity to 

do things better. 

 

The government's fingerprints appear already on this 

commission, and that's the problem, because the government 

has indicated that there will be 58 seats established.  They've 

indicated that the two northern ridings will remain unchanged.  

Government members have stated that any changes to Cut 

Knife-Lloydminster, Prince Albert, and Moose Jaw will be 

minimal.  Comments such as these are not what I consider 

allowing a commission to work independently and in a manner 

which will, I think, result in what we need to have done. 

 

And while we're on the topic of reform, electoral reform is very 

vital to ensure confidence of the voting public, but so too are 

other reforms, Mr. Speaker.  And I find it rather ironic that the 

one thing that costs so little is reform, and the one thing that's 

been done very little by this government in 19 months is to 

implement reform. 

 

Politicians of all stripes have received another black eye 

recently because of things that have transpired in this very 

Assembly, accusations alleged at one particular individual.  

And I think that one of the things that we have to do is to 

ensure that things like this can't occur in the future.  And as you 

know, Mr. Speaker, this is the second time that something like 

this has resulted in this year alone, in the year of 1993.  Only 

four months ago, reports surfaced indicating that there is an 

investigation into the spending practices of other members of 

this Legislative Assembly.  So that includes now four people in 

this particular Assembly out of 66 members.  That in itself is 

something that does not send a positive signal to the province 

of Saskatchewan and the people in it. 

 

(1930) 

 

Ordinary citizens all deserve consideration of being presumed 

innocent until they are found guilty of wrongdoing in a court of 

law.  However, elected officials -- elected representatives -- are 

people who must adhere to a much higher standard than 

ordinary citizens and should ensure that their actions are not 

only impeccable but they are seen to be impeccable as well. 

 

And the decisions that we make in this Assembly, the decisions 

made by government and the way that they are going to go 

about reform -- reform to the Board of 

Internal Economy, reform to the Electoral Boundaries 

Commission, reform to the way that we look at a wide variety 

of things that really need to be addressed in this province and 

by this government and by all members -- the way in which 

that's dome is what is going to begin to restore public trust. 

 

The very fact that the government could have brought in their 

code of ethical conduct as well as the conflict of interest 

guidelines last year leaves one wondering why that has taken 

so long.  Why is it that so much time will be taken in this 

Legislative Assembly ramming through legislation, not 

providing the kinds of opportunities for real reflection on the 

implications of legislation, when there's been a real decision 

made, an actual decision made, a solid, thoughtful decision 

made on the part of government, that somehow the code of 

ethical conduct and conflict of interest guidelines are not the 

number one priority?  I find that rather surprising that we've 

now gone through three different sessions and this has not been 

something that to this day has come to some result. 

 

There need to be specific guidelines.  We need to ensure that 

people are held accountable from any misuse of power, even 

when such misuse is discovered after leaving office.  And as it 

stands now, we know that there are loopholes in rules, there are 

routes that may be taken to circumvent different regulations, 

and we need to do all different kinds of things to ensure that 

every kind of reform that takes place is done to the very, very 

best of our ability, without doing it in some kind of surface 

way. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan elected a new government, Mr. 

Speaker, on the promise of being new and being different.  

New and being different.  But months and months have passed 

without any kind of addressing to the real issues of reform. 

 

And I do want to give credit.  The fact that annual reports are 

filed more regularly; there have been changes in terms of some 

public accountability with finances of this province -- I think 

those things are to be heralded. 

 

But I think when we're talking about public trust, and we're 

talking about accountability, the people want to have that sense 

that: a) they are not only just listened to, they're heard; and that 

their politicians are exemplary in the way that they account for 

their own expenditures, the way that if there are going to be 

changes to things that affect their lives, like their own 

boundaries . . . which by the way doesn't affect urban members 

the same way.  It doesn't affect urban citizens the same way 

when boundaries are changed, when there can only be a block 

between one's constituency in an urban centre and the next 

place.  There's not that same sense as what happens in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And we have to be sensitive to those things, that people who 

live in rural Saskatchewan have an enormous sense of 

isolation.  They can't be like business or labour, in cities, who 

can get the ear of government more readily.  They are not like 

that in 



2412 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1993 

rural Saskatchewan.  They have to be able to have accessibility 

to their particular members and we have to have that kind of 

thing kept in mind when we're undergoing changes to the 

electoral boundaries Act. 

 

When the people elected this new government some 19 months 

ago they did want something new and different.  And I guess 

my sense is that the new and different is not turning out to be 

so new or so different.  And this is a time of real opportunity to 

show that this particular commission will be independent, it 

will not be dictated to, and that in fact there will be a true 

opportunity for the kinds of changes to take place, as far as 

electoral reform is concerned, that will make a difference. 

 

If we ever want to reduce the level of cynicism about 

politicians, about politics overall, then reform is one aspect of 

government which is going to be the key.  And it's not good 

enough to simply allow things to carry on as they've always 

been.  We have a chance to begin, piece by piece, member by 

member, in this Assembly to restore public confidence.  And 

it's the government that has to take the leadership role to make 

positive change, change which would be very, very beneficial 

-- and as I stated earlier -- not cost Saskatchewan a dime. 

 

I feel that the members of this Assembly should all be doing 

what is within our own power to ensure that all politicians are 

held accountable, that we can all be part of the process of 

ensuring that reform is addressed in a reformed manner, and 

that we can be above reproach. 

 

We can participate in ensuring that things are done in a way 

that allows for the citizenry to feel that this is going to be done 

differently and that finally we're on the path to true reform, 

where the electoral boundaries will be done in a fair and 

equitable fashion, where they will be done by people who are 

honourable, that they're going to be done in such a way that 

people will see that there will be greater efficiency, greater 

effectiveness, they'll still have accessibility, and that what 

we've done is the best possible job on their behalf. 

 

I will end, Mr. Speaker, by stating that every single day I meet 

people who talk about their sense of disillusionment.  And they 

talk about politics as nothing but the trading off of different 

kinds of games.  We do know that government does control the 

rules.  They have definitely controlled what's been going on 

here today.  There was one agreed-upon set of things that we 

would be discussing today, done this morning.  There was then 

something else put on the order paper for this afternoon.  

People were quite prepared to not be talking about this 

particular issue but to get on with other issues.  And it seems as 

though all agreements just fell aside. 

 

That kind of thing does lead to disillusionment in people who 

are even in this legislature.  Because with 55 members, the 

government does indeed have the control.  But there is one 

thing -- two things actually -- which will continue to make the 

difference.  And 

that is if there's a real commitment to decency and civility of 

people in this legislature to each other and to the people we 

serve. 

 

We have an opportunity, with the changes to the boundaries in 

this particular province, to demonstrate that we're committed as 

an entire group to true reform, that we're committed to ensuring 

that the independent commission is independent, that that 

commission will be allowed to entertain all people's points of 

view, including I think what is an excellent position being put 

forward by the official opposition, and that I hope it will 

consider some of my suggestions as well. 

 

And what we have a real chance to do is to begin to introduce 

even more electoral reform besides the boundaries by setting 

election dates and taking away what has become what I 

consider to be a manipulation of the people's rights.  Thank 

you. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to make a few 

comments, Mr. Speaker, about the Electoral Boundaries 

Commission and the procedure in which the government of the 

day is pretending to change the ridings in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to spend a few minutes on the proposal put forward by 

the official opposition and my seat mates because I believe if 

this is about efficiency, Mr. Speaker, then the proposal that we 

have put forward is very efficient, saves money -- it's operated 

by the feds -- and it is eminently fairer than the position put 

forward by the members opposite. 

 

We see under the guise of an excuse to be more cost saving and 

to save money, the NDP administration has now decided that 

they will reduce the number of MLAs in the fashion that they 

see fit.  And I think it would be fair to say, Mr. Speaker, if you 

talked to the public, the general public out there today and you 

said, well do you think the NDP will redo the boundaries fairly 

in a non-partisan way, you'd probably get a laugh. 

 

The general public would say: well as if; I'm sure; yes, right  -- 

as if the NDP administration would actually redo the 

boundaries and be fair.  In a non-partisan way, they wouldn't 

care about politics, they'd just be very, very fair.  The public, 

Mr. Speaker, just doesn't buy that.  That's why, when we look 

at this hurry to bring in this legislation -- and it's a whole term 

ahead, because normally it's every eight years and now they're 

doing it in three years -- you wonder what is their motive. 

 

If their motive is to save money, then the proposal put forward 

by the PCs (Progressive Conservatives) and our official 

opposition is much better because it saves a great deal of 

money.  If it is for fairness, both rural and urban, then our 

proposal is even fairer because it's based on federal ridings 

which are guaranteed across Canada, which means that we 

even get a larger share of our representation than other areas of 

the country because if it was one person, one vote, we'd be 

stuck with probably four or five federal ridings. 



June 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2413 

So we have an eminently fairer system working with the 

federal boundaries and it is very, very efficient because the 

federal government carries much of the burden of 

responsibility for redefining the boundaries every 10 years. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it's rather interesting and the public is asking, 

well if this is to save money, if the NDP Bill here and this new 

Boundaries Commission is to save money, why don't they 

really save money and cooperate with the federal government 

and put the ridings, the provincial ridings, inside the boundaries 

of the federal ridings and leave the responsibility and the 

expense to the feds.  We would see very, very fair distribution, 

rural and urban, as we see today; and we would certainly have 

the advantage of not worrying about rapid changes or any 

hard-core partisan politics because you'd be in federal 

boundaries that are already there that everybody has agreed are 

reasonably fair. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the NDP says no, that isn't what we want.  

They don't want to save money evidently or they'd seriously 

even consider our proposal.  But, Mr. Speaker, isn't it odd that 

they won't even consider a proposal which saves them more 

money and cooperates with the federal government, makes it 

that much easier to administer?  They won't even consider it 

because they said, well there would be too much variance. 

 

Well now that argument doesn't wash either, Mr. Speaker, 

because if you go back to one member, one vote, Saskatchewan 

would only have four or five seats.  Is that fair?  Is that what 

the NDP want?  I don't think the NDP federally would support 

that.  So if they can't find the consistency in their argument for 

one member, one vote, federally versus provincially, if our 

suggestion even saves them more money but they don't buy 

that. 

 

Then they flip and say, well we'll just have to do it our way and 

we won't look at any other options.  Then people are going to 

have to reinforce their belief that the NDP are just using this 

cost-saving excuse to gerrymander the ridings, to eliminate 

rural ridings, and to try and hang on to one more term of 

government by consolidating their support in urban centres that 

they think  can keep them in government. 

 

And we've heard over and over and over again, they'll go to . . . 

and the Attorney General has gone to certain ridings and said, 

yours is safe in Moose Jaw, yours is safe in Prince Albert, 

yours will be safe in Lloydminster, this urban seat will be fine, 

these urban seats.  He hasn't done that in the country, Mr. 

Speaker.  You don't see him going around saying, we will be 

non-partisan; we will be very fair.  No, he goes in and he 

speaks riding by riding where they hope to hang on to power, 

and he says, but Moose Jaw, you won't be touched; and P.A. 

(Prince Albert), you won't be touched; Lloydminster, you won't 

be touched, you'll be okay under the new NDP system.  And 

then he thinks that people will believe they're doing this on the 

basis of cost saving? 

(1945) 

 

Makes no sense.  People don't believe the NDP will allow any 

commission -- any commission -- to set new boundaries 

without political guidance.  And the public generally believes 

the maps are already drawn, the caucus has already looked at it, 

the cabinet ministers have got them up on the wall and 

everybody's saying well, if we did this and this and this, it'd be 

fine. 

 

And we can use the excuse we're saving money.  That'll be it -- 

we're saving money for the public and the taxpayers, and we'll 

do this after three years.  Normally it's eight, normally it's 

eight, but we'll do it after three.  And we'll say, oh well, we 

have to because there's a deficit. 

 

And people are starting to say, as you hear, Mr. Speaker, from 

the gallery, from the streets, from the towns and the villages, 

rural and urban, they're saying: we don't believe the NDP; we 

don't trust the NDP; they are not fair; they're not conducting 

themselves in an open fashion; they're not doing what they said 

they would do. 

 

Even the simplest thing that they campaigned on, the fact that 

there was a terrible deficit under the Devine administration, a 

terrible deficit -- campaigned on that.  And then they turn 

around with a $400 million bribe to get elected.  They had an 

extra 400 million.  We'll just give that away, and it'll be okay.  

We'll still balance the budget and we'll give you lots more in 

health and education and protect the rural and protect the sick, 

and give you more. 

 

Well what about the deficit?  Oh well, we'll fix that.  I know it's 

huge, but we'll just give you 400 million.  Here's a bribe -- no 

provincial sales tax, no harmonization.  We'll just give you that 

money and trust us, it'll be fine.  And now two years later, two 

years later, they're saying:  well we'd just like to redo the 

boundaries here a little bit to save you some money. 

 

They just gave away $400 million in a bribe to get elected, and 

they're saying:  but I tell you, to save some money what we 

really have to do is redo the boundaries because that would be 

really instrumental in us balancing the budget.  Do you believe 

us so far?  Do you believe us so far? 

 

And the people are shaking their heads, whether you go down 

to the mall on south Albert or whether you go to Victoria 

Square Mall, or whether you're in Prince Albert, Saskatoon, 

Estevan, Weyburn, Macklin, any place.  They say no, I don't 

believe the NDP.  They didn't get elected on telling it as it is.  

And when they get in power, they hurt every single person in 

Saskatchewan except those that they've propped up with 

patronage.  And we've got lots of evidence of that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So on the efficiency grounds, their proposal doesn't hold up.  

It's not as good as ours and all we've asked is 



2414 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1993 

it just even have the perception of fairness.  Would you 

consider ours which includes the federal ridings?  Divide each 

of the federal ridings into four provincial ridings; give us 56 

seats.  That is more efficient than yours by two, and you can't 

monkey with it.  There's no gerrymandering, and it costs less 

because the feds redo it every 10 years. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, you'd think that they would be . . . the NDP 

would be ashamed not to at least consider the option; just give 

it a fair hearing.  But they say no, can't do that.  No.  So, Mr. 

Speaker, I think I've made my point that the NDP are not doing 

this because of fairness, they're not doing it because of 

efficiency, they're not doing it to save money. 

 

And nobody believes this.  Certainly the PCs don't believe it, 

the Liberals don't believe it.  And frankly, the NDP, when you 

corner them, they don't believe it either.  They say, well hey, 

we got to do this.  We're in some trouble.  We've got a big 

excuse.  We got to say, hey there's a deficit.  We'll cut the 

number of MLAs, save a bunch of money, and they think that 

the public will buy it.  And they know the public doesn't buy it.  

Their own ridings don't buy it, their campaign managers, their 

presidents, their spouses, their wives, and their husbands don't 

buy it.  And they say, nobody's going to believe this.  Who do 

you think you're kidding? 

 

They must believe that there are people out there who believe 

them -- but there aren't.  The partisans say, go for it, do it.  Just 

do it anyway.  Just go for it; we'll have enough seats just to 

squeak by.  And the rest of the public says, you promised you'd 

be different; you promised you'd be open; you promised you 

would have fairness; you promised you'd open the books; you 

promised you'd be non-partisan; you promised no patronage; 

you promised you'd help farmers; you promised to reduce the 

food banks, eliminate food banks; you promised you'd have 

more money in health; you promised no tax increases.  And 

you can't say: hear, hear; hear, hear; because you didn't do any 

of those things.  You've denied people access all . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- That's right, hear . . . You finally . . . That's 

right.  You've denied people access to health care.  You denied 

them support in agriculture.  You denied them all of the things 

that they thought that they may get under a new administration.  

You have let them down. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when I look at the Progressive Conservative 

proposal on new boundaries in the province of Saskatchewan, 

if we base it on the federal boundaries -- 14 seats, and each 

riding is divided into four seats with equal population, we'd 

have 56 seats -- we'd have very close, close to one person, one 

vote, with margins that could range as much as 5 per cent and 

up to 25 per cent, and the feds are at 5 per cent now.  So that 

isn't difficult.  And if you needed a little bit more, you could 

be there, but it would still be eminently fair because those 14 

federal ridings are all across the province of Saskatchewan and 

you could have it as fair as you could imagine.  And the feds 

would bear most of the cost. 

 

So again, with all the fairness and all the cost-saving measures 

that are associated with that proposal I would sincerely ask -- 

and have the public know -- that if they want a very fair system 

that saves money and that helps the public, and is much more 

efficient, that they could ask the NDP MLAs, and the NDP 

cabinet, and the NDP Premier, to consider a system like that or 

else give us the very good reasons why they shouldn't do that, 

why they shouldn't consider it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in their attempts to salvage and retain power in 

one more term, the NDP have really picked on rural people.  

We know, Mr. Speaker, if you look at population basis, the 

population in rural Saskatchewan, in towns and villages, farms, 

is suffering the most in the province of Saskatchewan.  People 

are leaving farms, people are leaving smaller cities, towns, and 

villages. 

 

These people have suffered a very large extent under the NDP 

government.  And now, Mr. Speaker, what we look at is the 

ultimate in damage to people, is to take away their right to have 

fair representation in their government.  Rural people will be 

denied fair representation because as you cut seats and ridings 

under the NDP plan, you are going to cut where the population 

has been under the most pressure.  And the population has been 

under the most pressure where the NDP have put them under 

their thumb. 

 

Over and over and over again, the NDP administration has put 

their thumb on rural people and squeezed them and forced 

them out, caused them to suffer.  And these then will be the 

very areas where they will say, well as a result of our 

cost-saving measures and as a result of what's going on in 

population, we got to take away your riding. 

 

Now imagine that, Mr. Speaker.  And they joke about it and 

they laugh and say, well these people have . . . too bad, they've 

lost all their support, they've lost their farm programs and their 

hospitals and their health care and their roads and their bus 

services.  And isn't it interesting and isn't it kind of strange, 

we're losing population in the rural as soon as the NDP get 

elected. 

 

And when the population is really falling and really diving and 

people under terrible stress and terrible pain, terrible suffering, 

the NDP, after 18 months say, I guess we'll bring in a new 

boundaries commission so that we will have new ridings.  And 

if in fact there just happens to be less people in the country, 

whoops, sorry, I guess you won't have to have an MLA.  And 

people believe that the NDP have consciously planned at this 

time, under the excuse of cost savings, to remove those rural 

seats just so rural people won't have an impact at election time 

like they should and have fairness like other people across 

Canada. 

 

And the NDP laugh about that and they snicker.  Well I'll tell 

you, members of the legislature, you'll have to face not only the 

people, but you'll have to face your conscience when you look 

back and say, we did this 



June 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2415 

to Saskatchewan people, our neighbours -- in fact, our friends 

and our families -- that have had to suffer through this and then 

end up with no representation in the legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a long list of things that the NDP have 

done to hurt rural population that has resulted in this now 

excuse to cut them off from having a member of the legislature.  

People have been hurt, and people are now leaving their towns 

and villages as a result of NDP policy.  And in the middle of 

this wellness program and their so-called agriculture support 

programs and all of their other taxation programs, they just 

happened to get the idea that now we'll remove the number of 

seats in rural Saskatchewan so that they won't even have a vote. 

 

It's shameful, it's pathetic, and it's sad to think of even the 

once-proud CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) 

party that represented rural people would do this -- the CCF 

would pick on rural people, the salt of the earth, those that were 

pioneers, that broke the land, built the first schools, built the 

first churches, were our parents and grandparents. 

 

And now the so-called next party to the CCF, the NDP, said, 

well we'll abandon the rural life of Saskatchewan.  We'll just 

turn our back on it; in fact, we'll pick on it.  It's just shameful.  

It's pathetic.  I mean the seniors in the CCF party that are out 

there today and tonight are saying, I agree. I mean it is awful 

the way that the NDP are treating rural people. 

 

You couldn't find a CCF member of the legislature that would 

do what you're doing in here.  And not only this Bill but all 

kinds of Bills and I'm going to read a few of them because it's 

the pain to rural people that you are revelling in and rubbing 

your hands and making all these catcalls on and say, yes we'll 

get elected, Grant; it will be okay. 

 

Well on the backs of what? Your reputation, the backs of your 

party and the backs of the reputation of good, solid, rural 

people who built schools, co-ops, 4-H, the very backbone and 

the spirit of this province -- and you're saying no, I'll abandon 

you.  It is pathetic and it's sad and it's the absolute truth because 

that's what you're doing. 

 

Rural population is going down like it's never gone down since 

the 1930s and you've cut support.  And people voted for you 

for help and you said yes, we'll be there. I promise, you said.  

The man from Riversdale and the rest of you said, I promise I'll 

be there, better than the Tories, better than anybody else; I'll 

stick up for you.  And when you're elected after 18 months, 

you've just cut their heart out . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Hear, hear, what? 

 

Listen to them laugh. Listen to them laugh, Mr. Speaker. I wish 

the television cameras could go across here and listen to them 

laugh at the pain and suffering in rural Saskatchewan.  They 

think it's a joke. 

 

An Hon. member: -- Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 

The Speaker: -- What's the member's point of order? 

 

Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Speaker, my point of order, now four times 

the member has talked about government members laughing at 

this serious matter and, Mr. Speaker, he's making that up.  This 

is just simply not happening and so I would ask you to . . . 

request that you ask the member from Estevan not to make 

things up that aren't happening in the House. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member's point of order is 

not well taken. 

 

Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- On that point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- I already ruled.  The member's point of order 

was not well taken. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- That's for sure. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

(2000) 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, that's a good ruling.  And 

they're still laughing, Mr. Speaker.  They're still laughing. 

 

They'll laugh at rural people.  They laugh at their roots.  They 

laugh at the children and the seniors and those that have to be 

uprooted and leave the province and leave their homes, leave 

their towns, leave their villages.  What about their families? 

 

I think I've heard before, Mr. Speaker, in this Legislative 

Assembly the NDP standing up and saying, what about the 

families of people who would have to move to another town?  

And they condemned that.  They said, but the families would 

have to move.  It was all right if they moved to Regina; didn't 

worry about those families.  But they talked about how the 

NDP will be so kind to families and to children and to CCF 

seniors and to senior citizens.  We'll be so kind.  We promise, 

they say.  We'll keep your hospitals open, your schools open, 

the bus lines open.  We'll keep the co-ops open.  We'll defend 

you; we'll defend you; we'll defend you.  Not one word did 

they say, but we'll raise your taxes and cut your hospitals, cut 

your schools, attack your co-ops, kick your people out of 

towns, run against business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they have reneged and they have beat on people 

something fierce since they got elected.  And in here all they 

can do at 8 o'clock at night, towards the end of the session 

when they're all anxious to get out of here and go home and 

hide, is laugh at the people, laugh at the people.  They're sitting 

there laughing and they're over here laughing.  Mr. Speaker, it's 

pathetic . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Mr. Speaker, point of order. 

 

The Speaker: -- What's the member's point of order? 



2416 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1993 

Mr. Pringle: -- For the last 10 minutes the member from 

Estevan has not even mentioned the Bill under discussion here 

tonight.  This is electoral boundaries Bill and he's not even 

mentioned it for 10 minutes, and I would request that you ask 

him to stick to the Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I want to remind members that there is 

an amendment to the motion which reads: 

 

 That Bill 79 not now be read a second time because the 

principles contained in the Bill reinforce the recent trend of 

legislative action against the fundamental values of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I assume that the member from 

Estevan will connect this with the recent things that have been 

happening in the legislature, and I don't think the member's 

point . . . Order.  I don't think the member's point of order is 

well taken. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, it doesn't take much imagination 

to know that the CCF values that people at one point in time 

were proud of was defending rural people, including their right 

to vote, including their right to raise children in the country -- 

in the country, a beautiful place to raise a family. 

 

And my point is, on the backs of this pain initiated by this NDP 

government with a CCF legacy, they are now even taking away 

the people's right to vote.  And that's shameful and that's an 

awful Bill. 

 

And you'll pass it and you'll be proud of it, but I'll tell you, 

you'll have to look at yourself in the mirror and you'll have to 

look back years from now and say, did I do what was right for 

the people of Saskatchewan.  Is that fair to the people of 

Saskatchewan to be that harmful to their communities and that 

harmful to their families.  And then when they've lost hope and 

lost population -- they move away -- and say, I will take away 

your right to vote.  I can't think of a CCFer that would have 

done that. 

 

And that's my point, Mr. Speaker.  I don't believe, in the 

tradition of Saskatchewan, this NDP government is even close 

to the CCF in terms of values.  CCF had some compassion and 

they cared. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- And you can say, "hear, hear" to that, and that's 

correct.  And they got elected on that basis. 

 

And the NDP are entirely something else because they promise 

they're like the CCF.  They say we're the same party, just had 

to change our name.  And then when they get elected, Mr. 

Speaker, what do they do?  They are not like the CCF at all. 

 

And because they're in a lot of trouble and because they think 

they have an excuse on efficiency, they said, we'd better, after 

18 months in power, make 

some new ridings because we're going to need all the help we 

can get.  What other reason after 18 months would you be 

going through this exercise, picking on rural people?  What 

other reason? 

 

They haven't got one.  They've just got smiles.  They just sit 

there and they know full well it's all politics, all just to survive.  

After they've taken away the dental program, after they've 

taken away chiropractic coverage, the prescription drug plan, 

insulin and oxygen coverage, closed the hospitals, kicked out 

the doctors, the druggists go, rip up roads, take away the bus 

service, close the school, take away their pension plans, the 

senior citizen's heritage fund, the farm programs, no GRIP 

(gross revenue income program), no farm support, on top of all 

that, what do they do?  They take away the man and woman's 

right to vote. 

 

And they expect the public to feel good about this and this is 

going to save a bunch of money.  This isn't about money at all 

because we filled out a proposal here that would protect rural 

people so they have a vote, and it's decent and it's fair, based on 

federal ridings.  And they won't even listen to it.  They won't 

even consider it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we've seen some really odd things in this 

Legislative Assembly in the last 18 months.  We've seen 

closure upon closure.  We've seen rule changes.  We've seen a 

Minister of Finance here during estimates couldn't even 

respond because of the confounding rules.  First time in the 

history of probably the British Commonwealth.  The Minister 

of Finance couldn't get up because if he got up he could never 

get down because of his own rules.  It's unbelievable. 

 

And then they admit afterwards: I shouldn't have even touched 

this, I shouldn't have even done that.  They didn't know what 

they were doing from the seat of their pants.  And on top of 

that, and on top of that . . . And they laugh -- listen to them 

laugh at the confusion and the pain and the suffering and the 

fear all over the province. 

 

I'm going to tell you, Mr. Speaker, people aren't laughing when 

you see headlines like this: The NDP is losing credibility in 

health care.  They're not laughing.  The public isn't laughing. 

 

And you look at the wellness model headlines like this.  What a 

farce -- NDP policy.  Do you think people are building trust to 

let you redo the ridings, given headlines like that? 

 

Here's another one:  Minister should pay for dividends or pay 

for his friends.  He's hiring his friends in Crown corporations.  

Said he'd never do that. 

 

The public is saying, well the NDP promised.  Attorney 

General says no patronage, we've come clean.  Do you think 

with headlines like that they're going to trust you to redo 

boundaries fairly?  You got to be smoking wacky weed to 

believe it. 

 

University funding cuts hurt women.  Look at this one, 



June 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2417 

Mr. Speaker: Despite wellness model, Eston is sick with 

anxiety on health care.  Shock and anger on health care.  

Closure upsets staff and patients. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the NDP administration was meeting with 

favour in the public and wasn't under so much political 

pressures, and they weren't in free fall of public support, and 

they weren't doing so many vindictive things to rural people 

and to health care people and to co-ops and to seniors and to 

labour and to natives and Indians, then we could believe well 

maybe they're just . . . they really think that this would be the 

right thing to do. 

 

But that's not the case.  They're under so much pressure, 

making so many mistakes, breaking so many promises that 

clearly people believe that they are scrambling to stay alive.  

Because why after 18 months would you all of a sudden have 

to change the ridings? 

 

Something is up.  What's going on over there?  It's normally 

every eight years you do this.  And you can't show anybody 

that this saves a bunch of money.  And the waste that you have, 

even in supporting your hacks and giving them wage increases 

and the large cabinet that you promised you'd never have, is 

much more saving than these boundaries. 

 

And if you really did want boundaries savings, you'd adopt our 

proposal that works with the federal government, that gives 

you very fair boundaries and two less seats than you have.  So 

it isn't that. 

 

So you'll pass this.  And you'll run home and hide.  And you'll 

tell everybody, oh we really pulled one over on the people.  

And you'll try to survive another election. 

 

Look at this one, Mr. Speaker: Rural Saskatchewan scared sick.  

And then you're saying to rural people, well I know you're 

scared sick and you have anxiety and you're closing your 

hospitals and you're ripping up this and that and we don't have 

any farm support, but trust us; we'll rejig the ridings so that 

you'll have a lot of support.  You'll get a good, fair hearing and 

you'll get lots of votes.  And they laugh.  They sit in their seats 

and they laugh at rural people. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there's nothing, there's absolutely nothing 

that we have seen in this Legislative Assembly in terms of 

fairness, in terms of justice, in terms of equal opportunity, one 

person one vote, or fairness in terms of ridings that would lead 

anybody in their right mind to believe that the NDP are doing 

anything close to what is right and correct in this Bill. 

 

This Bill, Mr. Speaker, is a disaster.  It's the epitome in terms 

of trying to hang on to power with your fingernails.  There is 

no justification for what they're doing on any basis that we can 

find. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when they do pass this Bill and they say to 

themselves, well now we've really been fair and we've really 

helped a lot of people, and this will be eminently the model to 

use on national boundary commissions or international 

boundary commissions, no one in the province is going to 

believe them, Mr. 

Speaker.  This is not a model; this is a disaster. 

 

I can only say in wrapping up my comments, Mr. Speaker, that 

the people of Saskatchewan have a sense of fairness and 

decency.  And when the people of Saskatchewan elect a 

government, they expect them to be decent, fair individuals.  

They understand politics but they expect fairness and decency 

and honesty.  And if you want to design boundaries in a 

non-partisan sense to reform, they'd say: fair enough; but then 

prove to us that it is non-partisan. 

 

And all the actions we've seen here in the NDP administration 

with higher and higher deficits, lower and lower credit ratings, 

and broken promises and broken hearts and broken wills, and 

the children and the seniors and others that are suffering as a 

result of the NDP, none of that would lead us to believe that the 

public has confidence in the NDP government designing and 

redesigning boundaries. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would certainly support the amendment to 

this Bill.  And I would support any arguments that say, let's 

back off this change.  Because the faade of efficiency and cost 

saving is not there, and there certainly isn't fairness seen in the 

NDP administration.  And the public, Mr. Speaker, wants to 

know that if you are going to gerrymander so that you're going 

to get the same government over and over even if you don't 

want them . . . that's the farthest thing from their mind. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just want to make it very, very clear, I think it's 

a sad, sad day in the province of Saskatchewan when this kind 

of Bill comes forward after 18 months of boondoggles and 

misinformation and half-truths and reneging on promises.  I 

think it's a pathetic, pathetic show of non-courage, 

non-foresight; and it really tells us that the NDP were elected 

for one reason and one reason only, and that's partisan politics 

-- win at all cost, and then stay in power at all costs.  And I 

hope they reap what they sow, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(2015) 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, at times 

when we find ourselves in the legislature, there's times when 

we'd like to speak to Bills and there's times when we'd not like 

to speak to Bills, Mr. Speaker.  And I think this is one of those 

times when we are forced into a situation of speaking to a Bill 

that is very, very poor, a Bill that's been brought forward by a 

discredited government, a government that continues to amaze, 

absolutely continues to amaze the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

You go from one jackpot to another.  I don't know when it's 

going to end.  One jackpot to another.  First of all, when you 

get in here you do everything possible to hurt rural 

Saskatchewan, and then you stand up and tell us that it's all in 

the interests -- the best interests -- of the people of 

Saskatchewan in general.  It's amazing. 



2418 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1993 

We've seen such dramatic things happen in rural Saskatchewan, 

to rural Saskatchewan, and these people, back-bench MLAs, 

still maintain that they support rural Saskatchewan and 

represent rural Saskatchewan.  There isn't a single one of you 

back-bench MLAs that have done one thing for your 

constituency since the day you were sworn into office into this 

place.  Not one thing, Mr. Speaker, have they done for their 

constituencies. 

 

You just look at the things that have happened to rural 

Saskatchewan since you people have took office.  Just look at 

them.  You cut off their hospitals, rip farm support away from 

them, take away almost everything that can possibly be taken 

away from them, and now you want to take away their vote so 

that they can't get back at you.  That's what it is.  That's what 

it's all about, isn't it?  You know darn well you're in a jackpot 

here.  You know very, very well that you are in trouble 

politically and therefore the only way to stop the people of 

rural Saskatchewan from taking you out of office next time 

around is disenfranchise them, Mr. Speaker; make it so that 

they can't speak up in the face of democracy.  Make it so that 

they cannot have a voice.  Make it so that they can't throw you 

out of office. 

 

But it's interesting. I see all these NDP back-bench MLAs 

supporting this thing, and their seat is going to disappear.  

Which ones will be left, I wonder, Mr. Speaker.  Which ones 

will be left?  Shaunavon will be gone for sure, guaranteed.  

Adios, amigo.  It's done.  Everyone knows that one's gone.  And 

that guy he's . . . That's fine anyway because he doesn't go 

home anyway.  He tells us privately he doesn't go home any 

more because they roast him royally when he does go home, 

Mr. Speaker.  That's what happens to him when he heads out 

that way. 

 

It'll be interesting, Mr. Speaker.  The member for Maple Creek, 

he'll be representing everything from the South Saskatchewan 

to the American border, and I'll be representing everything 

from the South Saskatchewan to the Athabasca before long, 

Mr. Speaker.  That's what'll happen on the western side of the 

province.  We'll have constituencies over there triple the size of 

some of the ones -- square-miles wise -- compared to other 

constituencies in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not only that, we'll be representing constituencies 

with such vast size I don't know how we'll be able to get 

around them.  And they always use the argument, they always 

use the argument that that's the concern about the two northern 

seats -- very thinly populated, few people.  That's right.  Why 

does that argument apply in those situations but when you look 

at other situations it doesn't apply any longer?  What is the 

reason?  What compels you people to continue along this line?  

What compels you to continue along this line?  Have you got 

some kind of a death wish electorally or what? 

 

It amazes me, Mr. Speaker, that they continue going down this 

path.  We saw the health care reform, Mr. 

Speaker, that was forced on the people of this province, Mr. 

Speaker.  And the kind of thing that we see -- health care 

reform  we had huge, huge public rallies out on the western 

side of the province and it wasn't only directed at health care, 

the concern, Mr. Speaker.  The concern was about the kinds of 

things that's happening to rural Saskatchewan in general. 

 

Sixteen hundred people.  Sixteen hundred people turned up at a 

public meeting in my home town, Mr. Speaker, 1,600 people.  

That's more than the whole community and area has.  There's 

people came in from a distance to go to that public meeting and 

vent their rage with this government on health care reform and 

on a whole host of other issues, Mr. Speaker.  That night, that 

night, Mr. Speaker, when they had an opportunity to question 

the ministers, they touched on a whole host of areas and 

electoral reform was just one of them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They take away their hospital.  They take away everything that 

they can get their hands on, Mr. Speaker.  Now they want to 

take their vote, Mr. Speaker.  Not only that but they wanted to . 

. . for a little while the member from Rosetown-Elrose was 

even going to rip up the highways so they couldn't even get out 

any more, out of rural Saskatchewan if they wanted, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And fortunately, fortunately . . . I don't know which one of you 

had the good sense to put the kibosh on that.  It'd be interesting 

to . . . it had been an interesting day to be in caucus, I'll bet -- or 

cabinet, Mr. Speaker -- when the decision to reverse that was.  

It probably went something like this: which one of you kooks 

come up with this idea? 

 

The Speaker: -- I think the member is treading on pretty 

dangerous grounds when he refers to people in this legislature 

as kooks, and I'd ask him to withdraw the remark and get back 

to parliamentary language. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I withdraw that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can only think, us in the opposition, Mr. 

Speaker, and people in general in rural Saskatchewan can only 

feel that the . . . what is happening to rural Saskatchewan is 

something that we cannot agree with.  I think the people of 

rural Saskatchewan do not agree with what's happening, Mr. 

Speaker.  I think the people . . . any fair-minded person in 

Saskatchewan does not agree with what's going on in this 

legislature as far as the changes that this government is putting 

forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Any time that this government, any time that this government 

feels that they are threatened, for whatever reason, they bring 

in legislation to deal with it.  That is their solution to 

everything, Mr. Speaker.  Power for power's sake   that's 

how they deal with their concerns, Mr. Speaker. Every time we 

see something that they feel is a threat, real or perceived, they 

bring in a piece of legislation to deal with it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And they realize more and more and more as their 



June 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2419 

rural members sneak back into their constituencies in the dead 

of the night, Mr. Speaker, on the weekends, they find that they 

come back and they tell them, we're in big trouble.  We're in 

big trouble in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

So the way you deal with it is the same way you deal with 

every other problem you had, you legislate it out of existence.  

Legislate the problem out of existence, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That's what's happened.  That's the legacy that we have seen of 

this government in 18, 19 months, Mr. Speaker.  We've seen 

them legislate against personal contracts of people, former 

employees of the government, Mr. Speaker.  We've seen them 

legislate against farmers, Mr. Speaker, because they realize that 

the farm community didn't support them.  The farm community 

didn't support them in the last election, Mr. Speaker; they 

realized that so they had to do something to hurt them. 

 

They had to do something to put forward a platform of revenge 

on those people, Mr. Speaker.  So they took away the lifeblood 

of rural Saskatchewan when they changed the GRIP contract.  

They took away the opportunity for them to have some kind of 

economic hope in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And every farmer, every single farmer in rural Saskatchewan, 

they just have to look at the difference between '91 and '92 and 

they realize the significant difference that there was in the 

amount of coverage that they had, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I notice members are turning the 

mikes on their desks.  Tomorrow a number of those mikes will 

not be in operation.  They will not respond.  And we're going to 

have some difficulties in the legislature, and I'm asking 

members please not to turn the mikes on their desks. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, they had 

to legislate against the farmers because they felt the farmers, at 

some point, would bite back, and that would be the next 

opportunity that there was an election, Mr. Speaker, so they 

legislated against them. 

 

Then they had to look at some other things that they needed to 

do.  They are going on a platform of revenge in rural 

Saskatchewan, unprecedented revenge.  I just have to look at 

the constituency that I represent, Mr. Speaker.  I don't know 

how many things more you can do to the constituency of 

Kindersley. 

 

I just look at the community of Eston as an example, Mr. 

Speaker.  And I'll just lay out a few examples of what I 

consider political revenge on my constituency because I live at 

Eston.  And here's a couple examples, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In one day -- this is an example of what happened in one day in 

my constituency -- they announced in the morning that they 

were going to take away the 

hospital for that community.  Fourteen hundred people live in 

Eston.  They're going to take away the hospital, downsize it up, 

do whatever you want to talk about, convert it, you name it.  

They were going to downsize that thing out of existence, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Later on in the day we found out in that community that we 

were going to be losing every single penny -- every single 

penny -- of money that was directed to the regional park.  It 

wasn't a great deal of money -- $14,000 -- but it was the 

amount of money that the lifeblood of that park lived on, I'll 

tell you, Mr. Speaker.  Fourteen thousand dollars. 

 

I happened to talk to the chairman of the board of that regional 

park and he tells me that that happened on the same day.  In 

fact I saw the copy of the letter -- he provided it to me -- of 

notice from the department.  Fourteen thousand dollars.  So 

that was the second hit that day. 

 

And the third one, Mr. Speaker, was they came in and told 

them that the bus line for that area would no longer be 

continuing.  In one day, in one day, you've effectively closed 

the hospital, you've effectively closed the regional park, and 

you've effectively stripped away the bus-line service to that 

community.  In one day. 

 

In one day that's the kind of devastation you people have 

imposed on a community in rural Saskatchewan.  One day.  

And it doesn't stop there, Mr. Speaker.  Doesn't stop there 

either.  It just goes on and on and on, the saga. 

 

Another thing that happened to that community just a little 

while ago, Mr. Speaker . . . They have a baseball team out there 

and a hockey team out there called the Eston Ramblers.  

Hockey team, Eston Ramblers.  Baseball team, Eston 

Ramblers.  You may be familiar with them, Mr. Speaker.  They 

play in the Saskatchewan major baseball league.  And they also 

play in the Wild Goose Hockey League. 

 

In one day, Mr. Speaker, as well, they said to those people . . . 

they wanted to put on a fund-raising bingo, Mr. Speaker, 

something that goes on in rural Saskatchewan all the time, to 

help small sports franchises keep alive, community-based 

sports franchises.  Wanted to put on a community bingo. 

 

So they went to the people that are in charge of giving out 

licences for that function, Mr. Speaker, and they denied it to 

them.  They've held a bingo in that community for as long as I 

can remember -- as long as I can remember -- to raise funds for 

the hockey team and the baseball team.  And now they can't do 

that.  Now they can't do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Because this government looks at that community and says, 

they elected a PC member; we are going to make sure they pay.  

We are going to make sure they pay in spades, Mr. Speaker.  

And the list goes on and on and on and on of political revenge, 

political revenge that has been imposed on that community and 

that constituency, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They were going to rip up the highway, they were 



2420 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1993 

going to rip up the highway south of Eston.  That was on the 

list that was going to be brought forward.  And I wonder what 

the rationale was for that, Mr. Speaker.  Was it because the 

member for Kindersley just happens to live there, Mr. Speaker?  

Another example of political revenge by this party.  Another 

example of political revenge. 

 

So we see them wanting to tear the highway out, wanting to cut 

the bus line off, cut the hospital out, take away the regional 

park, take away fund-raising bingos. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they sit and laugh.  Well I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, 

the people of that community sure aren't laughing.  The people 

of that constituency sure aren't laughing about what's 

happening to them, Mr. Speaker.  It goes on and on and on. 

 

And then recently, Mr. Speaker, here is probably the crowning 

glory of all of the stupidity that could be hoisted upon this 

constituency, Mr. Speaker -- the crowning glory.  Not less than 

. . . it was, I believe, about two, maybe three years ago in the 

town of Eston, Mr. Speaker, the people of that town got 

together, municipal council and town council, decided that 

what they were going to do was build a new clinic, Mr. 

Speaker.  The clinic that was there previous to that was an old 

building and in fairly serious state of disrepair, Mr. Speaker.  

And they decided they were going to build a new clinic. 

 

So they did.  They got together the two levels of government, 

Mr. Speaker, got together and they raised enough money 

between the two -- the municipality and the town council -- and 

then they put a special levy on for the municipal property and 

town property, raised enough money to build that clinic.  I 

think it was something in the order of $600,000 over a couple 

of years they put together, Mr. Speaker.  Put together $600,000, 

built a beautiful clinic, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(2030) 

 

As a result of that new clinic, we've been able to attract a new 

dentist to the community -- a young fellow that was born and 

raised and educated in Eston, went on to dental college in 

Saskatoon and then came back to practise his profession in that 

community.  And he wouldn't have, had it not been for that 

new clinic being built because there wasn't any facilities for 

him, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So they built that clinic; beautiful thing built onto the hospital, 

which incidentally is a very, very sound structure.  It was built, 

I believe, in '57, Mr. Speaker.  The building is in excellent 

repair still.  So they built this new clinic onto the hospital, Mr. 

Speaker.  And everyone thought that the health care services in 

that community were absolutely guaranteed and secure at that 

point because they had finally corrected the one thing that was 

wrong.  The clinic was needed desperately, so they corrected 

that one problem.  And the people of that community thought 

everything would be fine, Mr. Speaker. 

And what happened in the last few days?  And the member 

from Biggar, he would know this because he was out there 

talking to the people out there.  They came to them, they came 

to them now and said to the people of Eston -- if you can 

imagine this, Mr. Speaker -- that they are going to . . . One of 

the proposals that they have is to shut the hospital down, the 

other one is to physically pick up that new clinic -- big brick 

structure, beautiful building -- physically pick up that structure 

and move it two blocks down the street and hook it onto the 

nursing home.  And the people of that community look at them 

and think they have completely lost their minds, Mr. Speaker, 

when they want to do something so absurd as pick up the 

building and physically move it two blocks down the street and 

add it onto the nursing home.  What would possess anyone to 

think that that is some kind of a rational way of utilizing the 

health care dollars? 

 

They had a construction moving company -- I think it was 

Wiebe's out of Saskatoon -- come out and give them a 

quotation of $100,000 to pick that building up and move it two 

blocks down the street to satisfy the whims of the Minister of 

Health, Mr. Speaker.  Can anyone believe that, Mr. Speaker?  

What would be the possible reason why you would want to do 

that -- a building that's sitting in one location, move it to 

another location two blocks down the street? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Who told you that, Bill?  Who told you 

that? 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, one member's chirping from 

her seat: who told me that.  Well I'll tell you who told me that, 

the chairman of the board of the health care district, that's who 

told me.  That was one of the proposals that your government 

brought forward. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, so they bring in a few of the 

back-bench MLAs, I think the Associate Minister of Health 

came out to that community, and I think Biggar was out there 

and a couple of other MLAs that day.  And they came into that 

community and what did they do, Mr. Speaker?  Rather than 

meeting with the people of that community, they decided what 

they had to do was try and shore things up a little bit politically 

that day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So they came in, snuck into town.  Nobody knew they were 

coming.  Snuck into town, had a little, private little audience 

with a few of the big-time NDPers in the constituency, trying 

to pump a little sand into their backbone to get them to go 

along with all of this, Mr. Speaker.  And I don't know what the 

results of that meeting were that day, Mr. Speaker, but my 

guess is that even the NDP people in that town are looking at 

you people and saying, shame on you.  Shame on you for the 

kinds of things that you are doing to that community.  Shame 

on you for taking away their hospital.  Shame on you for taking 

away their bus line.  Shame on you for taking away their 

regional park funding.  Shame on you for wanting to rip up 

their highway.  And now shame on you for wanting to tear that 

building out of one location and move it to the other location. 



June 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2421 

That's like, Mr. Speaker, because you don't happen to like the 

street you live on, picking your house up and moving it down 

the street a few blocks just to get a different view.  That's all 

that would be accomplished, Mr. Speaker, by doing that.  

That's all that would be accomplished by doing that, taking that 

building and moving it from one spot to another.  Get a little 

different view on things.  That's all that would happen, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the member from Biggar, he was there that 

day.  What did they tell you?  What did they tell you, Mr. 

Member from Biggar?  What did the people of Eston say to 

you that day I wonder?  I'll bet they said you don't know what 

you are doing in government any longer.  You guys have lost 

complete control of what you're doing.  You guys are listening 

to the front benches on that constituency and there isn't a one of 

you back-bench MLAs that has the ability or the intestinal 

fortitude to stand up in your caucus and say no.  Not one of 

you. 

 

Not a single one of you other than perhaps the member from 

Regina Rosemont who we saw here the other day was the only 

one, the only one to date that's had the courage to stand up to 

his convictions.  Although misguided as they are, nevertheless 

he stood up for the views that he holds, Mr. Speaker.  The 

normally ill-informed member, he at least put forward what he 

thought was the view that was representative of his 

constituents, Mr. Speaker, and the people that he represented 

here that day in the gallery right behind us, Mr. Speaker, union 

leaders from all over this province. 

 

And what happened after, Mr. Speaker?  That was an 

interesting day.  I haven't seen anything like it. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I want to remind members, 

although this is a wide-ranging debate, he can't go into details 

on those various items and not relate them to the Bill.  So I'd 

like to make sure that he directs them to the Bill and to the 

amendments. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, what it 

shows, what it shows quite clearly is a developing trend by this 

government, a developing trend of trying to rip away support 

from one area of Saskatchewan and deliver it to another area of 

Saskatchewan.  A trend that is trying to protect that fragile, 

very, very fragile political situation that they find themselves 

in, Mr. Speaker.  That's the trend that it shows. 

 

And on that day when the member from Regina Rosemont tried 

to introduce a piece of legislation into this Assembly, every 

single one of the NDP MLAs voted against it that day.  And it 

was quite a thing to behold, Mr. Speaker.  And union members, 

man, were they ever mad up in that gallery.  Do you recall that, 

Mr. Speaker?  And it's a type of trend that we are seeing from 

this government.  It just goes on and on and on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and what happened was, as each one of 

them, as each one of them dared to go out into the rotunda out 

front here, they were royally roasted by those union people that 

day.  I'll never forget it.  I stood around out there for a little 

while, Mr. Speaker, and watched the fun.  And man, was it 

something to behold, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When NDP people who probably were as partisan of supporters 

of you people as there ever has been, as they're probably as 

strong a supporter that you ever got, when they say to you and 

confront, look you right straight in the eye, Mr. Member from 

Biggar, when you walked out there, when they looked you 

right straight in the eye . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I have to remind the member 

that that has nothing to do with the amendment or the Bill that 

is before us.  And I wish the member would get back to the 

amendment and not get into details on something that happened 

outside this House, which has nothing to do with the Bill.  I ask 

the member to get back to the Bill and to the amendment. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'll try 

and illustrate a little bit more clearly then how those things are 

associated with the Bill.  Mr. Speaker, I think what it shows is 

that this government will do anything in its power to get its 

way. 

 

A clear trend has developed right from the day they took office, 

Mr. Speaker.  A clear trend that has shown that they are not in 

touch with the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  A clear 

trend that shows that they are trying to put forward a platform 

of revenge on one group, one sector of our society, Mr. 

Speaker, and that being the rural people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there's a lot of people in this legislature that are 

MLAs for rural constituencies.  And it seems funny, Mr. 

Speaker, that the only ones -- the only ones -- that are standing 

up to the constituents that they were elected to stand up for 

happen to sit over on this side of the House confined to these 

10 desks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The only ones that are standing up for rural Saskatchewan and 

saying no, we don't agree with having our hospital taken away 

from us.  No, we don't agree with having our highways ripped 

up.  No, we don't agree with having our farm support taken 

away from us. 

 

And where, Mr. Speaker, where have the NDP back-bench 

MLAs been while all this is going on?  I haven't heard one of 

them, not a single one of them, including the member from 

Regina Rosemont, standing up and trying to defend rural 

Saskatchewan against this government.  Not a single one of 

them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it's all part of the trend, Mr. Speaker, that this government 

has shown itself for what it is.  A party that is in decline -- 

rapid decline -- Mr. Speaker, and they know they are . . . the 

bottom has fallen out 



2422 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1993 

electorally, the bottom has fallen out electorally, of your 

chances of being re-elected.  And they know it. 

 

And the Premier is doing whatever he can to cling to that . . . 

his desk, Mr. Speaker.  Whatever he can to cling to his desk.  

So the way the great minds that sit in the front benches there 

have got together collectively and decided the only way we're 

going to save this thing, if there's any way of saving it at all, 

Mr. Speaker, is to strip rural Saskatchewan of their electoral 

votes and their ability to put members into this legislature, Mr. 

Speaker.  That's what they've decided is the way to deal with 

the problem. 

 

Just like everything else, if it doesn't work, if you can't get it to 

work, legislate it.  Do whatever you have to to get your way, 

Mr. Speaker.  Doesn't matter, win at all costs, Mr. Speaker.  

Doesn't matter what the consequences are, the goal is to win, 

Mr. Speaker.  Get in there and fight as hard as you possibly 

can, go for the gusto and win.  And that is exactly what they've 

decided, the front benches of the government, Mr. Speaker, 

have decided to do, try and protect themselves electorally and 

strip rural Saskatchewan of whatever remaining values are still 

out there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I say to you, Mr. Speaker, I think the people of rural 

Saskatchewan will rise up against this government.  I think that 

there's clear evidence to show, Mr. Speaker, that the people of 

rural Saskatchewan are pretty well fed up, pretty well fed up 

with what's happening with this government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we know that the member from Cut Knife-Lloyd can't go 

home either on weekends any more.  The people there are very, 

very disappointed in her, Mr. Speaker.  The people are 

disappointed in her, as an elected MLA from that constituency, 

can't go home on the weekends because she gets into trouble at 

home on the weekends, Mr. Speaker.  What happens is, Mr. 

Speaker, I can just imagine, the phone must never stop ringing 

of people calling and complaining against your government. 

 

And so what happens?  They hunker down, Mr. Speaker, right 

here in the heart of government, develop a bunker mentality, 

make it so that you collectively can govern right from Regina 

here and not have to go out into the great unwashed of rural 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  Make it so that you don't have to 

put up with the criticism of rural Saskatchewan any more, Mr. 

Speaker.  Make it so those people can't get to you any longer.  

Make it so those people can't get to you any more, Mr. Speaker.  

And make it so you can win again.  Make it so that you can win 

again. 

 

But the fact is, Mr. Speaker, even though the Minister of 

Justice said that the seat of Cut Knife-Lloyd probably wouldn't 

be affected, Mr. Speaker, how does he know that?  How does 

he know that, Mr. Speaker?  How does a member from Moose 

Jaw -- the one member from Moose Jaw -- know that his seat 

won't be affected, Mr. Speaker?  And how does a couple of the 

ones up in P.A., how do they know that their seats won't be  

affected, Mr. Speaker? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Show us the map. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- That's right, Mr. Speaker.  I think it's been 

predetermined.  That's how they know it's not going to happen.  

That's how they know that their seats aren't going to be affected 

by all of this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It must have been an interesting time in caucus when you 

divided up the spoils.  It must have been an interesting day in 

caucus when you sat down with the big map on the wall and 

said:  which one of you people are expendable?  We know for 

sure the member from Shaunavon is expendable.  He's toast; 

he's out of here, Mr. Speaker.  He's expendable, so he has to go. 

 

Now I'm not sure whether the member from Biggar has 

distinguished himself enough in this legislature, in caucus, 

whether he was able to save his hide that day, Mr. Speaker.  I 

don't know.  Maybe he can enlighten us.  Maybe he would care 

to enlighten the people of Saskatchewan.  Were you able to 

hold on to your seat for Biggar?  Were you able to hold on to 

the seat for the constituents at Biggar?  I don't know whether he 

was or not.  I don't think he's a strong enough member, Mr. 

Speaker, to be able to do that. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Bengough-Milestone. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Bengough-Milestone.  There's another one too, 

Mr. Speaker.  A novice member, not exactly myself, Mr. 

Speaker, first-time elected member; doesn't quite know the way 

around a little bit; hasn't been shown the ropes by some of the 

old boys on the front bench, Mr. Speaker.  Hasn't been shown 

all of the intricacies of looking after things for themselves, Mr. 

Speaker.  So probably that member's gone too.  

Bengough-Milestone will likely be gone.  We're up to three 

now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Wonder which other ones are out of here too, Mr. Speaker.  

Redberry, I'll be bet you is . . . Redberry, I'll bet you is on the 

chopping block because the guy in the back corner over here 

that never says anything, we know very well he wouldn't stand 

up in caucus for his constituents, Mr. Speaker.  He wouldn't 

stand up for his constituents, so he'll be gone too. 

 

And the guy beside him -- what seat is he? 

 

(2045) 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Shellbrook.  He'll be gone too.  Shellbrook will 

be gone and they'll roll that into P.A. for sure.  A couple of 

P.A. seats are a little more safe.  They're a little more safe up 

there.  So those ones will have to be rolled into P.A. to make 

sure that there's two seats that are safe for NDP MLAs up there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it doesn't take a lot of thought to be able to put 

together this kind of scenario that must have developed that 

day in caucus. 



June 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2423 

I wonder what made the member from Shaunavon and Biggar 

and Bengough-Milestone and a couple of these guys back . . . 

what made you guys into such black sheep in such a hurry with 

this government, Mr. Speaker?  What did you do?  What did 

you do that made them turn on you?  What did you do that 

made them turn on you, Mr. Speaker?  I wonder what happened 

that day in caucus.  What made them turn on you so quickly?  

What made them turn on you so quickly? 

 

And it's probably because, as some of the members were 

saying, it's because they don't do anything.  That's what 

happened, Mr. Speaker.  It's fairly clear; it's growing more 

clear all the time, Mr. Speaker.  The people of those 

constituencies, those few that we mentioned, they are 

under-represented now and they're going to be with total 

unrepresentation pretty quick, after the big map gets 

completely drawn, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I'll bet there isn't a member on the front bench . . . oh no, I 

forgot about him -- Rosetown-Elrose.  Rosetown-Elrose, he's in 

serious trouble, Mr. Speaker.  The member from Maple Creek, 

as I said, will be representing everything from the South 

Saskatchewan to the American border and I'll have everything 

from the South Saskatchewan north to Cut Knife-Lloyd 

because that one's safe, apparently, Mr. Speaker.  And then 

everything over to probably to about Diefenbaker Lake, which 

will take in the member from Rosetown-Elrose.  I forgot about 

him.  He's the guy that brought forward the fiasco of GRIP.  

And so if he isn't a black sheep in that caucus, I don't know 

who is.  He's probably as much of a black sheep as the member 

from Regina Rosemont is these days, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and so that's probably the way it was sort of done.  

I'm not quite sure that that'd be exactly how it was done, but I 

guess that's probably how it was done.  The two MLAs from 

Moose Jaw, they're reasonably strong members, so they were 

able to hold on.  They were able to hold on.  When he speaks in 

the legislature, that one over there -- I forget which seat he 

represents, north or south Wakamow, or whichever -- anyway, 

he has that ability to speak fairly well in caucus, I presume.  He 

has that sort of religious zeal and that sort of auctioneer 

cadence that he's able to spellbound things for a little while. 

 

And that's kind of a . . . even though he didn't make cabinet, 

that's kind of a useful kind of guy to have around, Mr. Speaker 

-- you know, one of those handy kind of things.  That's what 

that member represents.  So I think he'll be able to hold onto 

his seat.  In fact, you already said he did.  He will be able to 

hang onto it, Mr. Speaker.  It's been widely reported, widely 

reported that he'll be able to cling to his seat -- cling to his seat.  

I don't know what . . . maybe he sent the front bench a 

Christmas card last year and the others didn't.  I don't know 

what the criteria was that they used for drawing this thing up. 

 

The guy up in Canora; I'd be a little worried about him 

too though.  That seat's . . . that one's a little tenuous, I would 

say as well, Mr. Speaker.  Lately he hasn't been making a lot of 

people happy.  Out at stock growers the other day out there, 

they wanted a barbecue, and I'm not sure it was beef that they 

wanted to barbecue that day, Mr. Speaker.  I think it was the 

Minister of Agriculture that they had in mind, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can put, we can put a light tone on all of this, 

and that's exactly what we've been doing, but it's far more 

serious than that, Mr. Speaker, far more serious than that.  The 

people of rural Saskatchewan feel betrayed.  They feel betrayed 

by a government that is drunk with power, Mr. Speaker.  They 

feel betrayed by a government that knows no limit to the 

distance that they will go to try and get re-elected. 

 

The Premier of this province, he worked, he worked as hard as 

any person in politics today to get where he is and he doesn't 

want it to slip.  He doesn't want to have to go back to being the 

Leader of the Opposition, or just the back-bench MLA for 

Saskatoon Riversdale.  It took a long time.  He clawed his way 

to the top and he wants to stay there right on top, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And therefore, Mr. Speaker, if it means making a few members 

expendable, so be it.  So be it, Mr. Speaker, if a few 

back-bench MLAs like Biggar and Canora and 

Bengough-Milestone and Rosetown-Elrose, if he has to make a 

few of them expendable, fine. 

 

He'll find jobs for them nevertheless, though, Mr. Speaker.  If 

he can find something that even looks remotely like these 

people might be qualified for, which would be quite a job in 

itself, Mr. Speaker, but if he can find something that these 

people would be qualified for, or at least look like they're 

qualified for, he'll be able to slip them into that. 

 

The member from Biggar, I'm not sure what kind . . . he's an 

agricultural kind of guy, Mr. Speaker.  There must be 

something in agriculture that he can do.  Must be something, 

some board or some commission or . . . Does he know 

anything, Mr. Speaker?  I don't know. 

 

But he probably, because he's been in farm circles for a long 

time, probably has a reasonably good understanding of crop 

insurance.  So, Mr. Speaker, that might be something that he 

could deal with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, electoral reform is something that this 

government has put forward as one of its platforms, Mr. 

Speaker.  Electoral reform is something that they promised, 

Mr. Speaker.  Electoral reform is something that they said that 

they were going to do, Mr. Speaker, and now they want to put 

it in the hands of a commission, but they want to . . . they got to 

make sure that it's goes the way they want it to go. 

 

So you got to dictate a few things, Mr. Speaker.  You got to 

make sure that there's only two seats in the North because the 

two seats in the North, they know that there's pretty good 

chance that they can continue winning them, pretty good 

chance that they can continue winning them, Mr. Speaker.  The 

people up in the North are far enough from Regina that they 



2424 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1993 

don't know what's going on down here most of the time, so 

those seats are fairly well secured, so you can protect those.  

And then within caucus, the members that are the strongest 

within . . . performers within caucus, protect those, Mr. 

Speaker, and that's how it's done. 

 

The Minister of Justice, Mr. Speaker, he said . . . he said, Mr. 

Speaker -- I thought it was absolutely amazing when he said it 

-- they didn't have any particular number in mind; it could have 

been 59, it could have been 57, could have been 55; picked out 

of the air 58.  I can't . . . I don't know what it was about 58.  

Maybe it was his number in the pool, Mr. Speaker.  Maybe it 

was the number he chose in the pool, the NDP pool that was 

going around, choosing up the number of seats that would be 

available for people. 

 

So he picked 58.  No rationale; admitted that.  Admitted that 

there was no rationale to it.  Said it just was a number. We just 

picked it out of the hat -- 58.  So there we go.  Cuts down eight 

seats.  Save a little money, Mr. Speaker.  Maybe make that 

money available to have a few more cabinet ministers, add a 

couple of resignations, a little bit messy, but we can bring in a 

few of the back-bench boys that have a little promise, Mr. 

Speaker.  A couple of them that have a little promise. 

 

And I'll predict, Mr. Speaker . . . I think the fellow from 

Kinistino has been doing pretty good, Mr. Speaker.  I think he 

might be moving up in the ranks, Mr. Speaker.  I think he's 

been doing not all that bad.  And the fellow from Meadow . . . 

the guy from Meadow Lake hasn't been doing all that good.  

Yes, look over your shoulder; it wasn't you I was talking about.  

It certainly . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Entertaining as this assessment of our 

various merits is, I'm wondering if the member is going to 

relate it to the Bill.  It doesn't seem to have much relevance to 

it. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I think, Mr. Speaker, in talking to the point of 

order raised by the government assistant Deputy House Leader 

is that it's very salient what my colleague from Kindersley is 

talking about. 

 

He is tying everything together to . . . with the tremendous 

trend, the trend that we're experiencing here, the attack on the 

fundamental values of the people of Saskatchewan as the 

motion is indicating, Mr. Speaker.  And he is taking it piece by 

piece, member by member, showing how they are not stacking 

up.  It's very salient, very relevant, and very interesting and 

very truthful to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: -- The member . . . the Government House 

member makes a good point.  I have listened very carefully to 

the member from Rosthern and he is deviating very far and 

wide from . . . I think the member from Regina Churchill 

Downs, the Government House Leader, makes a very good 

point, 

a valid point.  And I have listened to the member from 

Kindersley and I think he's deviating too far from the motion 

and from the amendment.  When he goes into detail on various 

members in this House and their qualifications, that really has 

nothing to do with this Bill and I ask him for the second or 

third time to stay with the Bill and with the amendment. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We'll try and keep it 

more closely confined to what you feel is the appropriate 

subject, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The proposal that's been put forward by the opposition is quite 

clear, Mr. Speaker.  There's 14 ridings, federal ridings, in 

Saskatchewan, 14 ridings in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Four 

provincial ridings per individual federal riding, we wind up 

with 56.  At least it has some rationale to it, Mr. Speaker.  It 

gives everyone the opportunity in Saskatchewan to know 

exactly who their representatives are. 

 

We know of situations in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, where 

there are several provincial seats that are within a federal seat 

right now.  We also know situations where there's just bits and 

corners of them overlapping jurisdictions -- all kinds of things 

like that, Mr. Speaker, and it must be confusing. 

 

I represent a seat that is confined within a federal seat, Mr. 

Speaker, so there isn't as much of an opportunity for confusion 

on that issue, Mr. Speaker, but there other areas of the province 

where there is significant confusion between who is the MLA, 

who is the MP (Member of Parliament), all of those kinds of 

things, Mr. Speaker.  We follow it fairly closely here, Mr. 

Speaker, so the people in this legislature generally know who 

their MP is, but there are folks that don't follow it quite as 

closely, Mr. Speaker, and there's a lot of confusion.  And I 

think if everyone looks at it honestly, Mr. Speaker, I think that 

they would find that that's exactly the case. 

 

You find quite often, Mr. Speaker, I have calls to my office and 

people will be confusing federal issues with provincial issues.  

They'll call you on unemployment insurance concerns, not 

realizing that you are the provincial MLA or not realizing that 

it's an area of federal responsibility, Mr. Speaker.  They'll look 

at different areas.  Often there's confusion in that one 

particularly, unemployment insurance, Mr. Speaker.  There's 

lots of confusion in social services.  There's lots of confusion in 

a number of different areas, government departments, Mr. 

Speaker.  And I think that would help deal with that confusion, 

Mr. Speaker.  I think it would help deal with it because the 

people . . . you'd be able to move them along the chain rather 

quickly to the person that they need to talk to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Often I think that there's occasions when people are confused 

because of the various boundaries and everything, Mr. Speaker.  

They don't know where exactly they fit into the puzzle that is 

out there, Mr. Speaker.  So if we had boundaries that were the 

same federally within four constituencies, confined within that 

federal jurisdiction, Mr. Speaker, I think it would 



June 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2425 

alleviate a lot of that concern, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's a serious issue.  It's an issue that goes to the 

heart of democracy.  It goes to the heart of democracy because 

people want to have adequate representation.  They want to 

have people in the legislature representing the interests of their 

constituency.  And they want to know that the process of 

selecting the constituencies was done in a fair way, Mr. 

Speaker.  And it can be argued -- and I'll accept that argument 

-- that it's been done in all different ways in the past, Mr. 

Speaker.  And we can accept blame.  We can accept blame for 

some of it in the past, and that other administrations have to 

accept blame for some of it in the past.  But there's always the 

perception, Mr. Speaker, that it hasn't been done fairly, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

(2100) 

 

But yet the one area it seems that there isn't near as much 

criticism is when you look at the federal areas, Mr. Speaker.  

There isn't near as much criticism because there's a lot more 

public input in it.  People have a better understanding of it, Mr. 

Speaker.  And as a result of that I think the people would 

support a move to confining four provincial seats into one 

federal seat, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, but what it does though, to the government 

members, it represents a significant problem for them.  Because 

who on the front benches is going to be able to divide up the 

spoils of Regina or divide up the spoils of Saskatoon 

electorally, Mr. Speaker?  Which ones would have to be 

bounced out, Mr. Speaker?  And that's the problem that the 

government has with it. 

 

Even though it's rational, even though it presents a lot of very, 

very good things to the people of Saskatchewan, even though it 

makes a lot of sense to most people, Mr. Speaker, it doesn't 

make sense because there might be the odd one on the 

government side that has to be moved aside, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And generally the cabinet ministers, they know that the best 

thing they have to do for themselves and their constituents is 

protect their little interests, Mr. Speaker, so they can't possibly 

accept this.  Even though I think, Mr. Speaker, there is 

wide-ranging support for this; even though when you look at it 

in an unbiased fashion, Mr. Speaker, there is support for it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is lots more that can be said on this issue, 

Mr. Speaker.  There's a . . . I think the people of rural 

Saskatchewan don't ask for a lot, quite frankly.  I don't think 

they ask for a great deal.  They don't ask for much, Mr. 

Speaker, but they do ask to be represented in this legislature, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would now conclude my remarks by just saying 

that I think the government is wrong.  I think the government is 

wrong to be bringing forward this type of legislation.  I think 

that they should be looking seriously at other proposals.  I think 

our proposal has 

significant merit, Mr. Speaker.  I think it is something the 

government should look at.  But it represents a threat to them 

and therefore they won't do it, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you very 

much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We have tonight, 

Mr. Speaker, the necessity to discuss in debate the Bill No. 79 

which I guess is An Act to Provide for the Division of 

Saskatchewan into Constituencies for the Election of Members 

of the Legislative Assembly.  That in itself seems like a 

reasonable thing to do from time to time.  And having looked at 

history and lived in Saskatchewan for a fair number of years, 

we realize of course that this is a process that is ongoing and 

has been done many times before. 

 

There is one slight difference though.  This government has 

said that in the past in opposition, that they would never enter 

into things like gerrymandering, shaping of constituency seats 

for purely partisan political reasons.  They would never do 

these kind of things, was the message that we heard for several 

years. 

 

And yet here we are with a Bill that doesn't just review the 

boundaries, Mr. Speaker, it sets up a network and a process to 

deliberately manipulate the way that the seats in this province 

will be distributed, not for the purpose of fair representation, 

but for the purpose of achieving an NDP victory in the next 

provincial election.  Of that I am absolutely convinced. 

 

We are also, at the moment, dealing with an amendment to this 

Bill.  And just to refresh my own mind and to make sure that 

my mind-set is on the perimeters that we are to stay within 

during this debate, as well as to let the people who may be 

watching on television know what we're discussing tonight and 

the points that we're trying to make and why, I will read the 

amendment basically to myself out loud.  And it says: 

 

 That Bill 79 not now be read a second time because the 

principles contained in the Bill reinforce the recent trends of 

legislative action against the fundamental values of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

That's a fairly broad-ranging approach, Mr. Speaker, but it is 

necessary because a Bill of this nature that shapes the 

fundamental number of people that will make the laws of our 

province is, by its very nature, extremely important to all 

people within our province. 

 

There's no question that this is something that affects 

everyone's lives, both the past of their lives and the future of 

their lives.  The past of course being the direction that we 

establish in our minds, that we are taking in our lives in our 

province, and the future of course lying in the types of laws 

that we will have to live with and within the boundaries of. 



2426 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1993 

If our laws are made by too many people, I suppose they 

become awkward and cumbersome.  But perhaps we have too 

much expense and people would feel that there would be a 

waste. 

 

On the other hand, if we have too few people, then we run the 

serious risk of destroying the fundamental basis of democracy 

itself, and that of course being the give and take of debate in 

the pros and the cons of the debate and the arguments that go 

on in a democratic Assembly.  The debate is the fundamental 

part of democracy, Mr. Speaker.  And if not enough people are 

involved in that debate, then the message may not fairly and 

equitably be exchanged. 

 

The purpose of our structure in this Assembly is for the 

government to govern by introducing legislation and to try to 

formulate a direction of policy and laws that our people will 

live under and be administered by.  The opposition's purpose of 

course is to bring out all of the problems that can result. 

 

This may be done in something of an adversarial method and 

approach to the view of a quiet passer-by.  But to those that 

study the institution, they must recognize that this is 

fundamental to the democratic process, in that bringing out all 

of the things that are wrong will equip the government to know 

where they may possibly be making mistakes. 

 

And the hope of the democratic process, sir, is that those 

mistakes then can be corrected.  And by the opposition 

showing the things that are wrong and the government trying to 

do things right, the two shall mix with amendments that come 

to legislation.  And in all fairness, in the end hopefully society 

has rules and regulations that they can easily live under. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what has all this got to do with Bill 

79 and the number of seats?  Well quite frankly we deal here 

with who will be represented by what MLAs and how many 

people will be represented by each MLA and how will that 

MLA be able to serve the people that he is elected by. 

 

It has been said by this government that the two seats in the 

northern Saskatchewan, even though they cover several 

hundreds of thousands of square miles, deserve to have two 

members to represent the vast needs of a vast area.  In other 

words population is of no concern in those two instances 

because there are such diverse areas to cover.  Because there 

are so many different things that go on within those vast miles, 

that no one can be truly sure how to properly represent the area 

if you don't have at least two members.  And I can accept that.  

I don't for a minute suggest that those arguments are wrong. 

 

But I will echo the sentiments of my colleague from Kindersley 

who said some minutes back, if the principle applies to 

northern Saskatchewan, why would it not also apply to vast 

distances or vast areas in some other part of Saskatchewan, for 

example, the south-east or the south-west corner or the 

south-central? 

Our populations in rural Saskatchewan are dropping.  There is 

no question about that.  You don't have to be a rocket scientist 

to be able to figure that out.  All you have to do is drive 

through our small rural towns. 

 

But should those that are left in those vast areas with reduced 

numbers now have less representation than the people in the 

two northern seats?  Do not the same principles and the same 

arguments apply, and shouldn't they apply?  And my reasoning 

of course has to be well pointed out that I believe they should 

apply. 

 

So population is not the only criteria that we can stick to.  That 

is why I thought it was so fair and so reasonable when I first 

heard the proposition that the provincial constituencies should 

follow a model that is designed directly after the federal seats 

and the federal division.  And the good luck of it is that, even 

though there's a 25 per cent variance allowed in the federal seat 

distribution, in Saskatchewan apparently we are told that that 

variance is not there.  We do in fact have a variance that is 

much closer to the 5 per cent. 

 

Having lucked into that, then it becomes very much possible, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, for us, very much possible for us to have 

a system that integrates the two -- the federal and provincial 

boundary systems.  That not only can save us a lot of hassle but 

it does give us a very fair distribution of representation and it 

provides us with an excellent opportunity to save the people of 

Saskatchewan several millions of dollars.  And, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that I think Saskatchewan people will all agree is very 

important in these days of depression and in our economy.  To 

save millions of dollars by being able to copy the figures 

already paid for by the federal government seems a natural and 

intelligent thing to do from my point of view. 

 

I've never, ever felt that it was wrong to borrow an idea or, to 

put it even more specifically, to even steal an idea if it was a 

good idea.  Take the idea that somebody else has and use it to 

your benefit because nothing really, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 

our world, is new or original.  All thoughts have been thought 

before through generations of people; all ideas have been 

played around with before.  We simply take the best of them, 

with the knowledge that we have gained as a society, and apply 

them where they best suit our needs and bring us the greatest 

economic benefit.  And here is a golden opportunity for us to 

do exactly that. 

 

We have 14 federal seats.  Put four provincial seats into each 

federal seat and you've got 56 seats, two less than the magic 

number that the NDP have come up with.  I don't know where 

they got that figure.  I've never been able to figure how they 

thought that one through.  My other colleagues suggest that it 

may have been that they saw that there were eight seats that 

they could probably never win, so they might as well eliminate 

them.  That's altogether possible.  But again, there is some 

built-in magic in these numbers.  I don't know if it came about 

as a fluke or if it was well planned.  Nevertheless, it's there. 

 

The two northern seats in the federal distribution are 



June 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2427 

well taken care of because they allow for the preservation of 

that split of two members in the North.  And yet at the same 

time, those areas in the rest of the province that are becoming 

more sparsely populated are also served by that same principle 

in those same numbers. 

 

That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, may be a coincidence or it may be a 

good plan, but it really doesn't matter.  The fact that the 

numbers work out so well is the important thing.  How it 

happened is not important at this stage.  What is important is 

that they're there and they'll work, they are fair, they are 

reasonable; and we truly suggest to this government that they 

take a look at what they're doing with Bill 79 and put some 

amendments in that can make this truly a fair and equitable 

distribution without the partisan politics that we've seen in the 

past. 

 

Now we have talked about the need, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of 

this government to align political boundaries in such a way that 

the history and the culture and the evolution of our province 

can continue to be represented and can continue to grow 

without being stifled.  And we have said that there are certain 

trends in our amendment that are demonstrated as being 

Saskatchewan only -- trends of ways of life, all the way back to 

the pioneering spirit that only a mid-west part of Canada and 

perhaps some of the United States could express and show. 

 

(2115) 

 

The cowboy hat and the cowboy boots that some people wear, 

sir, are a distinct and cultural part of our heritage.  You won't 

find them worn very often in Toronto.  You won't find them 

very often in Montreal.  And even Vancouver has very few; but 

a few are there because some of those from the Midwest go 

there and take their lifestyle and their culture with them. 

 

I suggest that in some parts of the world the western dress that 

we sometimes wear would even be laughed at.  But it's ours -- 

it's distinctly ours.  In Saskatchewan, for those who choose to 

go that way and to wear those styles, no one much pays 

attention.  They even have a bar in Regina where you get a 

special reduction when you come in the door if you're dressed 

in such attire.  That has become our culture and our way. 

 

Those things reflect in the kind of laws that we have and the 

trends that we are taking, and we call it our Saskatchewan 

values.  The right to be a little different, the right to be a little 

bit eccentric.  We don't wear six-guns on our hip but we live a 

rather free and easy and sort of easy, loose kind of lifestyle.  

Not loose in morality, but loose in our ability to accept one 

another. 

 

We have a tendency not to discriminate in Saskatchewan 

against other folks, the way they do in some of the other parts 

of the world.  We have the ability, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to look 

down the street and see people from all nationalities, and not 

even basically consider that they're there.  That too is a part of 

our culture. 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- It's not that I'm not interested in the 

lifestyles of the people who the member relates to, I cannot 

however relate it to the Bill.  It seems to me to be way off the 

topic. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- I think we should give the member an 

opportunity to relate what he's saying to the Bill.  Let him 

proceed. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  For the 

member opposite, I want to read the amendment so that he will 

understand where we're coming from.  The amendment says: 

 

 That Bill 79 not now be read a second time because the 

principles contained in the Bill reinforce the recent trend of 

legislative action against the fundamental values of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

The fundamental values of Saskatchewan people, sir, are the 

ability . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  I'm getting too much chatter 

from both sides and I'm finding it difficult to hear the member 

from Maple Creek. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I know that 

it's hard for the members to understand that we have a separate 

culture that has been based on the kind of laws that we have 

evolved in this province and the trends that we have developed 

in our province; trends that can be very much affected by the 

boundaries we have in our Assembly, the boundaries that we 

have in our province that affect how many people will be in our 

Assembly. 

 

The number of MLAs that will be here is determined on how 

many seats we have and where those boundaries are.  Laws 

will be made by the balance that we have between urban, rural, 

and the mixes of the two. 

 

The member from Greystone, earlier today, made some 

reflections that I thought were interesting.  In her deliberation, 

she thought that a mix of urban and rural might be good in 

some cases.  And I've thought about that and reflected.  My 

first impression there was no, that wouldn't be fair because 

rural should be represented separately; urban should be 

separate because their ideas are somewhat different.  However, 

there is some logic in having some mix as well, if somehow 

you can find representatives that also are able to have a 

mind-set that goes and flows between rural and urban. 

 

I'm not sure how you guarantee that, though, or how you would 

find that proper kind of person that can balance the two within 

their own minds unless they lived rural and lived urban and sort 

of went back and forth.  I have known people, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, who come from a farm background, who have now 

lived in 



2428 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1993 

the cities for a full generation and their children do not have the 

same values about rural life that rural people have.  You can 

see the difference in the thinking, even though they have that 

background. 

 

Those that have a grandparent still out in the country -- in a 

small town or out on the land -- have a better understanding 

because they relate with those people in conversation and 

discussion, and they know about the trends of how our 

province evolved from a rural area into a rural-urban mix, 

which is leaning more and more to being an urbanized society 

as time goes by. 

 

I don't know if we blame big machinery or what we blame 

those things on.  Maybe it's not even all that bad.  Maybe we 

shouldn't lay blame.  Maybe we should say it's a good thing.  

Who knows?  But the truth of the matter is that our cities grow 

bigger while our rural populations grow smaller. 

 

The truth, though, is that the laws that we make have to serve 

both interests.  Rural areas don't need or want the same things 

out of life that people in the cities need to have in their lives.  

There is a difference.  There's nothing wrong with that 

difference.  In fact, we should cultivate it and we should be 

proud of it because it is part of our culture to have both.  We 

have the food producers and we have the city people who eat 

the food.  We need one another.  Neither one could exist 

without the other.  So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the laws that we 

make and the ways that we make them and the numbers of 

people that we put in this Assembly to make those laws is 

extremely important. 

 

In this Assembly this year, 66 members have debated and 

worked on 90 Bills -- 90 new laws for the people of 

Saskatchewan to live under.  It's true that in this Assembly at 

this time, the balance is heavily in favour of the government.  

That's the democratic process.  If the people don't like that, 

they have themselves to blame and no one else.  Because they 

had the right to go to the polls and choose who should 

represent them, and they should not fret when they find an 

imbalance. 

 

I do find it surprising though when I travel around both urban 

and rural Saskatchewan that I find people saying, my, wouldn't 

it be better if there was a better balance.  Well you can't blame 

the MLAs for that.  We all ran fairly against one another.  It 

was the people that chose. 

 

The reality though is that even though the opposition is small 

and the government is large, the democratic balance is still here 

because we have in our democratic system this Assembly with 

rules.  And the rules that are used allow the opposition the time 

necessary, for the most part, to give good, honest debate -- 

good, honest debate to each and every one of these 90 Bills. 

 

And the opposition's job clearly is to bring out the errors, the 

possible errors, the mistakes and the possible mistakes, the 

good and the bad that the laws that we write can do to serve 

society. 

That's extremely important.  And most times the balance of the 

Assembly would be probably, by the luck of the draw, a little 

closer in balance, in numbers.  But it's not so necessary to have 

those numbers in the legislature as it is to have them out in the 

province. 

 

You say 66 people is a lot, and we have come to the conclusion 

that with our declining population that that is a fact.  We agree 

that we have to reduce our numbers here because the numbers 

of people that we represent seem to be falling. 

 

I don't know if we can ever turn that around, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker.  I have hopes that we will.  I have hopes that we will 

find a way to build our job base and to build the numbers in our 

province a little bigger.  Not that I want to be elbow to elbow 

with people all around me all the time.  I don't want to be in big 

line-ups and I don't want to push and shove everywhere I go, 

but Saskatchewan could use a little bigger population to make 

our economy work better. 

 

But the reality is that we have so many square miles in this 

province and unless Alberta follows through with its 

intention/suggestion a month or so back when they said that 

they were thinking of annexing part of Saskatchewan, unless 

they do that, our area will stay the same. 

 

There are of course people on the west side of the province that 

would be quite happy to see the Alberta border slide a hundred 

miles over. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- 150. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- One of the members who lives 140 miles says 

150 would be a lot better.  I suspect that . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well I'm going to have to take a breath while 

the members interject their ideas on how we'll put up these new 

boundaries. 

 

That's just a little fun that we need to do once in a while to 

lighten up our debate, Deputy Speaker, but the reality being 

that we have to have a consideration for the number of square 

miles we have in our province.  And we have to think in terms 

of how we can get around to meet our constituency, to talk to 

the people that we represent, to get their ideas. 

 

If I've heard one accusation of wrongdoing or fault in my 

travels as an MLA, it has been that people feel that they don't 

have a direct input to this Assembly and to the laws and 

through their MLAs to getting things done that they want done.  

They feel isolated once we're elected.  They talk about the need 

for recall because they quite simply don't think that when their 

MLA gets to Regina that that MLA is any longer listening to 

them. 

 

If you have to travel around a constituency like mine, it 

becomes very difficult to stay here for four months and then be 

able to get back and talk to all of those folks.  I'd be lucky if I 

see them all in a parade let alone one on one each year.  The 

pure fact of the matter is that if you've got to travel around the 

Great Sand Hills, the great Cypress Hills, even if you've got the 

greatest people in the province like I have, it is physically 



June 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2429 

impossible to get that done. 

 

If you make my constituency bigger by geography even though 

there aren't any more people, I am going to have just that much 

harder time getting around to meet those folks.  And if I don't 

get there to meet with them and talk to them, then their 

complaint is legitimate that they are not being heard by their 

representative.  Because quite frankly, if I'm not there to listen 

to them, how can I know what they feel and what they want. 

 

And it's true that the people in my area don't change very 

much, their ideas don't change a lot.  That's why they've been 

electing Conservative representatives for many, many years.  

But they do get different ideas about what laws we should have 

when those laws are constructed by an NDP government.  That 

shakes them right up actually and they do want to have some 

input. 

 

So quite seriously, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could talk about this 

Bill and the troubles it will cost probably for two or three days.  

We've got all of the seats in the Assembly with all of the names 

on.  And while the member from Kindersley went through 

them at some length of who would be here and who not, I'm 

not going to do that but I could speculate on who will be here 

and who not and why, why they won't be here again after these 

boundaries are redrawn.  Because the boundaries are going to 

be drawn to eliminate those people who can't come back and 

win and sit on the government side. 

 

There's a fear in the government that they can't form 

government next time.  And so they have to redraw the 

boundaries to try to bring the centres that have the biggest vote 

for them into balance with those centres where they haven't got 

such good support to overweigh the balance of numbers. 

 

I could talk, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for a long time about each of 

the 90 Bills and the direction that those Bills are taking us in 

this province, the direction that we are going away from the 

cultural trend that we have established in our province in the 

past.  The direction that we are taking has taken a sharp veer 

off of the road that we were travelling on, metaphorically 

speaking.  That sharp directional change is in the direction of 

power to the government and government officials, a power 

structure we have never seen before. 

 

And with 90 Bills you can appreciate that one could talk for a 

long time.  We could talk about Bill 38, the shift in the 

direction of our morality through our law making, a direct and 

very absolute shift in direction, an almost 90-degree direction, 

metaphorically speaking, in change. 

 

I picked up the one that says lighten up, and I guess maybe 

that's good advice.  I'll take it for myself.  And I won't go into 

that particular news article, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I could talk about the newspaper that is distributed by the 

taxpayers' association that tells us about how we 

are running amok with taxation and how we are destroying the 

very essence of the economy of our province. 

 

(2130) 

 

And I could talk about the promises made by the former 

member of the opposition, the now Premier, who talked about a 

direction in our province.  And he said in a campaign:  and the 

latest PC proposal to close down all five hospitals in this 

constituency is unacceptable.  And now he and his government 

closed down 52.  And while it was unacceptable before, now 

closing 52 is acceptable.  That, sir, is a right-angle change in 

the direction on the road we were travelling and the values that 

we held in this province. 

 

I could talk about the labour Bills and how they are changing 

the direction that our province has travelled and the 

fundamental differences that we are encountering with this 

administration.  And we could make a very strong case for 

honesty and for goodwill and for the morality that needs to 

come through the legislation that we bring forth, the kinds of 

things that can only happen if people are truly and honestly 

represented.  And this is key to the number of people that are 

represented in this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we must maintain the ability for representatives in 

this Assembly to be able to get in touch with the people that put 

them here.  If we don't maintain that, then we have no right to 

be here.  And on the day when I can't represent my constituents 

and the feelings and thoughts that they have, then I probably 

shouldn't be here, and maybe that's when my seat should be 

eliminated.  But it can't be better if we make the seats so big 

that I can't travel around it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to talk about this for many, many 

hours because it is a very important issue, but my colleagues 

have got some things they've got to get off their chest.  And if I 

don't let them get their two bits worth in, they might throw me 

out of the airplane tomorrow.  So with that I want to say good 

night to my wife, and thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We do indeed 

have some words we would like to say on this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, because it's very important to the people of rural 

Saskatchewan the type of representation that will be available 

to them once this Bill passes.  And not only is it a matter of the 

number of representatives that Saskatchewan has, that rural 

Saskatchewan has, but the quality and the availability of access 

to those MLAs. 

 

I was talking one day to the member from Regina Lakeview 

and we were comparing constituencies.  We were comparing 

what we have within our various constituencies.  So I'd like to 

give you a little description of my constituency, Mr. Speaker -- 

Souris-Cannington.  We have 20 communities within that 

constituency, Mr. Speaker.  We have 20 urban 



2430 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1993 

municipalities.  We have 11 rural municipalities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And rural and urban municipalities, while in a lot of cases they 

face the same problems, they also face some very distinct 

problems.  I have one Indian reserve, two school boards, Mr. 

Speaker, and six health boards.  Also within the larger area of 

my community, which would encompass all of the federal seat, 

we have one provincial riding within the federal seat that I 

believe is divided up into either five or six sections being 

represented by either five or six different federal ridings, in one 

provincial constituency.  And that's, Mr. Speaker, really not a 

very good situation.  It would be much better for those people 

if they had to deal with one federal member and one provincial 

member within that small grouping. 

 

Within the member from Regina Lakeview's constituency, and 

it goes for any of the major urban seats either in Regina or 

Saskatoon, but in this particular seat this MLA has to deal with 

one urban municipality.  She has to deal with no rural 

municipalities whatsoever.  So her municipal concerns are 

being dealt with with one agency.  I don't believe there are any 

Indian reserves within this particular seat.  And fact is, I don't 

believe there are any Indian reserves within the city of Regina. 

 

She has to deal with two school boards, the same number that I 

do.  She has one health care district.  But while this member 

has one health care district and two school boards to deal with 

and one urban municipality to deal with, she also has 10 other 

MLA colleagues within the boundaries of the city of Regina 

that deal with those same people also.  So there's not a lot of 

pressure on one individual urban MLA from Regina or 

Saskatoon when it comes to representing their community 

because they have 11 MLAs in each one of those cities. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, there are more MLAs in either Regina or 

Saskatoon than there are city councillors in those cities.  And 

that seems a little ridiculous, Mr. Speaker, because those city 

councillors are dealing with the entire section of the city and 

the MLA deals with a very much smaller portion of that city. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while we were considering this Bill this 

afternoon, I sat down and did a rough calculation as to the 

geographic circumstances within my constituency.  My 

constituency covers almost 2,700 square miles, which is over 

1.7 million acres.  When you look at the city of Regina, you 

look within the city of Regina at Wascana Park.  Wascana Park 

is approximately 1,200 acres. 

 

The southern border of my constituency is approximately 54 . . 

. is approximately 63 miles long -- east and west -- and 54 

miles north and south.  On the angle, Mr. Speaker, it's 83 miles. 

 

But we can't travel on the angle, Mr. Speaker, because no roads 

travel in that particular direction -- on a south-east/north-west 

or even on a 

north-east/south-west line; they all run east and west or north 

and south. 

 

So to travel across my constituency from one corner to the 

other, Mr. Speaker, in a south-east/north-westerly direction, 

you have to travel about 117 miles. So if you drove at a 

reasonable speed, you could cover that distance in about two 

and a half hours. 

 

Again in my discussion with the member from Regina 

Lakeview, she said she could walk across her constituency in 

less than two hours. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Lake Centre. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Excuse me, Mr. Speaker.  The member 

has corrected me. It's Lake Centre rather than Lakeview.  I 

apologize for not knowing her constituency.  She can walk 

across that constituency in less than two hours, Mr. Speaker, 

and I can't even drive across mine in two hours. 

 

There is a vast difference, Mr. Speaker, between rural 

constituencies and urban constituencies.  And while the 

members of the government may wish to ignore this fact 

because they think it's to their political benefit to eliminate the 

rural ridings, when you look at northern Saskatchewan we also 

have a problem of communication and travel.  But when you 

go into northern Saskatchewan, most of the people in those two 

constituencies reside in a few communities. 

 

And while it's expensive to travel -- and it takes time to fly 

across those constituencies -- from community to community, 

it really is on a par to a lot of the rural communities . . . 

constituencies, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to difficulty and 

the time factors involved in travelling across those 

constituencies.  And yet the government opposite is saying yes, 

it's fair, it's right that those constituencies not be bound by their 

concept of fairness, which is one person, one vote, with a 5 per 

cent variance. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if it's good to give geographic 

considerations, time and distance in northern Saskatchewan, I 

believe those considerations should also be given to some areas 

in rural Saskatchewan, if not all areas.  In northern 

Saskatchewan, people working for the federal government get 

isolation pay.  Well, Mr. Speaker, in southern Saskatchewan 

there are communities where federal bureaucrats are given 

isolation pay because of the difficulties and the isolation of 

those communities. 

 

The RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) officer stationed 

at Val Marie receives isolation pay because that community is 

so far-flung, because of the difficulty in communicating, 

because of the problems that can occur with adverse weather.  

But those reasons are not being given consideration by the 

government members opposite because they see it as their 

political advantage not to give those kinds of considerations. 

 

The member from Greystone spoke of combined seats, of 

rural-urban 



June 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2431 

split . . . not a split but rural-urban combinations.  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, that does happen in some places.  If we look at the 

seat of Melfort; Melfort is a small city, approximately 5,000 

people, and around it is a rural area that is also represented.  

But in that rural area there is approximately 50/50 per cent 

rural and urban.  But what we see happening, Mr. Speaker, in 

some of the major cities or in the area surrounding it, is that the 

government will take approximately a two-thirds urban and a 

one-third rural.  And what happens under those circumstances, 

Mr. Speaker? 

 

What happens is . . . all you have to do is look at the Prince 

Albert federal riding.  The city of Prince Albert and the rest of 

Saskatchewan north are represented in one federal riding.  

What it means is that the city of Prince Albert makes the 

decisions, politically, for the northern half of the province 

because most of the people live there.  And if you base it 

simply on a one person, one vote, that's fair.  But most of the 

people who do not live in Prince Albert also need to have a fair 

representation, Mr. Speaker.  They need a quality of 

representation that understands their particular circumstances 

and their needs.  And that's what rural Saskatchewan needs, 

and that's what urban Saskatchewan needs. 

 

My colleague from Maple Creek described people who have 

moved from the farm and now live in urban circumstances and 

no longer relating back easily to the needs of the farm, the 

needs of rural Saskatchewan.  I'd like to give you an example. 

 

I came out of the post office one day on a Saturday afternoon 

and it was raining.  And I met one of the neighbours who lived 

in town.  And the lady says to me, well I suppose you're happy 

now that it's raining on the weekend.  Well, Mr. Speaker, we 

hadn't had rain for a month, and in a farm community in the 

middle of July, that's a very critical situation.  But because this 

person was not directly related to the farm and the farm 

economy, she didn't understand the need that rural 

Saskatchewan has for rain.  And the same circumstances 

happen when it comes to representation on a multitude of 

issues in Saskatchewan.  Someone with an urban perspective 

has difficulty understanding the rural needs and vice versa, Mr. 

Speaker.  Somebody from rural Saskatchewan can have a great 

deal of difficulty understanding the needs of the downtown 

core of Regina or the suburbs because we haven't lived those 

experiences. 

 

And this is the reason why we feel our proposal to combine the 

provincial seats within the federal ridings is indeed a good 

proposal but we're prepared to listen to other valid arguments.  

The arguments that the government has presented in this Bill 

are not based on any rationale other than the fact of decreasing 

the number of ridings from 66 to 58. 

 

And as the minister himself said, he plucked 58 from out of the 

air.  Well I would suggest perhaps he put a little more thought 

into it and plucked that number 58 out of the air because he 

looked around the province and said, how can we redistribute 

the provincial 

ridings in this province to give us, the NDP government, a 

maximum advantage.  By going to a one person, one vote, 5 

per cent variance, by going to that number, it gives a greater 

preponderance to urban Saskatchewan over rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

If you look at the election results from 1982 and 1986, Mr. 

Speaker, you see that in 1982 and 1986 both, rural 

Saskatchewan in the main voted against the NDP.  In 1982 a 

good number of the urban seats also voted against the NDP, but 

they shifted back in 1986.  But because of the weight of the 

rural vote the NDP lost that election also and the government, 

Mr. Speaker, has decided that that will not happen to them 

again.  They will eliminate the possibilities that rural 

Saskatchewan will be the determining factor on who wins or 

loses the election. 

 

(2145) 

 

I was looking over the election results for Saskatchewan from 

1905 to 1986, and it's really quite interesting, Mr. Speaker, 

when you look through here.  In 1905 there were 24 seats in 

Saskatchewan.  My own seat was divided between two 

constituencies, Cannington and Souris.  And in 1905, in the 

Cannington constituency, it was won by an Ewan McDiarmid 

of the Provincial Rights Party.  No, excuse me, it was won by 

John D. Stewart of the Liberal Party.  I'm sure Mr. Stewart 

would be unhappy to know that I had forgot that he had won 

that.  And in Souris, Mr. Speaker, the election was won by a 

James T. Brown of the Provincial Rights Party.  That was the 

initial formation of this province, Mr. Speaker, and we had 24 

seats. 

 

As we go through, Mr. Speaker, the various years . . . 1908, 

three years later, we had gone from 24 seats, Mr. Speaker, to 

40 seats; 1912, we were at 53 seats, an increase of 13 seats in 

four years.  At that particular time I'm not sure how my 

constituency was divided because we have the constituency of 

Cannington, the constituency of Moose Mountain, and the 

constituency of Souris, which can all have been part of my 

present constituency.  1917, 56 seats; 1921, 63 seats, Mr. 

Speaker -- a very significant increase; 1925, 63; 1929, 63; 1934 

was a change, Mr. Speaker.  We dropped from 63 to 55.  But 

the thing that's interesting in 1934, and even in 1929, is that the 

cities now, rather than having one member in Regina, 

Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, perhaps Prince Albert, there are now 

two members in each of those cities. 

 

And this stayed that way, Mr. Speaker, for a significant amount 

of time.  1938, we're at 51; 1944, 51; 1948, 52, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And where does that change come in?  That change was an 

added rural seat, Mr. Speaker.  1953, we added another seat 

which was an increase in Regina to three members, Mr. 

Speaker.  In 1952, there were 53 members in this legislature 

and three of those members were from the city of Regina. 

 

1956, we also had 53; 1960, 55; and again that change, Mr. 

Speaker, came in the cities.  We now have 



2432 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1993 

four members in Regina and three in Saskatoon. 

 

1964, we increased to 59 members, Mr. Speaker, which was an 

increase of one in Regina and five members in total in 

Saskatoon; 1967, we had 59; 1971, 60 members, Mr. Speaker; 

1975, we had 61 members.  And, Mr. Speaker, it's interesting 

for me personally, 1975, because that was the first year the 

constituency was called Souris-Cannington, which is what I 

currently represent, and it was won by my predecessor for the 

Progressive Conservatives, Mr. Eric Berntson; 1978, we had 61 

members; 1982, Mr. Speaker, we had 64, which was an 

increase of 3.  In 1986, we had 64 members, and in 1991, Mr. 

Speaker, we had 66. 

 

Because our population had gone up in the preceding 10 years, 

we . . . the numbers increased because of the census, Mr. 

Speaker.  While our numbers have dropped somewhat, the 

change hasn't been that dramatic.  But the decrease down to 56 

members, as we suggest -- or is 58, Mr. Speaker? -- can be 

done fairly.  It can be done fairly to give representation to all 

the people of this province in an equitable manner. 

 

But fair and equitable, Mr. Speaker, does not mean just one 

person, one vote because there are always other considerations 

-- geographic considerations, trade patterns, communities of 

interest.  So, Mr. Speaker, those items need to be taken into 

consideration also when the government is making its decision. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when this Boundary Commission goes out to tour 

the province, I'm sure that they will hear representations from a 

good number of people representing various communities of 

interest.  I hope that they listen to those interests sincerely. 

 

We will be proposing some amendments that we feel will aid 

the Boundary Commission in listening to those communities of 

interest, that will make the Bill better, and make the 

representation in this province better. 

 

I have other colleagues, Mr. Speaker, who also wish to address 

this issue and I would allow them that opportunity at this time.  

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have a few 

words to say on this Bill, Mr. Speaker.  I, along with my 

constituents in the constituency of Wilkie, are very concerned 

about how this Bill is being proposed.  Mr. Speaker, the 

constituency of Wilkie has only had one NDP or CCF 

representative out of that constituency since the province was 

formed. 

 

The people out there, Mr. Speaker, feel that their constituency 

could be eradicated for purely political reasons.  So they are 

quite concerned, Mr. Speaker, and I believe it is only right that 

I should bring their concerns to the attention of the 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government I believe is on a very 

slippery slope.  When they started, they started off, Mr. 

Speaker, with the GRIP Bill.  They started off, Mr. Speaker, 

doing things that were not fair, I consider not right, and, Mr. 

Speaker, I consider very dangerous. 

 

Once that first step is taken, Mr. Speaker, it's very easy to start 

down the slippery slope.  Mr. Speaker, the trend that we see 

here in this legislature, I can point out to you, Bill 38.  Bill 38, 

Mr. Speaker, is another step down that slope; Bill 55, another 

step down that slope; Bill 56 and indeed Bill 90.  Mr. Speaker, 

Bill 79 is also another major step down that slippery slope.  Mr. 

Speaker, we feel that under the present Bill, you tie the hands 

of the commission. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's awfully hard for us on this side of the House 

to understand why the government, the NDP over there, will 

not put their trust in the commission.  They will not trust a 

commission to be fair.  I don't know whether it's because they 

don't want them to be fair.  I don't know whether it's because 

they themselves have no fairness within themselves, or what it 

is.  But, Mr. Speaker, why do we have tie the hands of a 

commission? 

 

Why do we have to say that the variation is 5 per cent?  Why 

can't we say to that commission, you have the parameters of 5 

per cent to 25 per cent, and let the commission make up their 

mind what is fair? 

 

As my colleague just pointed out, over the years, many times 

the number of seats have been changed.  Mr. Speaker, if you 

look at the population during those times, you'll find that the 

population varied also.  Those of you that don't know that, we 

were, at one time, over a million people back in the early days, 

and for that reason the number of seats went up. 

 

The proposal that the leader of our party put forward, I think is 

fair.  I think it makes common sense.  There could be some 

adjustments to be made.  We're prepared to work with the 

government to make those adjustments.  Mr. Speaker, I would 

ask why, why in this case the government seems to feel that we 

have to do it their way and we have to do it now?  My 

colleague mentioned the good, the bad, and the ugly.  Mr. 

Speaker, I believe this is the ugly. 

 

I would like to quote from a newspaper clipping, Mr. Speaker, 

that goes back into 1988 when we were government.  We were 

making some changes.  And the headline, Mr. Speaker, simply 

says: Riding changes need more time for study.  And that was 

by the NDP of the day, Mr. Speaker.  Now that was after five 

years, and at that time the opposition of the day was saying, 

what's the hurry, why can't we have a little more time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to read another headline just to point 

out the fact of where we see this government going: NDP 

criticizes proposed electoral boundaries.  The proposals now on 

a new electoral map should be divided into 66 seats violates the 

principle of representation by population.  And that was by the 

member from Riversdale who is now our Premier, Mr. 

Speaker. 



June 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2433 

Mr. Speaker, at no time has there ever been such a rush by a 

government to get some of their tough legislation through.  Mr. 

Speaker, the people in Wilkie constituency are very, very 

nervous.  They're concerned, Mr. Speaker, that we will be one 

of the rural constituencies that will not be there after the 

redistribution.  And I remind you of what the member from 

Maple Creek said.  In my constituency, Mr. Speaker, it's 

approximately 75 miles by 55 miles, just quickly.  And when I 

try to meet those people, Mr. Speaker, I can't make a swing 

through that area just stopping off at the various little towns 

without taking a whole day -- a whole day.  And all I do is stop 

for a little while in each of the towns. 

 

And at the same time, Mr. Speaker, we must have -- and I 

agree with the government -- we must have a value, a weighted 

value in each person's vote.  We accept that.  We also accept -- 

while we don't agree that it should take place after only two 

years or three years, Mr. Speaker -- that we could possibly do 

with less representation.  But what we find out, Mr. Speaker, is 

that there seems to be a rush to do these things. 

 

I take you to the health care.  We've pleaded with the 

government, wait a little bit.  We've proposed that we hold 

some Bills for six months.  We're not proposing that they don't 

do it.  We're saying, let's do it right. 

 

I understand from some of the remarks made from some of the 

people opposite, Mr. Speaker, that the proposal to reduce the 

representation down to 56 members was not unacceptable to 

the government.  They said they needed time; there was some 

problems with it.  Fine. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  It now being 10 o'clock, this House 

stands adjourned until tomorrow morning at 10. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 

 

 


