




















































Hansard: April 15, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 983 

 April 15, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave of the Assembly to 

introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And also 

thank you very much to the opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure today to 

introduce to you an exchange student from Japan with us today 

from Meadow Lake. If Kimiko would rise please. 

 

Kimiko Furukawa, excuse me Kimiko, is with Janet and Bill 

Caldwell from Meadow Lake. And Kimiko is a Rotary 

International exchange student from Shiroishi, Japan. She is 17 

years of age and is attending Carpenter High School as a grade 

11 student. 

 

She's acting as a goodwill ambassador, Mr. Speaker, for her 

country, to help promote international peace and 

understanding. During her year in Meadow Lake she is being 

hosted by four Rotary families. 

 

And with her, if I could ask them to rise as well, is Janet and 

Bill Caldwell, her hosts from Meadow Lake. And I'd ask all of 

the Assembly to join with me in welcoming Kimiko to Canada 

and . . . Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Harper: — To ask leave for the introduction of guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 

me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to you and through you 

to all the members of the legislature, a delegation that are 

seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. And they are the board of 

directors of Norquay Alfalfa Processors Limited. Down here 

today is Jack Jacquemart, the president; Chief Dennis O'Soap, 

chief of the Key Indian Band, and on the board of directors; 

Garfield Chellenor, also on the board of directors. 

Accompanying the directors to Regina today is Lorne Dennis, 

the general manager and chief executive officer of Norquay 

Alfalfa. 

 

And we had the pleasure of their company over lunch today 

with our Minister of Economic Development and some of his 

officials from SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic Development 

Corporation). And, Mr. Speaker, that particular project I think 

stands out as a 

shining example of what communities can do when they work 

together. 

 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I'll ask all the members of the 

House to offer them a warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Can we extend leave to all people who wish 

to introduce guests? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to 

introduce, in the Speaker's gallery, Vonda Kosloski and several 

of her associates. They are here as long-time advocates for 

family and family issues. Particularly Vonda has been coming 

to the Assembly on a fairly regular basis in recent times and 

certainly has presented the case for families to each member of 

the legislature. 

 

She's a tireless worker, and regardless of the views of 

individual members, I think we would all recognize her 

commitment to the democratic process and to her vision for 

community. Currently she is concerned about Bill 38. And I 

ask all members of the legislature to welcome her and her 

colleagues here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before the member introduces guests, I just 

want to remind members to please not refer to Bills that are on 

the order paper or any business of government when we are 

introducing our guests. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you I would like to introduce to the Assembly a 

number of individuals across the province who have taken time 

to come to the city because of some of the concerns they have 

with regards to certain procedures of the Assembly. I'd like to 

welcome them and extend a welcoming hand from all of the 

members of this Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — And, Mr. Speaker, I move this House do now 

adjourn. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, I can facilitate matters 

here. The member who had just made that motion was not 

aware that there were others that wanted to make introductions. 

So certainly we would allow any introductions to proceed. 

 

The Speaker: — We need leave to revert back. Do we have 

leave of the Assembly to revert back into introduction of 

guests? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

see in the west gallery a constituent of mine 



984 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1993 

and a well-known business person in the constituency of 

Saskatoon Broadway. I'd like to welcome Richard Smith to the 

legislature. He is the owner of Pinocchio's restaurant in 

Saskatoon. And it's good to see you here along with your 

colleagues, I suspect, from the restaurant association. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to join my colleague from Meadow Lake, 

the member, and say a special welcome to Bill Caldwell who I 

see is here that was acknowledged earlier. Bill and I were 

colleagues in Social Services for many years, and Bill Caldwell 

had a very distinguished career, long-time career as a public 

servant. And I just want to join my colleague in welcoming 

Bill. It's good to see you again. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I now move the House adjourn. 

 

The division bells rang from 2:08 p.m. until 2:18 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Toth 

Muirhead Britton 

Devine D'Autremont 

Neudorf Goohsen 

Martens  

— 9 

Nays 

Romanow Calvert 

Van Mulligen Hamilton 

Thompson Johnson 

Wiens Trew 

Simard Draper 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Goulet Sonntag 

Atkinson Flavel 

Kowalsky Kujawa 

Carson Stanger 

Mitchell Knezacek 

MacKinnon Harper 

Penner Kluz 

Bradley Carlson 

Pringle Jess 

Lautermilch Haverstock 

— 32 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Regarding the 

petition of citizens on the proposed 230-volt power line. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that the Honourable 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the Government to do 

the following: 

 

 1. Order SaskPower to facilitate the production  

of non-utility generated power in areas of increased demand, 

namely Lloydminster and Meadow Lake. Several companies 

in this area have applied to generate power. Allowing 

non-utility generation of power in this area will make the 

construction of the power line and its attendant 42 million 

dollar expenditure unnecessary. 

 

 2. Order the Minister of the Environment to undertake a 

complete environmental assessment including public 

hearings. 

 

 3. Order SaskPower to ensure that there is a full and 

complete compensation package for all affected 

land-owners, with increased emphasis on compensation for 

loss of property value experienced by owners of small 

holdings on or near the proposed route. 

 

 4. Order SaskPower to table, in the Legislature, a complete 

economic analysis by an independant auditor that proves 

the economic benefits of the proposed line exceed the 

economic benefits of non-utility generated power or 

conservation. 

 

 5. Order SaskPower to table, in the Legislature, a review of 

all national and international studies on the effects of 

electric and magnetic fields on humans. 

 

 6. Further, order SaskPower to cease and desist all planning, 

surveying, or preparation for construction of the Condie to 

Queen Elizabeth 230,000 volt power line on any of the 

proposed routes until all other points in this petition are 

honored. 

 

 And, as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

These individuals come from Lake Alma, Dundurn, and 

Hanley, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I do move this House do now 

adjourn. 

 

The division bells rang from 2:23 p.m. until 2:33 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Toth 

Muirhead Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

— 8 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Hamilton 

Wiens Trew 

Lingenfelter Draper 

Goulet Whitmore 

Atkinson Flavel 

Kowalsky Kujawa 

 



April 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 985 

 

Mitchell Stanger 

MacKinnon Knezacek 

Penner Harper 

Bradley Kluz 

Pringle Carlson 

— 22 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, by leave I would like 

to make a ministerial statement. 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 

I am presenting petitions on behalf of several dozen individuals 

from the west side of our province. And I'll just read the prayer, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of the Health Districts Act so that 

communities may continue their efforts to organize their 

people and have a genuine impact on the process without 

intimidation or threat of arbitrary action by the government. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, I have petitioners from the communities 

of Luseland, Kerrobert, Tramping Lake, Dodsland, Macklin, 

Cactus Lake, Senlac, Evesham, Denzil, Togo, Casine — 

people, it appears, Mr. Speaker, from the entire west and 

north-west side of the province of Saskatchewan and I would 

like to table these petitions with the legislature today, and I 

move for adjournment, Mr. Speaker, of the House. 

 

The division bells rang from 2:37 p.m. until 2:47 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Toth 

Muirhead Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen t 

— 8 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Draper 

Wiens Whitmore 

Simard Sonntag 

Lingenfelter Roy 

Goulet Kujawa 

Atkinson Stanger 

MacKinnon Harper 

Penner Kluz 

Pringle Carlson 

Murray Haverstock 

Johnson  

— 21 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, with leave I would 

like to move to do a ministerial statement on the understanding 

we would revert back to our present position and that it 

wouldn't take away from the time allocated to petitions. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Success of Norquay Alfalfa Processors 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, earlier you were 

introduced to guests from Norquay Alfalfa Processors and I see 

some of them are still in the Speaker's gallery. And I want to 

thank them for coming to Regina today. We enjoyed a lunch in 

the members' dining room downstairs and I appreciate the 

endeavour that they have undertaken. 

 

I believe this project is a classic example of how partnerships 

between government and business can help to build a more 

secure future for Saskatchewan communities and 

Saskatchewan people. There are some things government can 

do best and there are some things best done by business. 

However, Mr. Speaker, in this project SEDCO provided the 

enabling financial assistance to help facilitate a successful 

venture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not a megaproject. It has not cost the 

people of Saskatchewan millions of dollars with few long-term 

jobs in return. In fact I am proud to announce today that the 

Norquay Alfalfa producers have successfully paid off its $1.8 

million SEDCO loan to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it has become a 

successful project and in large part because of the work done 

by those members who are here with us today. 

 

The company now employs 22 full-time employees and during 

the summer months will employ 30 more. During the 

construction of the facility it also provided jobs in buildings 

and trades, jobs for Saskatchewan residents. Norquay 

purchases alfalfa from farmers in the area, providing them with 

a local market for a crop other than grain, thus assisting in the 

diversification of Saskatchewan agriculture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me give you a brief history of this project. 

When a group of people from Norquay-Pelly area had the 

vision to establish an alfalfa processing plant, they were unable 

to acquire the necessary financing from traditional lenders. 

This is an all too familiar story in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

However like many other prospective entrepreneurs they came 

to SEDCO for assistance. Conditional approval had been 

granted in July of 1991. After further review of the viability of 

the project and consideration of the commitment of the 

community, final approval was granted by the then new  



986 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1993 

administration in January 1992. The facility was officially 

opened by the Premier in August of '92. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is indeed a community project. Equity 

financing was provided by residents, farmers from 

Norquay-Pelly area, and from the Thunder Hill Investment 

Corporation comprised of members of the Key and Cote first 

nations. 

 

This project also has the support of the provincial government's 

Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat, the Saskatchewan Indian 

agricultural program. The federal government has also 

participated with funding through the western economic 

diversification program and the aboriginal economic 

development program. 

 

Canada's alfalfa processing industry is respected worldwide for 

its ability to supply high-quality pellets. The Canadian 

processing industry has developed a new product that combines 

the dehydrated characteristics of pellets with the long fibre. 

 

The Norquay facility was the first in Saskatchewan originally 

designed to produce a new combination of dehydrated pellets 

and this new larger pellet which has good marketability in 

Japan and other Pacific Rim countries. 

 

We believe this company has a promising future. A trial order 

of the larger pellet has been produced for a Japanese client. 

Negotiations are under way with clients in Korea, Taiwan, 

United States, and Europe. 

 

As I said, Mr. Speaker, at the outset, this is how this system of 

government-assisted economic development should work. And 

the Norquay processors is exactly the type of project, value 

added agricultural processing, that this government knows will 

help secure the future of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I close by 

congratulating the management and shareholders of the 

Norquay Alfalfa Processors on their entrepreneurial abilities 

and their commitment to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too want to rise 

and congratulate the people from Norquay for their endeavour. 

I want to point out to you and to the members of the Assembly 

that I recall very clearly going out there in the winter of 1991 

and visiting with the rural municipalities, with people 

interested in this business venture at that time. And I believed 

in it at that time and I believe in it today. 

 

One of the things that we need far more of is agriculture 

diversification and value added in agriculture processing. And 

it's a fundamental part of what we have in Saskatchewan and 

what we do best. 

And I think that as we go about this process in dealing with the 

issues of agriculture, the more we can value-add by processing 

and by having livestock and . . . either in pork or in beef or 

dairy or poultry, the more we add the value to the product that 

we grow and that we do so well. 

 

And I think that . . . I want to compliment the individuals who 

headed up the program and the initiative up there. They deserve 

a very major congratulations and a compliment. I want to say 

that it combines, I think too, the community effort of involving 

the people with their own money doing the thing that they do 

best. And I think that that's the kind of opportunity that we 

would recommend that this government continue to do on a 

regular basis, and that is the reason why we support it. 

 

I also want to say that it involves initiatives on the part of 

individuals to have a way of creating jobs for their own 

families and in their own community and having their children 

come home to be a part of that. And I think that that is also an 

important part of a project like this. And I say that we need to 

do far more of these across the province, whether it's in alfalfa, 

whether it's in growing the seed for alfalfa, all of those kinds of 

things. 

 

And I know that in this sort of a program you have a lot of 

capital costs; you have a lot of operational costs. And I know 

that those are things that involve a lot of economic impact in 

the province of Saskatchewan. And I want to just say 

congratulations to the community, congratulations to the 

businessmen who provided that opportunity, and you will, I 

believe, have a day to be proud of when you get the whole 

thing paid off and then have the opportunity to initiate more of 

those kinds of things in your communities. 

 

Thank you very much for being here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — I would like leave please to make a 

comment on the ministerial statement. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like 

to congratulate the management and the shareholders of the 

Norquay Alfalfa Processors. We are indeed fortunate to have 

people with such ideas, talents, and commitments to our 

province who would take risks. And that's to be commended. 

 

I think what is most significant is that the endeavours of these 

particular individuals has resulted in 22 people of our province 

having the dignity of employment. With that of course, come 

the economic spin-offs in the communities as well, of course 

the tax that are generated for which we are all very, very 

grateful in the province of Saskatchewan. We applaud you. 



April 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 987 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for Regina Hillsdale: 

 

 That a special report of the Legislative Assembly by the 

Provincial Auditor on Bill No. 42, The Crown Corporations 

Act, 1993 be referred to the Standing Committee on Crown 

Corporations. 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. The member must have 

leave in order to do this. 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Why not? 

 

The Speaker: — Somebody said no. 

 

Mr. Toth: — We're on petitions, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — Presenting petitions. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'll just 

read the prayer of a petition I've got in my hand: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of the Health Districts Act so that communities 

may continue their efforts to organize their people and have 

a genuine impact on the process without intimidation or 

threat of arbitrary action by the government. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the petitions I have in my hand are signed 

by individuals from communities like Macklin, Lloydminster, 

Mervin, Denzil, Provost, Unity, and Eatonia — a number of 

communities along the west side of the province. I present 

these to the House and I move the House adjourn. 

 

I present the petitions and move the Assembly . . . the House 

adjourn. 

 

The division bells rang from 3 p.m. until 3:10 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Muirhead Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

Toth  

— 7 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Whitmore 

Thompson Sonntag 

Lingenfelter Flavel t 

 

 

Goulet McPherson 

Mitchell Kujawa 

MacKinnon Stanger 

Penner Knezacek 

Pringle Kluz 

Murray Carlson 

Trew  

— 19 

 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have several 

petitions I would like to present to the House today. Mr. 

Speaker, they are in reference to the health situation. And I 

understand we can just read the prayer: 

 

 Therefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of the Health Districts Act so that 

communities may continue their efforts to organize their 

people and have a genuine impact on the process without 

intimidation or threat of arbitrary action by the government. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners humbly pray. 

 

I would like to table these petitions, and move that the House 

now adjourn, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. 

 

The division bells rang from 3:12 p.m. until 3:22 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Toth 

Muirhead Britton 

Devine D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

— 8 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Draper 

Thompson Whitmore 

Simard Sonntag 

Lingenfelter Roy 

Goulet McPherson 

Kowalsky Kujawa 

Penner Stanger 

Pringle Knezacek 

Murray Kluz 

Johnson Carlson 

— 20 

 

Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition on 

health care and I'll read the prayer. The petition is from Smiley 

and Kindersley, Major, Kerrobert, and various communities on 

the west side of the province. There's one, two, three, four, five 

pages here and they're all signed by individuals. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of the Health Districts 



988 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1993 

 Act so that communities may continue their efforts to 

organize their people and have a genuine impact on the 

process without intimidation or threat of arbitrary action by 

the government. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move this House do now adjourn. 

 

The division bells rang from 3:26 p.m. until 3:36 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Muirhead Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

Toth  

— 7 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Whitmore 

Thompson Sonntag 

Goulet McPherson 

Kowalsky Kujawa 

Penner Crofford 

Bradley Stanger 

Pringle Knezacek 

Murray Kluz 

Johnson Carlson 

Draper  

— 19 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Speaker, with leave I'd like to 

introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I'd 

like introduce to you, and through you to the members of the 

legislature, Clarence and Dolores Durocher. They're from 

Ile-a-la-Crosse and they have with them their three sons — 

Robert, Derick, and Tyson — and their friend Tyron 

Whitehawk. Clarence is a member of the RCMP (Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police) and stationed in North Battleford, 

and they are all from Ile-a-la-Crosse. And I would like all the 

members to join with me in welcoming the family here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, are we done with . . . 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: — According to order, the following petitions  

have been reviewed pursuant to rule 11(7), and they are hereby 

read and received: 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to 

postpone consideration of The Health Districts Act. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on Monday next move first reading of a Bill to restore 

health care services to the community of Arborfield. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 

Monday next move first reading of a Bill to restore health care 

services to the community of Beechy. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on Monday 

next move first reading of a Bill to restore health care services 

to the community of Birch Hills. 

 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 

notice that I shall on Monday next move first reading of a Bill 

to restore health care services to the community of Dodsland. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall 

on Monday next move first reading of a Bill to restore health 

care services to the community of Borden. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy today to 

give notice of a motion for first reading of a Bill. I give notice 

that I shall on Monday next move the first reading of a Bill to 

restore health care services to the community of Climax, 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's a pleasure for 

me to give notice of a motion for first reading of a Bill. I give 

notice that I shall on Monday next move first reading of a Bill 

to restore health services to the community of Eston. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on Monday next move first reading of a Bill to restore 

health care services to the community of Bengough. 

 

The Speaker: — I made my ruling yesterday and I referred 

members to a former ruling that was made by Speaker Swan 

that notice of motions or notices would only be . . . each 

member can present one oral notice of motion and also that's 

it's a courtesy of the House. And that was my ruling yesterday 

and that ruling stands. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Notice of question, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — What is your notice of question? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — I give notice that I shall on Monday next ask 

the government the following question . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I want to remind members that 



April 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 989 

my ruling applies to all notices of motions and therefore that 

will hold. 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Rural Hospital Closures 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I direct my question to the Minister of Health. 

Specifically, Mr. Speaker, I ask the Minister of Health that in 

response to the damaging — damaging, Mr. Speaker — reports 

coming in from rural Saskatchewan on the issue of lack of 

funding for hospitals, lack of funding for the health care 

facilities, and lack of input on behalf of the district boards 

when the solemn oath and solemn promise was given by the 

Minister of Health that they would indeed have direct input and 

indeed their concerns would be addressed by this government, 

that because of the appalling lack, the appalling lack of the 

consultative process, I ask the Minister of Health now to tell 

the people of Saskatchewan why the government is doing this, 

not only to rural Saskatchewan but tearing out the heart of 

Saskatchewan by gutting rural health services. We are a 

province, Mr. Speaker, with half the farm land in Canada and 

what you do to rural Saskatchewan, you do also to urban 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I want the Minister of Health, or in her place the Premier 

of this province, to get up and to tell the people of 

Saskatchewan why they are doing this terrible thing. Mr. 

Speaker, I ask the Minister of Health. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1545) 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, the 

official opposition critic, in his usual fashion uses some pretty 

exaggerated language in the House. Mr. Speaker, he talks about 

the — I think, if I can quote him — the appalling lack of 

consultation. I would remind the member opposite — he knows 

this — that during his term in government, his government had 

a report commissioned and done in the province called the 

Schwartz report which didn't see the light of day. 

 

Beyond that report, his government, Mr. Speaker, established 

the Murray Commission. And to the credit of the Murray 

Commission, it travelled this province widely and met with not 

hundreds but thousands of people directly from the health care 

fields, produced a long report with over 200 recommendations. 

Mr. Speaker, that report then was put on a shelf somewhere. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we've built on the work that was done in 

1980s, that vast amount of consultation. After the change of 

government the Minister of Health travelled this province 

widely herself, met again with hundreds and thousands of 

people in this province, and have hence through all of that 

process, Mr. Speaker, put together the reform model that is 

now before the people of Saskatchewan and being  

implemented across our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's the kind of consultation we believe in; that's 

the kind of process we believe in. And further to that, Mr. 

Speaker, the process now is involving people in a community 

way where that has never in the history of this province or any 

other, to my knowledge, happened. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, since 

the Minister of Health and the Premier are not going to be 

answering this afternoon, I want you to tell the people why 

they are getting mixed messages out there. 

 

At one hand, the minister is saying this is not because of cost 

reduction; on the other hand, someone else is saying that we 

are saving $5 million by gutting rural health services, Mr. 

Minister. Now I want you to answer the question: why are we 

doing this and why are we gutting rural health services and, in 

respect to that, also urban? 

 

At the same time one minister is saying it's $5 million saving 

and the other one is saying it's not being done because of 

deficit; it has nothing to do with that. Could you clarify that for 

us, Mr. Minister? Which is it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the member asks why is 

this being done. Mr. Speaker, it is recognized by people across 

our province that if we are to preserve our health care and 

strengthen it for future generations, changes must be made. 

Everyone agrees, everyone agrees that changes must be made, 

that there is a requirement for change. Part of that requirement 

is because of the fiscal condition, the fiscal crisis, that faces our 

province. 

 

But it is far beyond that, Mr. Speaker. We are called upon 

today to treat new illnesses, new conditions, that we didn't even 

hear about 10 years ago. Mr. Speaker, we're facing an ageing 

population in our province. We're facing changing 

demographics, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The impetus is upon us to restructure and reform and revision 

health. And, Mr. Speaker, we're doing it. We're doing it to 

build a better-quality health system, not just for today but for 

the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I say to the minister 

again, there's a lot of hurt and there's a lot of anger — pure, 

frustrated anger, Mr. Minister — at your government, at the 

Premier and your Minister of Health. 

 

The phones are ringing on open-line shows. There are some 

horrible comments being made about what they would like to 

do to your ministers. That is the frustration and the hurt and the 

anger at the deceit that your government has perpetrated on the 

people of this province, Mr. Minister. 



990 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1993 

You have no mandate for what you are doing, no mandate 

whatsoever. You were elected on the promise that you would 

do more in health and education and you would not increase 

taxes. The opposite has happened. You have no mandate. 

 

In order to make sure, Mr. Minister, that you have that 

mandate, I ask you now: will you commit that because you will 

not have public hearings, because the Premier is ducking public 

meetings, will you commit to having a referendum set up so 

that the people of Saskatchewan can in one final swoop have 

the final say? 

 

Because a referendum, Mr. Minister, will be binding on you. 

We know what you do to plebiscites. So we want a binding 

referendum where the people of this province will have the say 

as to what their future in health care is going to be. Will you 

make that commitment to the people of this province, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to recognize that 

indeed there is concern in our province. In any period of 

change there is concern and uncertainty. But the fact of the 

matter is this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Members of this government, this cabinet, and this caucus are 

travelling the province now on a daily basis, meeting with 

people in public meetings and in private meetings, Mr. 

Speaker, to try and provide accurate information in this period 

of change. That is some way different, Mr. Speaker, than the 

kind of information that has been provided to some of these 

meetings by members opposite, which is, through a process of 

misinformation, is only building the kind of fear and concern 

that's happening, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the member talks about a referendum. The 

people of this province, some not-quite 18 months ago, looked 

at the record of that government; looked at its record in health 

care; looked at its lack of courage in being willing to reform 

and restructure health care and the referendum was conducted, 

Mr. Speaker. It was conducted about 18 months ago. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, my question is to 

the Premier or else whichever one of these ministers has the 

courage to answer. 

 

Mr. Premier, you have absolutely no mandate for the 

destruction of rural Saskatchewan and the people are outraged 

because of it. The minister, the Associate Minister of Health, 

just said that they received a mandate. Mr. Speaker, people 

voted for this party because they promised that they would 

respect and protect hospital care in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Instead they are destroying it. 

 

Mr. Premier, how do you justify misleading and deceiving rural 

people — the seniors, the health care 

providers who voted for you and counted on you to protect 

their hospitals — how do you justify, Mr. Premier, betraying 

these people in the face of all the promises you made a short 18 

months ago? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, if we were not to engage 

in health care reform, restructuring and revisioning in our 

generation, Mr. Speaker, we would lose the inheritance that has 

been built for us in this province by our ancestors, and we 

would forsake the future for our children, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We are taking these difficult measures now. We are taking 

these positive measures now to ensure, Mr. Speaker, the future 

of medicare and health care for all of our people, not just for 

today, but for future generations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Question to the 

Premier. Mr. Premier, you keep saying that you are saving 

medicare. Well, Mr. Premier, first of all you were going to save 

the prescription drug plan, and now you have destroyed it. 

Then you were going to save the children's dental plan, and 

now you've destroyed it. And now you are saving medicare, 

Mr. Premier, by closing 52 rural hospitals and destroying 52 

rural communities. 

 

Mr. Premier, can you please tell the people out there what 

you're going to save next so that we can warn people and have 

them run for their lives. Would you do that, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I find it almost passing 

strange that the member opposite would want to raise the issue 

of the prescription drug plan. Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Saskatchewan know that one of the major challenges we face 

in Saskatchewan and that other provincial governments face in 

terms of their drug plan provisions, Mr. Speaker, is the change 

in the federal legislation in patent protection that will add 

significant, significant — and I mean millions of dollars — of 

costs to our prescription drug plan. 

 

Now the members opposite are of that particular political party 

that in Ottawa imposed this on us, Mr. Speaker. Every province 

— and I was there — and every other province was there in 

Ottawa to protest. But did we have some help from the 

members opposite? Did we have some assistance? Did we hear 

their voice in that debate? 

 

No, Mr. Speaker, by their silence they gave tacit approval to 

what their friends in Ottawa were doing. It's one of the 

challenges — one more challenge — that we face in health care 

today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My 



April 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 991 

question to the Premier. Mr. Premier, your minister continues 

to hide behind the cloak of others. Mr. Premier, I have a letter 

that you sent to the people of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg during 

the by-election in 1988. Do you remember what you were 

saying back then, Mr. Premier? 

 

You said the PC (Progressive Conservative) cuts to the 

prescription drug plan and the children's dental plan were 

unjustified, and the latest PC proposal to close all five hospitals 

in this constituency is unacceptable. Do you remember that, 

Mr. Premier? Well, Mr. Premier, the man who was going to 

save the hospitals in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg yesterday closed 

three of those five hospitals. And there's no doubt, Mr. Premier, 

that the other two are on the cutting block, as far as their beds. 

And worst of all, you now have a member from 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg who goes along with the whole thing 

just like some trained seal, Mr. Premier. 

 

Why don't you go out to Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, Mr. Premier, 

and explain your actions? Who don't you go out and listen to 

the people whose lives you are hurting, hurting through this 

cowardly . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, order. I would ask 

the member to refrain from using the characterizing of some 

members in this House. And it's inflammatory in question 

period, and I ask the member to refrain from doing so. The 

member may ask his question. I'm not sure that his question 

was heard. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — I appreciate your comments, Mr. Speaker. I'll 

ask it again. 

 

Mr. Premier, why will you not go out and listen to the people 

whose lives you are hurting through this deceit and betrayal 

which is coming down on the constituents of 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg? Why don't you do that, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I will endeavour as best as 

I can to avoid this kind of exaggerated language in the House 

and in question period. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here we are again with the kind of misinformation 

that tends to come from the members opposite. Now the 

member, the Leader of the Opposition, just moments ago talked 

about closure of hospitals. Mr. Speaker, that is simply not the 

case and he knows that, Mr. Speaker. What is happening to 

many of our small health care institutions, the small hospitals, 

is that funding for the acute care beds is being reduced and 

eliminated and being replaced, Mr. Speaker, with transition 

funding of $42,500 per bed to be used for transition and 

conversion of many of those facilities to health care clinics to 

offer, Mr. Speaker, more appropriate and better-quality health 

care in those communities, Mr. Speaker. That's what's 

happening. It is a difficult transition process and no one denies 

it. 

But, Mr. Speaker, when the process is over, when the process is 

through, we will have in this province health care, sustainable 

health care that we can know for today and for tomorrow. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again my 

question is to the Premier. Mr. Premier, I have the letter here. I 

have the letter to the people of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. And it 

says, in the latest PC proposal to close down all five hospitals 

in this constituency is unacceptable. That is what the Premier, 

the now Premier of Saskatchewan said to the people in 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 

 

I would say to you, Mr. Premier, that there is obviously no 

truth in advertising when your party makes a promise to 

Saskatchewan people. Mr. Premier, your minister says that 

these hospitals are going to remain open. Well, Mr. Premier, 

you're not fooling them. 

 

My question to you is, sir, those people out there want true 

consultation; they don't want simply the light and the heat kept 

on in their hospital. Mr. Premier, today would you say to those 

people in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg that you will go and listen to 

their concerns? Or will you simply send another mistruth, 

another mistruth to the people of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, Mr. 

Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I would want the member 

opposite to know that the Premier of this province in the past 

months and weeks has attended dozens and dozens of public 

meetings and in fact, Mr. Speaker, has met with hundreds and 

thousands of people and, Mr. Speaker, this very night will be 

attending a public meeting in the community of Milestone, to 

which I'm sure there will be many in attendance, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite talk about . . . 

They're bound that they're going to obstruct and oppose and 

stop the kind of reform process that is happening in 

Saskatchewan, which I assume therefore, Mr. Speaker, they 

have a different plan for health care in Saskatchewan. I assume 

they do; if they want to stop this process, then I assume they 

have a process of their own. 

 

And I am suspicious, Mr. Speaker, when I see the kind of 

things that are happening in Alberta even now. Mr. Speaker, 

what we're seeing in Alberta is the privatization of health care 

and a two-tiered system arising on the horizon if it's not already 

in place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you and members will be interested to know that 

today in Alberta, if you want an MRI (magnetic resonance 

imager) it is provided by a private firm; and if a citizen wants 

that MRI, Mr. Speaker, that citizen will be paying 900 to 

$1,100 for that test, plus health premiums, Mr. Speaker. Now 

that, I guess, is the right-wing solution. Our solution, Mr. 

Speaker . . . 



992 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1993 

The Speaker: — Order. Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, my final question 

to the Premier. Mr. Premier, yesterday in this House you had 

your entire caucus, your entire caucus and the Liberal leader, 

voting with you, voting with you to try and bring closure down 

on this House and the people of Saskatchewan who are looking 

for leadership in the health care area. 

 

Mr. Premier, I can't believe that somehow you have coerced 20 

of your back bench MLAs (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) who had their hospitals closed yesterday, how you 

coerced them into voting to bring closure down in this House. 

 

Mr. Premier, people in Saskatchewan are demanding leadership 

from you. You went out to the people in the fall of 1991, you 

went to rallies and meetings all over this province and you said: 

vote for me and I will protect your community. Mr. Premier, 

there are meetings and rallies all over this province and they're 

saying: Mr. Premier, come out and protect us. 

 

I offer an invitation to you today, Mr. Premier. The mayor of 

Macklin asked me earlier this afternoon to extend on his behalf 

an invitation to the town of Macklin for next Monday night for 

you to attend and show that you are a Premier who leads by 

example, not a Premier who hides cravenly in the legislature of 

Saskatchewan. Would you do that, Mr. Premier? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to the 

member, the Leader of the Official Opposition, and to his 

colleagues that in fact this government is leading; Mr. Speaker, 

we are leading health care reform across this country and 

across the continent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what's at issue here, I believe, is an opposition 

that is absolutely bent on stopping progress in health care 

reform in Saskatchewan. Why that is, Mr. Speaker, it simply 

boggles my mind, but it appears to be the case. They are simply 

bent on preventing health care reform in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. This government will show leadership, does show 

leadership, and will build in health care in Saskatchewan, 

quality, sustainability for today and for tomorrow. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the Associate Minister of Health. You are absolutely, without 

. . . unequivocally, Mr. Minister, destroying medical health care 

in the rural part of the province of Saskatchewan. You said . . . 

the Minister of Health said this, and I quote: we established the 

funding and the boards implement plans within their district 

and they have choices within those plans. She said that. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, the people of Arborfield have no  

choice. The people of Ituna have no choice. The people of 

Macklin, Birch Hills, Norquay, and 47 other communities have 

no choice. You did not give them choices, Mr. Minister, either 

in their planning . . . people, giving them choices. You didn't do 

that either. 

 

When are you going to allow the people to do what your 

Minister of Health said initially: I will give you the funding and 

you choose. You're not doing that, Mr. Minister, not in any of 

these communities, and I have heard from at least a dozen of 

them personally myself. When are you going to allow them to 

choose the opportunities that they want with the funding that 

you give them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — It would appear to me, Mr. Speaker, that 

the members opposite had some abrupt change of position from 

only days or weeks ago, when they were accusing this 

government, criticizing this government, of being unwilling to 

make hard decisions. But that our entire plan — that's what 

they were saying — is that our entire plan was to foist hard 

decisions onto others. Mr. Speaker, we have taken some hard 

decisions. But again the member opposite wishes to mislead 

this House and others. He's saying all of the decision-making 

power is gone. That is simply not true and he knows it, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the district boards are forming across this 

province. In terms of the acute care beds which the funding is 

being withdrawn and reduced, Mr. Speaker, we have indicated 

very clearly that transition funding of $42,500 per acute care 

bed will be made available. We are asking the districts and 

communities to do some need assessment and decide how that 

money will be best spent in the future, Mr. Speaker. That's 

local decision making, Mr. Speaker, local decision making 

that's never happened before. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, I want to ask you 

this question. How are you going to save doctors in Kincaid, in 

Grenfell, Invermay, Milden, Norquay, Cut Knife, Beechy, 

Birch Hills, Bengough, Gull Lake, Spalding, Neilburg, Climax, 

Dodsland, Radville, Ponteix, Vanguard, Macklin, Cupar, 

Arborfield? How are you going to keep the doctors in those 

communities when you cut them down to zero beds? Zero beds, 

Mr. Premier, and you are saying they're having choices. They 

have no choices. You cut their legs out right from underneath 

them. 

 

Every one of those planning groups have had no choice, Mr. 

Minister, and Mr. Premier. And I'm asking you, give them 

choices. Go back out there and say, we will allow you to make 

choices. 

 

They want to rationalize the health care system as much as 

anyone else in the province. But you, sir, are only doing it your 

way. Cut them down, hack them to pieces, kick out the doctors. 

Mr. Premier . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Would the member put his 



April 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 993 

question. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Will you tell those people in those 

communities that they are going to have a doctor and that they 

are not going to have to drive at least a hundred miles one way 

in order to have that service provided to them in this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, that question both in its 

content and its tone exemplifies exactly what is wrong with the 

official opposition's position on this important debate. It is not 

only inaccurate but it is purposefully misleading in an attempt 

to try to inflame . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. The Premier knows that that is 

unparliamentary, to say that someone is purposely misleading 

the House. And I ask the Premier to withdraw the words 

"purposely." 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I of course take your 

ruling and I withdraw the use of the word "purposefully 

misleading." I repeat to the House, Mr. Speaker, that the 

essence of the member's question in tone and substance is 

wrong. 

 

He says the doctors want to get involved in the reform of health 

care. I think they do. He says everybody wants to get involved 

in reform of health care. I don't think that is true. I do not think 

that you, sir, and the Conservative Party and the official 

opposition parties want to be involved in reform of health care. 

 

What you want is the current system to be weighted down 

through the multiplicity of problems that it faces, starting with 

your huge debt, followed up by the federal offloading, followed 

by all of the questions of high-technology costs, followed by 

overbuilding of hospitals in a spending spree by this 

government opposite when it was the government opposite, for 

political purposes. 

 

You're not interested in reform. You want it the way it is. 

That's why you're fighting it. And if you leave it the way it is, 

that is a door for the privatization of medicare and 

hospitalization. And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, so long as I'm 

Premier of this province we are not going to allow that. We're 

in favour of public . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Premier, in the town of Vanguard, which 

is typical of all of them, in the town of Vanguard there are 11 

people in that hospital today. One of them is in acute care, and 

all that whole hospital is going to close down. 

 

Are you personally going to see that every one of those patients 

in that hospital are going to have a place to stay at the end of 

six months? Are you going to personally guarantee to those 

children who have their parents in that hospital that they have 

some place to put their parents with Alzheimer's, with cancer, 

with all of the things they require? Are you going to find a 

home for them? Are you going to open your home for them, or 

are you going to cut your trip to New York with your Finance 

minister? Are you going to allow that to become a part of the 

money that goes to save these rural hospitals? Are you going to 

do that, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, here is another example 

of a question which is loaded with error, loaded with error, 

laden with emotion, and designed to purposefully for political 

reasons mislead the public of Saskatchewan. 

 

I have said to the members opposite, I've said to the people of 

Saskatchewan, what we would like the people of Vanguard and 

every other area of this province to do is to get together and 

form health districts, decide their priorities. When the member 

gets up and says, what happens to the 83 patients only which 

are involved in all of this, 83 — each one of whom will be 

protected, I tell the member opposite — he fails to tell the 

members of this House and the public that 52 or in that number 

will be accommodated in the community. The others will be 

accommodated very closely by the community. He knows that. 

And if he doesn't know that, then he is trying to scare the 

public. And I think they're up to this game. 

 

This debate by the members opposite has nothing to do about 

their concern for health care. They have no concern for health 

care. It's got more to do with the Tory leadership race, and it's 

got more to do with privatizing health care. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — What's the member's point of order? 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. In our 

rule book, under Petitions, rule 11(8) states the following: 

 

 No debate may be permitted on the reception of a petition, 

but it may be read by the Clerk, if required; or if it 

complain of some personal grievance requiring an 

immediate remedy, the matter contained therein may be 

brought into immediate discussion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my point of order is this. The petitions of people 

in the rural hospitals that asked for Bill 3 to be delayed are 

clearly personal grievances, Mr. Speaker. They are extremely 

concerned about what is going to happen to them. Others are 

concerned about what's going to happen to their families. 

Rarely does government action generate more personal impact 

than Bill 3 proposes to do. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I ask that you rule, pursuant to rule 

11.8 of our own rule book, that my petition falls into the 

category of a personal grievance requiring immediate remedy; 

or alternatively, make a ruling that guides me as to what does 

in fact fit into that 



994 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1993 

category. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member makes a fairly complicated 

point of order, and I think it would be inadvisable for the 

Speaker to make a ruling now. I will take his point of order 

under advisement and bring back my decision to the House at a 

later date. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — I move this House do now adjourn. 

 

The division bells rang from 3:12 p.m. until 3:22 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Neudorf Britton 

Martens D'Autremont 

Toth Goohsen 

— 6 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Lautermilch 

Thompson Johnson 

Lingenfelter Draper 

Goulet Whitmore 

Kowalsky Sonntag 

Carson Kujawa 

Mitchell Crofford 

MacKinnon Knezacek 

Penner Kluz 

Pringle Carlson 

— 20 

 

An Hon. Member: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — What's the member's point of order? 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, my point of order relates to the 

irregularity of Bill No. 3. Mr. Speaker, no appropriation has 

been made and in the absence of such appropriation and since 

the Bill itself contains no statutory provisions for funding the 

provisions of the Bill, I suggest the Bill is irregular and should 

be dropped from the order paper. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I ask members to give me a minute to consult 

here. 

 

I want to . . . I believe that the point of order that the member 

made from Moosomin is very similar to the one that was made 

yesterday by the Leader of the Opposition as it pertains to Bill 

No. 3. I do have a ruling that I want to make on the Leader of 

the Opposition's point of order and at the same time I will make 

my ruling . . . I believe it also is applicable to the member from 

Moosomin. 

 

Yesterday, on April 14, '93, the member for Thunder 

Creek raised a point of order stating that Bill No. 3 was 

irregular and beyond the jurisdiction of the Assembly and that 

it therefore should be ruled out of order. The issue to be 

considered here is whether or not Bill No. 3 falls within the 

jurisdiction of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 

 

This is clearly a constitutional issue. It is the responsibility of 

the Chair to rule on points of order which fall within the realm 

of parliamentary practice and procedure. The Chair has no role 

in ruling on points of order which relate to matters of a 

constitutional or a legal nature. 

 

I refer members to Beauchesne's Parliamentary Rules and 

Forms, 6th Edition, citations 168(5) and 324: 

 

 The Speaker will not give a decision upon a constitutional 

question nor decide a question of law, though the same may 

be raised on a point of order or privilege. 

 

And this can be found in Journals, July 8, 1969, pages 1319 to 

20. 

 

Furthermore, I refer members to a ruling by the Speaker of the 

House of Commons, May 2, 1989, and I quote: 

 

 The reasons for these citations are straightforward. The 

Speaker should not sit in judgement on constitutional or 

legal matters. That role belongs more properly to the courts 

and the administration of justice. Previous Speakers have 

been very careful in strictly addressing themselves to 

matters of a parliamentary or procedural nature while 

avoiding dealing with constitutional or legal matters. 

 

I therefore suggest that other avenues for members to pursue 

these issues, and find the points of order not well taken. 

 

Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Speaker, that ruling certainly gives us 

much food for thought. I move that the House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — What was that? I didn't hear the member. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Speaker, I just commented that that 

ruling gives us lots of food for thought, and I move that this 

House now adjourn. 

 

The division bells rang from 4:30 p.m. until 4:40 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

Toth  

— 7 



April 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 995 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Draper 

Thompson Whitmore 

Lingenfelter Sonntag 

Goulet Scott 

Kowalsky McPherson 

Carson Kujawa 

Mitchell Crofford 

MacKinnon Knezacek 

Penner Harper 

Koenker Kluz 

Pringle Carlson 

Johnson  

— 23 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 

 

The Speaker: — We haven't finished with the other item. I 

declare the motion lost. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Point of order. 

 

The Speaker: — I will take . . . does your point of order relate 

to ministerial statements? I would . . . Order. I will . . . I think 

the member's point of order is more appropriately asked on 

orders of the day. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, point of order. 

 

The Speaker: — If members . . . When the Speaker's on his 

feet, will the members please be seated. Order. I have told the 

members that on . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I ask the 

member from Wilkie to please withdraw that statement. I ask 

the member from Wilkie to withdraw the statement that the 

Speaker . . . Order. I ask the member from Wilkie one last time 

to withdraw the statement. Will the member please stand in this 

House and apologize to the House and withdraw the statement. 

 

Mr. Britton: — I apologize and withdraw. 

 

The Speaker: — The Speaker's on his feet. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Speaker is on his feet. I've told the 

members that I would accept points of order where they are 

legitimately asked on orders of the day. Order. Order. 

 

An Hon. Member: — On what ruling are you doing that? 

 

The Speaker: — If the member from Rosthern will only listen. 

Points of order on proceedings of the day should relate to the 

item that we are on. The item that we were on was oral 

questions. That is finished. No points of order can be raised on 

oral questions. We are then on ministerial statements. I've 

asked the member 

if his point of order related to ministerial statements. He said 

no. We therefore move to orders of the day. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, I have a point of order on 

ministerial statements. 

 

The Speaker: — We are on orders of the day. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, I have a point of order. Mr. 

Speaker, my point of order relates to a pattern of ministerial 

statements. 

 

The Speaker: — We have bypassed ministerial statements. I 

asked the member, but by leave of the House we can go back to 

ministerial statements. 

 

The member is raising a point of order on ministerial 

statements on orders of the day. He may proceed. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, my point of order relates to a 

pattern of ministerial statements that has evidenced itself in this 

House over the last period of time. And the reason I'm only 

bringing it to your attention today is that it took time to go over 

the record and see if there were some inadvertency or if I was 

overestimating what was happening. 

 

I have not been overestimating, sir. If you go back through the 

ministerial statements you will see that almost none of them 

can constitute a statement of government policy as required by 

the rules. We have had ministerial statements on everything 

from simple announcements of the creation of health boards to 

congratulating our curling champions. These are not statements 

of policy but rather statements for which the ministers should 

seek the leave of the Assembly. 

 

I raise this point now and ask that you rule so that the ministers 

start obeying the rules and procedures of this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a point of order. I just 

want to raise the issue on one particular issue, and that is 

congratulating the Sandra Peterson rink, the world champions 

who are represented from the Callie Club here in Regina. 

 

I'm very amazed that the members of the opposition would 

raise a concern about this, for a number of reasons. One, that 

when people of the standing of the Sandra Peterson rink do win 

a world championship, it seems to me that the House is well 

within its purview to not only recognize but honour people who 

rise to this height and endeavour in terms of a sporting event. 

 

The other reason, Mr. Speaker, that it surprises me is I 

consulted with the Government House Leader before I did the 

statement. I told him exactly what would be in the statement 

. . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Opposition House Leader. 



996 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1993 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The Opposition House Leader. I 

consulted with him and he approved basically and said it was a 

great idea. And so, Mr. Speaker, now because we're trying to 

obstruct the working of the House for the member . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I think the member has made his point 

on the points of order. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Well I'd appreciate it if you'd cut them 

off from time to time as well. 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I 

give the Government House Leader one more warning. 

 

The member from Morse, I think, has made a very valid point 

of order, but I think it's incumbent upon the Speaker to review 

all the ministerial statements that have been made. I reserve my 

judgement and will bring back a decision to the House. 

 

An Hon. Member: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — What's the point of order? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The point of order is where there is 

agreement of the House leaders on statements made in the 

House, how can it be possible that this would be a point of 

order that it's not agreed . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. The member is referring back 

to a previous point of order and his point of order is not well 

taken. Order. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move this House 

do now adjourn. 

 

The division bells rang from 4:49 p.m. until 4:59 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Toth 

Muirhead Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

— 8 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Pringle 

Thompson Johnson 

Tchorzewski Draper 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Goulet Sonntag 

Kowalsky Scott 

Carson McPherson 

Mitchell Crofford 

MacKinnon Knezacek 

Penner Harper 

Upshall Kluz 

Hagel Carlson 

Koenker  

— 25 

The Speaker: — It now being 5 o'clock, this House stands 

recessed until 7 p.m. this evening. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 


