




















































Hansard: March 12, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 283 

 March 12, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Harper: -- I give notice that I shall Tuesday next move: 

 

 Be it resolved that this Assembly support the government and 

its ministers of Finance and Economic Development in their 

efforts to restore financial freedom and revitalize 

Saskatchewan's economy by, on one hand, acting reasonably 

and courageously to address the current financial crisis; and 

on the other hand, by developing through partnership a 

cohesive, realistic, economic strategy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, a point of order.  I 

understand this is under rule 16. 

 

The Speaker: -- I'm told it really doesn't matter. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Appointment of President of SIAST 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A brief 

question to the Minister of Education.  Madam Minister, can 

you tell this Assembly why it is that SIAST (Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology) is being forced to 

operate without a chief executive officer? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, as the hon. member is 

aware, the operations at SIAST are subject to the governance of 

the board of directors of SIAST.  They have conducted a search 

over the last several months and a new president will be 

appointed soon.  In the meantime, the board has taken the step 

of appointing the chairman of the board, Mr. Ian Wilson, as the 

acting president in the interim. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, it's my 

understanding that this position has been offered as a patronage 

appointment to defeated NDP (New Democratic Party) Doug 

McArthur, and that he turned it down.  He turned it down, 

Madam Minister. 

 

I understand that you have also offered it to at least three other 

NDP supporters, who said, not a chance. 

 

Madam Minister, is this not proof that the mismanagement at 

SIAST is so bad that you can't even give the job away to one of 

your own hacks? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, before the heat of raw 

politics burns away the foundations of rational thought . . .  

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- As I say, the engagement of a 

president for the operation of SIAST is the responsibility of the 

board of directors of SIAST.  And in due course I'm sure that 

they will find someone who is appropriate to meet the very 

challenging circumstances of the operations of SIAST. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, the 

students at SIAST are very concerned about the futures of their 

programing.  Rather than blaming others, such as the directors, 

for your incompetence, rather than shopping around for NDP 

supporters to take over this mess for you, can you give the 

students of SIAST some assurance that the institution will get a 

qualified chief officer and that the future of the institution is 

secure? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member and I 

do have one area of agreement in that their administration left 

SIAST in a mess. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Of that there is no doubt.  So we 

moved to appoint, pursuant to The Institute Act, which the 

previous administration passed to create SIAST, a committee 

of review which reviewed the operations and heard 

submissions from all parts of SIAST -- the faculty, the 

students, the public, other institutions -- and we are moving to 

do some reorganization there. 

 

It is a very challenging job to head up that organization and try 

and clean up the mess that the previous administration left 

behind, but we are making progress.  And the students and 

faculty at SIAST can be assured that the operations there are a 

high priority for us and they will be dealt with in a positive 

way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Opting out of GRIP 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a question to 

the minister . . . or Premier.  Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Premier, 

every action taken by this government has been . . . through 

your government has been there to design a method to destroy 

GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) and rob farmers of 

the protection they so desperately need. 

 

In fact, in a recent survey of 1,800 people done at the 

Saskatoon farm rally, they said 93 per cent of them felt they 

wanted a new program, Mr. Premier, and 85 per cent wanted to 

be able to opt out of what you have for '92 GRIP.  If you didn't 

have an . . . give them an opportunity to opt out -- 85 per cent 

said they wanted 



284 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1993 

to if you didn't change it back to something that was 

reasonable. 

 

Would you, Mr. Premier, at least give the farmers of the 

province of Saskatchewan the commitment that they have the 

option of opting out when you opt out of the program? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 

opposite for that question.  There certainly is a large desire by 

farmers to get out of GRIP.  I've been talking to farmers at a 

rate . . . '91 GRIP, '92 GRIP, any GRIP, they want out of this 

damn program, and that's what they've been telling me. 

 

I think it's a flawed program.  I think if you look at what the 

neighbouring ministers of Agriculture have said about the 

GRIP program, you will tell . . . and remember this program is 

the one that's unchanged.  Ernie Isley from Alberta is saying 

that provincial and federal government will . . . federal and 

provincial taxpayers will pay up to $1 billion within the next 

four years. 

 

He goes on further to say that the GRIP by the end of 1992 will 

have an accumulated deficit close to $400 million.  This is the 

Minister of Agriculture from Alberta.  He said the plan will 

never be self-funded.  So that tells you something abut the total 

disaster design of this program in the very first place. 

 

Manitoba's Minister of Agriculture -- who incidentally are out 

of this program by 1995 -- Manitoba Agriculture minister, Glen 

Findlay, told a farm group last month that the farm was 

designed as an interim measure that would not be necessary 

after 1995.  So it's no wonder that farmers want to get out of 

this program which was a disaster from the very start. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, March 15 is 

the deadline.  You have done nothing short of jamming every 

possible, conceivable method that you have been able to think 

about down the throats of farmers in order to get them to either 

be frightened about what you're going to do or to be 

intimidated by what you're going to do.  And you have 

confused all of the issues in . . . as it relates to some protection 

for farmers in the province of Saskatchewan.  That is what you 

have done, Mr. Minister. 

 

Will you give them an option, before the 15th of March, of 

opting out before they have to take you to court for all of the 

things that you have done that have totally derailed all of 

agriculture in this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, farmers have options 

for getting out of GRIP as was designed by the members 

opposite.  They should well know the options for getting out of 

GRIP.  And that was part of 

the original program design, that the . . . And that, Mr. Speaker, 

has not changed. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, the Premier yesterday is 

apparently to have said, and quoted in the Leader-Post . . . or 

the Star-Phoenix, that he wants a new program and he wants it 

not based on universality. 

 

Can you tell the farmers of Saskatchewan that they are going to 

get a program that isn't based on universality, where it will only 

be NDP farmers getting GRIP from now on?  Is that what 

you're going to do? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, we are looking at 

new programs.  The farmers are telling us they want a new 

program.  We are talking to farmers about that.  Unlike the 

former administration that designed the GRIP program without 

consulting with farmers, we are talking to farmers.  They 

realize that GRIP is a disaster.  They want a new program. 

 

We have a 32-member committee of grass roots farmers 

looking at what's acceptable for a new program.  We are 

looking at things like capping and commodity neutrality and all 

the rest of the things.  We want a program that is fair, that 

producers can afford and that provinces can afford and it's 

national in scope.  And that is the program they were working 

on.  Meanwhile we are stuck with the disastrous program of 

GRIP which takes, even if we give notice, takes two years to 

get out of. 

 

So yes, Mr. Speaker, we are designing a . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Premier 

supposedly has said it wasn't going to be based on acreage 

either.  Are you going to tell the farmers in the province of 

Saskatchewan that the new GRIP that you're proposing for the 

March 15 deadline is not going to be based on acreage? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

well knows we're not proposing a new GRIP for 1993.  GRIP 

will be the same as last year with one added option that we 

have negotiated with the federal government that farmers will 

be able to choose at no extra cost if they so desire. 

 

We do not have, Mr. Speaker, the power in this province to 

unilaterally change and implement new programs.  We are 

working towards a program and we're asking farmers to design 

the program for us, and we will have it designed and we will 

replace this disaster that we have now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, according to the Star-Phoenix 

yesterday, the Premier also said that it wasn't going to be based 

on production. 



March 12, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 285 

My question to you is: by March 15 what are you going to base 

it on?  March 15 is the deadline.  And have you sent out the 

statement of all of the conditions that exist for the farmers in 

1993 GRIP?  Have you sent that out to them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, again, I explained to 

the member opposite, there are no changes to the program for 

this year.  We are tied into this program for at least two more 

years.  The letter has gone out to the farmers explaining to 

them what the program will be, which is basically no change 

with one option which they can choose.  And that letter has 

gone out to producers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, the program 

that you have designed is not at all what the farmers had.  You 

had to go to this Assembly and ask that all of the records be 

deemed not to have existed in the province of Saskatchewan.  

That's what you did, sir, and the member from Eston-Elrose . . . 

or Rosetown-Elrose.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why 

we're laying this before this Assembly today. 

 

Are you prepared to do what your Premier said yesterday; that 

it is not going to be based on universality, it's not going to be 

based on acreage, it's not going to be based on production -- is 

that what you're doing for the farmers of the province of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, again I repeat, we are 

not changing the program.  It is a program that we are 

committed to and tied into.  There is one change that is being 

offered as an option.  Farmers have received a letter explaining 

that.  There's been a press release explaining that.  If the 

members would read the newspaper occasionally, they would 

also know that. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, my question 

to you is this:  are you going to give notice to the federal 

government by March 31 that you're out of GRIP and NISA 

(net income stabilization account)? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, again I reiterate, 

we've been talking to farmers, we're talking to a meeting with 

farm groups again today; that certainly is a topic for discussion.  

We have until March 31 to finalize that decision and we will 

notify the members opposite when we finalize that decision. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, the farmers in the 

province of Saskatchewan are making management decisions 

based on what they're going to get from you and from the 

federal government. 

If you opt out, the federal government has to opt out too.  That 

is what the program says and that's what it does.  Are you 

going to tell the farmers before March 15 that you're going to 

opt out by March 31?  And if you're going to do that then they 

should have the same right as you do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, the farmers do have 

the right to opt out of the program in the same manner that we 

do.  They must give notice.  And again I reiterate, if we opt out 

by March 31, we are not out for two more years.  That's the 

design of the program. 

 

So we have two years; two years notice is what's required.  And 

if we decide, if we intend to opt out, we will opt out by the 

deadlines and they will have their two years notice that we are 

out of the program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister.  You have the 

right to opt out in two years; the farmers have the responsibility 

to maintain their integrity in the program for three.  You, sir, 

are not even giving the farmers the benefit of the doubt in this 

province.  Are you going to tell them by March 15 that they 

have the right to opt out this year, or before that you make the 

decision on March 31? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, that is absolutely the 

correct interpretation of the Act.  The farmers have a three 

years . . . give three years notice; we have to give two years 

notice. 

 

I might ask the member from Estevan why that was designed 

into the program.  He's the one who was there when it was 

written.  It wasn't my rules, and I think we will comply by the 

rules of the Act as we will have to. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier with 

respect to this program, and I'll just start very, very calmly and 

slowly. 

 

You see, Mr. Premier, what you're putting the farmers through.  

You're asking the farmer to decide whether he or she should 

opt out by the 15th of this month.  And then you are going to, 

in the next two weeks after that, decide whether you're going to 

opt out or not.  And that's not fair.  Now you have fired one 

cabinet minister over wrecking this program already.  And it's 

universally understood in the province of Saskatchewan that 

nobody appreciated the changes you have made. 

 

Now you're asking farmers to make up their mind by the 15th 

and your minister now, the new minister, is saying: but we 

don't have to make up our mind in the NDP benches until the 

end of March.  That's not fair.  Do you understand why that 

might not be fair?  It has 



286 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1993 

nothing to do with the rules that were there before.  It's your 

changes.  Will you stand in your place, Mr. Premier, and allow 

the farmers the same luxury as the NDP government in the 

province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Again, Mr. Speaker, if there are 

unfairnesses in the design of the agreement, they were there 

before we became government.  And we will give the proper 

notice.  If we do indeed withdraw from the program, we will 

give the required notice and do so. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- My question is again to the Premier.  Why can't 

you make up your mind at the same timetable that you're 

asking farmers to make up their mind?  You see how difficult it 

puts the average farm family in.  They don't know whether 

you're going to stay with it for two years or not, yet you're 

asking them to make this commitment by the 15th.  It's clearly 

unfair. 

 

We've penalized them before.  You've admitted that you 

shouldn't have touched it to start with.  Even if you want to 

today, say, design a new one because you don't like the 

universality, you don't like it based on production, you don't 

like it based on acreage -- and Lord knows what you'd base it 

on if you take out universal production and acres. I mean what 

else is there in agriculture production -- but even if you want to 

change it, why don't you operate by the same rules that you're 

asking farmers to operate? 

 

They have obligations to make, they have insurance to buy, and 

they don't know what in the world you're going to do with your 

part of the program until after they decide.  Why don't you just 

back off and say: we will tell you before the 15th whether we're 

in or out.  That would be just absolutely fair. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, again I reiterate 

farmers have the option to opt out at any time.  I think if the 

rules are unfair, again the member opposite was involved in 

writing those rules, not us.  This program has been a disaster 

from day one, and farmers are telling me it's a disaster.  We 

will certainly comply by the agreement which was signed by 

the previous administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier 

again.  Mr. Premier, you have admitted in Prince Albert that by 

making changes to GRIP you added problems in some ways.  

And I quote:  I think that if I had to do it all over again I 

wouldn't have touched it. 

 

Now in that admission, and knowing that it is complicated and 

that you admit that you've made mistakes, now you're asking 

farmers to make a serious decision about tens of thousands of 

dollars per farm and you haven't made up your mind whether 

you're going to stay with it or not. 

You see the problem?  You haven't made up your mind and 

you're asking the farmers to make up their mind.  And you've 

admitted that you've made a serious, serious mistake.  You 

caused this House to walk out for three weeks.  You have 

changes in contracts.  People had made decisions to buy land, 

to lease, to refinance, and now you're asking them, Mr. 

Premier, to guess on their basis, to guess what you might do 

when you've admitted you made a terrible mistake.  You have 

changed the way the contracts were initiated and now, Mr. 

Premier, you have not even given them the courtesy of saying 

that you would play by the rules for the next two years. 

 

On the admission that you have made . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Does the member have a question? 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question to the 

Premier: on the fact that you admit you've made serious 

mistakes, would you not now agree to tell farmers what you 

plan to do in the future before you force them to make up their 

mind whether they're in or out?  Please answer that question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, the mistake the 

Premier was referring to was trying to make a program out of a 

disaster.  This program was a disaster. 

 

It was poorly designed.  It was admitted by the . . . If you read 

what the Manitoba Agriculture minister is saying, that it was 

designed as a temporary program.  It was sold as a long-term 

answer to farm debt.  It was designed as a temporary program 

to get through a couple of elections in the province and at the 

federal level.  This program was flawed from beginning -- the 

basic formula which gives us lower support each year.  It was 

lower support in '92. 

 

The IMAP (indexed moving average price) prices dropped in 

'92, are dropping again in '93, will drop again in '94.  The pot 

that gets paid out is less and less.  And any changes that you 

make which shifts the table on the Titanic . . . shifts the chairs 

on the Titanic and takes from one farmer and pays the other 

farmer does not address the inadequacies of this program. 

 

And with a basic flawed program you cannot make an adequate 

support program out of a program that is basically flawed. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- But, Mr. Speaker, with great respect to the hon. 

member, and I can go back to the Premier, all we're asking you 

to do, even if you believe it's complicated, tell them what your 

plan is before you force them to opt in or out of the program. 

 

Leroy Larsen says in the paper today, as well as Hubert 

Esquirol, both of them say the farmers should know what the 

new program or the substitute is before you opt in or out.  

That's what it says.  Larsen says: "The government should not 

abandon GRIP until another program is put in (its) place."  

Hubert Esquirol says the 



March 12, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 287 

same thing. 

 

If you don't know what you're going to do, what the 

government's going to do, how can the farmer make up their 

minds.  All we're asking you, is before the 15th tell them 

whether you're in or out. 

 

If not, then move the deadline up to the time that you can make 

up your mind, or after the budget, or whenever it is.  Give them 

the same benefit of the doubt or the political benefit of the 

doubt or whatever it is you're holding over there.  Because if 

you plan to change it so it's not on the basis of universality and 

not on the basis of production and not on the basis of acreage, 

what in the world is this going to be based on?  And if you can't 

answer that in this legislature, how are you going to answer it 

in the town hall?  How are you going to answer it to the media? 

 

It's very unfair.  Will you give them the benefit of the doubt 

and extend the deadline till you make up your mind? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I repeat my answer.  

The program for '93 will be the same as '92 with one option 

which is added, one feature which is added as an option. 

 

Unfortunately because of the agreement, we cannot replace this 

program immediately.  We have a two-year commitment to be 

into the program.  We will give the proper notice . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I was very lenient with the 

member and I gave him one minute and twenty-one seconds to 

ask his question.  I think he should have the courtesy of letting 

the minister answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Again, Mr. Speaker, farmers are 

telling us that this is a flawed program and they would like us 

to replace it with something better.  We are talking to farmers, 

and we will replace it with a program that is designed by 

farmers. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 

Agriculture.  In your brochure that you sent around the 

province you said, and, Mr. Premier, you said: we are going to 

negotiate improvements to GRIP and NISA.  You utterly, 

absolutely, totally eliminated all benefits that could accrue to 

individuals in the province of Saskatchewan in your '92 GRIP.  

That's what you did, Mr. Minister. 

 

And now you're going to, on the basis of the speech that was 

made by the Premier of the province, you're going to cut out 

production, you're going to cut out acreage, you're going to cut 

out universality.  What option are you going to give to the 

farmers by the March 15 to get out of the GRIP program? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, again the 

farmers have the options that were in the program that was 

designed by the members opposite.  And they continue to have 

those options. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, in the Star-

Phoenix dated July 31, its says: 

 

 On the eve of a political showdown, Premier Roy Romanow 

swept into North Battleford Thursday to spread the gospel of 

good GRIP.  But just a few kilometres away, farmers 

remained oblivious to the message. 

 

 "You don't have to have a sharp pencil to see the program 

isn't as good," said Stewart Mitchell, the owner of a mixed 

farm just south-west of the Battlefords. 

 

That's what was going on at that time.  It's no different today, 

Mr. Minister.  It's because of you.  Will you tell the farmers of 

the province of Saskatchewan that they have the right to opt out 

like you have the right to opt out, give them the same date-line 

as you have? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, the Minister of 

Agriculture from Alberta says that GRIP is no good.  The 

Minister of Agriculture from Manitoba says that GRIP is no 

good.  The farmers tell us that GRIP is no good.  Yes we agree 

that it is no good.  And yes, they have all the options that were 

in the program as it was designed. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- A question to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, we're 

going to rephrase this question.  In the event that you decide to 

opt out and some other jurisdictions don't, Saskatchewan 

farmers will have a much larger premium to pay.  They would 

like to know if that's what they face when they make this 

decision by March 15.  I quote the paper today.  Hubert 

Esquirol says this: 

 

 All the premiums paid in the next two years would have to be 

high enough to cover the program payouts.  This puts 

Saskatchewan farmers at a serious disadvantage compared 

with farmers in Alberta and Manitoba. 

 

Now if that's the truth, if in fact you opt out and other 

jurisdictions get federal money because they pay the lion's 

share of it, Saskatchewan farmers by the 15th are going to have 

to decide to pay the lion's share of the premium.  Now you 

have to tell them.  You had better be fair to them and not have 

them sign up or be there while you scare them and frighten 

them with these headlines.  You have to be fair to them.  Will 

they pay higher premiums than you see in Manitoba and 

Alberta if they sign up on the 15th? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, our premiums this 

year will certainly be much lower than 



288 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1993 

Alberta's because of the design changes that we made to the 

program last year.  The premiums will probably be somewhat 

comparable to Manitoba's.  There will be no effect on the 

premiums regardless of our decision to opt in or out of the 

program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1030) 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 24 -- An Act to repeal The Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move that a 

Bill to repeal The Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan Act be 

introduced and read for the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 25 -- An Act to repeal The Saskatchewan Mining 

Development Corporation Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

move that a Bill to repeal The Saskatchewan Mining 

Development Corporation Act be now introduced and read for 

the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 26 -- An Act to repeal The Saskatchewan Computer 

Utility Corporation Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

move that a Bill to repeal The Saskatchewan Computer Utility 

Corporation Act be now introduced and read for the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 27 -- An Act to amend The Association of School 

Business Officials of Saskatchewan Act 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that The 

Association of School Business Officials of Saskatchewan 

Amendment Act be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 28 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation Act 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that The 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation Amendment 

Act be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

Bill No. 29 -- An Act to amend The Urban Municipality 

Act, 1984 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm sorry.  I move that An 

Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 1984, be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 30 -- An Act to amend The Local Government 

Election Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that An Act to 

amend The Local Government Election Act be now introduced 

and read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 31 -- An Act to amend The Heritage Property 

Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, I move that An Act to 

amend The Heritage Property Act be now introduced and read 

the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 42 

 

Emergency Debate on GRIP 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, 

pursuant to rule 42 that a motion may, in case of urgent 

pressing necessity previously explained by the mover, be made 

by a unanimous consent of the Assembly without notice having 

been given under rule 41, I would like to say that I believe that 

it is an urgent matter that the people in the province of 

Saskatchewan who are involved in agriculture be involved in 

an opportunity to know by March 15 what the government's 

intentions are going to be in relation to the aspect of GRIP and 

the federal-provincial agreement that the province is going to 

make.  And therefore I would move: 

 

 That this Assembly directs the government to announce its 

intentions today regarding continued participation in the 

federal-provincial GRIP program. 

 

And I will move that, Mr. Speaker, and I will have the seconder 

the member from Estevan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order. 

 

ROYAL RECOMMENDATION 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, before orders of the 

day, I wish to announce to the Assembly the 



March 12, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 289 

receipt of royal recommendation of Bill No. 6 which was not 

received in time to appear on the order paper.  Therefore I beg 

to inform the Assembly that Her Honour the Lieutenant 

Governor, having been informed of the subject matter of Bill 

No. 6, An Act to amend The Prairie and Forest Fires Act, 1982, 

recommends it to the consideration of the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: -- The recommendation has been received. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 

questions I believe no. 82 and 83, I move they be converted to 

motions for return (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Motions for return (debatable). 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 13 -- An Act to repeal The Mineral Taxation Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise in this 

Assembly today to move second reading of The Mineral 

Taxation Repeal Act.  The repeal of this Act is a housekeeping 

matter only. 

 

In 1983 The Mineral Taxation Act was replaced by The 

Mineral Taxation Act, 1983.  The Mineral Taxation Act was 

not repealed at that time because certain provisions relating to 

the potash resource payment arrangements needed to be 

continued for a period of time after the passage of The Mineral 

Taxation Act, 1983. 

 

The potash resource payment arrangements have ended, so 

now, Mr. Speaker, The Mineral Taxation Act can in fact be 

repealed.  Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Mineral 

Taxation Repeal Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We have a number of 

concerns about this Bill, and a number of concerns about the 

direction the government is taking with respect to mineral 

taxation in this province. 

 

We expect, Mr. Speaker, that the government is going to be 

bringing in a number of measures in the budget upcoming with 

respect to the oil and gas sector of Saskatchewan, and we're 

quite concerned about that. 

 

In my constituency, Mr. Speaker, there is a significant oil and 

gas sector, and I'd like to just touch on that a little bit and bring 

that concern to the floor here today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There is absolutely significant concern in my area about what 

might be proposed in the budget coming up, and all of these 

measures that the government is  

proposing with regard to The Mineral Taxation Act, and what 

they may be replacing it with or what they may be bringing in 

as a result of, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the Kindersley field -- Kindersley, Dodsland, Coleville, 

Smiley area of my constituency -- there's a very large and 

excellent oilfield.  However, Mr. Speaker, it's a low-producing 

field.  It's a proven field, but it's a very low-producing field.  

It's a field that has about, on average, four to six oil . . . 

production of four to six barrels of oil per day, and that makes 

it, Mr. Speaker, a field that is marginal -- marginal.  And as a 

result of that, Mr. Speaker, because it's a marginal field they 

simply cannot stand any more additional taxation.  They can't 

take it. 

 

We've seen, Mr. Speaker, in that area almost all of the major 

companies have pulled out of there in spite of the fact that 

we've had relatively stable oil prices over the last two years.  

Something in the range of about 20, 21, $22 per barrel, Mr. 

Speaker.  And as a result of that, that's precisely the reason why 

the majors have decided to pull back and pull out of that part of 

the area, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They're pulling out because they have a higher cost structure 

than the independents that are in the area.  And the reason they 

have a higher cost structure than the independents that are in 

the area is because they bring in . . . as a rule you'll have one or 

two engineers for maybe 30, 40 wells, Mr. Speaker, and 

because of that, they have a significantly higher cost structure 

than you would find in other fields with a higher amount of 

production, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what's happened is is the independents have been buying up 

the fields generally from the majors, the majors like Esso, 

Imperial Oil, Gulf, ones like that have been cutting back 

significantly in exploration, has been cutting back quite a bit.  

So we've seen, Mr. Speaker, the independents buying up from 

the majors and as a result of that they have a lower cost 

structure and they're able to deal with this marginal field. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, they will not, they will not be able to deal 

with a well-head tax, and I think, Mr. Speaker, there's 

significant concern in my constituency about the possibility of 

a well-head tax in the upcoming budget.  And we'd ask the 

Minister of Energy and Mines to at least consult with those 

people before you decide to push ahead with that. 

 

I know in his speeches in the past, Mr. Speaker, he's talked 

about slapping it to the oil and gas sector in this province, 

taxing them, taxing them, taxing them.  I'll tell you, Mr. 

Speaker, what will happen.  In the Kindersley field, we will see 

immediately, absolutely immediately, there will be shut in 

wells.  That's what will result from it.  They will shut down that 

. . . they can just by turning off the tap, they shut her in.  That's 

it -- adios, I'm out of here, go back out to Alberta, start up 

production out there.  Red Deer looks mighty attractive when 

they look at a socialist government in Saskatchewan, 

particularly in light of the kind of statements that the Minister 

of Energy and Mines has given to this Assembly in the past.  

That's the 



290 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1993 

kind of thing that worries them significantly. 

 

We have now a Minister of Energy and Mines in this province, 

Mr. Speaker, that has been an absolutely, absolutely rabid with 

respect to the oil and gas sector in his speeches in the past.  

And, Mr. Speaker, as a result of that we will see that kind of 

thing happening in our field if we see a well-head tax.  One can 

only wonder what kind of taxes they might be thinking about if 

it isn't a well-head tax.  And we would ask the Minister of 

Energy and Mines to clarify that over the next little while. 

 

What kinds of taxes are you going to be placing on the oil and 

gas sector in my constituency if you aren't looking at a 

well-head tax?  What ones are you looking at?  Everyone is 

wondering that.  You're absolutely scaring them.  You're 

scaring the living daylights out of the oil and gas sector in my 

constituency, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when we see this kind of thing . . . I talked to some of the 

oil and gas people out there just yesterday as a result of this 

Mineral Taxation Repeal Act, Mr. Speaker, and of course the 

obvious question was, if they're repealing this, what are they 

going to replace it with?  What are they going to replace it 

with, Mr. Speaker?  That's the question that they're asking in 

the oil and gas sector, particularly in my constituency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there's about 800 direct jobs in the Kindersley 

field as a result of the oil and gas sector.  They generate 

absolutely millions of dollars for the area.  They have families 

of course, Mr. Speaker.  They have significant investment in 

dollars, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see just the other day, there was a land sale and there was 

something in the order of a million seven, I believe, of land 

sales in the Kindersley-Dodsland area, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what will happen, Mr. Speaker, is those oil and gas 

companies simply will not touch that at all, will not even go 

near those properties if we see a well-head tax.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, I think that it's incumbent upon this government in the 

next days leading up to the budget to provide some kind of 

indication to the oil and gas sector what they're going to be 

doing. 

 

I wonder, Mr. Speaker, I haven't spoken to one single member 

of my constituency that are related to the oil and gas sector that 

they haven't heard a thing from this minister, this minister that 

they are afraid of in light of the kind of statements that he's 

made in the past with respect to the oil and gas sector. 

 

(1045) 

 

They're concerned that this minister will put them out of 

business, absolutely put them out of business.  And as a result 

of that, Mr. Speaker, it's not just the oil and gas sector that will 

be affected in the Kindersley and surrounding area, it will be 

the business sector. 

 

There's a large business sector, a large service industry that's 

been built up that is related to the oil and gas sector and they 

will be significantly impacted too, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I talked to car dealership owners here in the last few days and 

of course they're wondering about it.  You look at large . . . we 

have a large General Motors dealer, a large Ford dealer in 

Kindersley and they're both very, very significant amount of 

business that they receive from the oil and gas sector and they 

are absolutely frightened of the prospect of a well-head tax or 

any other taxes that might be proposed by this minister who in 

the past has talked about the oil and gas sector being used as a 

cash cow to support other initiatives that they might want to 

speak about. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, also things that we are concerned about and 

the people in the oil and gas sector are concerned about are the 

kinds of statements that the member makes when he was at the 

Canadian Federation of Labour conference a couple of weeks 

back in Saskatoon, when he's talking about the possibility of 

looking at nationalizing industries once again, bringing them 

under the cabinet order once again in Saskatchewan. 

 

This kind of socialist thinking can do nothing but drive away 

investment in this province, Mr. Speaker.  These people do not 

want this kind of talk from a minister who is so intent on 

bringing in a higher tax regime on the oil and gas sector, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We only can wonder, is this just the start?  Is this just the start?  

This is a government that talks about bringing in industry.  This 

is a government that talks about economic development.  Well 

I can tell you, Mr. Minister, that the oil and gas sector is a 

significant employer in this province.  They bring significant 

investment dollars into this province, Mr. Speaker, and they 

will not, I predict, will not look at Saskatchewan in the same 

way that they do now if you bring in a higher tax regime, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So as I said, Mr. Speaker, they can shut their industry down in 

a minute.  They will shut their industry down in a minute.  It's 

not scaremongering to suggest that they will do that sort of 

thing, Mr. Speaker.  What they are telling me is a higher tax 

regime in the Kindersley field, in that low-producing field, will 

put them out of business and they'll move back to a more stable 

type of oil and gas sector economy in Alberta.  That's what 

they'll do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we would be asking the minister questions about this in 

upcoming days about what his plans are with respect to that 

sector, Mr. Speaker, and we would be hoping that he has 

contacted the oil and gas sector.  I doubt that he has.  We're 

hoping that he will at least take the time to tell them what he's 

going to be doing to them in the next few days leading up to 

the budget. 

 

Take the time, Mr. Minister, to at least tell them what you're 

going to do to them so they can make some decisions about 

their future out there, Mr. Speaker.  I think that it's incumbent 

upon him to provide that kind of leadership and direction.  At 

least take the time to pick up the phone and give them a call 

and tell them what they're going to be doing. 



March 12, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 291 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of questions that have to be 

asked about this Mineral Taxation Repeal Act and what they're 

going to be replacing it with.  There are other speakers from 

our side that are interested in talking about the field of the oil 

and gas sector as it relates to their area, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I can only say in conclusion, I think it's important that this 

government consults with the oil and gas sector.  I think it's 

important that they realize the damage and havoc that they can 

wreak on this sector if they decide to move ahead with a 

significantly higher tax regime.  And keep in mind that they 

will and can and will pull out of this province if they are hit 

with significantly higher taxes.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would certainly 

not be doing my job as the MLA (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) for the Maple Creek constituency, Mr. Speaker, if I 

didn't rise to speak on this important issue. 

 

Even though it seems innocent on the surface, the mere fact 

that the oil and gas industry is the number two industry in our 

constituency -- and I don't think I'll get any argument from 

anybody out in the area on that point -- it's important to our 

community.  Not each and every small town is directly affected 

by the oil and gas industry.  But in a broad sense they all are 

simply by the mere fact, Mr. Speaker, that much of the revenue 

that comes in through taxation from that industry is used to 

offset in the municipal scheme of things the balance of 

payments that go to different municipalities. 

 

So that in those formulas that the Department of Rural 

Development uses to equalize taxation throughout our 

province, every community in our constituency, as every 

community in the province of Saskatchewan, benefits from this 

important industry. 

 

So if an industry as big as the oil and gas industry is shared 

throughout the province, as the potash industry is also shared 

throughout the province, then those industries become 

important to every person in the province, not just to the 

locality where they are located. 

 

So the point that my colleague and friend from Kindersley 

makes about the fact that when you make a small, seemingly, 

change by repealing an Act, you send fright and fear 

throughout an entire industry. That is extremely important.  

Because those shock waves, once they begin, it's like throwing 

a rock in the water.  They start out little and then they grow and 

they go and they go and they keep on and they keep on and 

they keep on and they affect hundreds and thousands of 

different things around you that you never expected were going 

to be affected.  And so when you throw this rock in the water 

and cause these rippling effects throughout the industry, Mr. 

Minister, you are frightening the entire industry. 

 

And let me tell you that my colleague is absolutely correct 

when he tells you that there are many, many 

places that the petroleum industry can spend their dollars of 

investment other than Saskatchewan.  Believe me.  There's a 

hunger for money, for investment in the petroleum industry all 

around the world. 

 

And as one fellow told me not so long ago, with Mobil Oil, he 

said: we don't need Saskatchewan.  Offshore is waiting for us 

and our dollars.  He said any place in the world you can go 

offshore now and almost be sure to get 100,000 barrels of oil 

where you might get 1,000 barrels in Saskatchewan for the 

same kinds of investment.  He said the risks are great but the 

rewards are even greater, and that's what's important, Mr. 

Minister, is the fear that you put into people when you start 

withdrawing these Bills. 

 

I see a pattern developing here, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Speaker, 

a pattern developing in the withdrawal of Bills that has us all 

very anxious about what is going to replace all of these things 

that are being withdrawn.  It almost looks like there's a plan 

developing, Mr. Speaker, to withdraw all kinds of Bills and all 

kinds of the former administration's work in the direction of 

establishing some kind of comfort level, some kind of 

confidence in our province.  And all through the industries, 

people are saying, what are they going to replace them with? 

 

We know that they're going to be replaced with something.  

That is for certain.  This government is too high bent on 

regulating and ruling people's lives.  They are too bent on that 

kind of philosophy to just let this vacuum sit empty.  And so 

what's coming? 

 

You might wonder, Mr. Minister, how this rippling effect can 

work in some of the other areas.  For example, when you 

change the labour laws in this province, all of the industries are 

affected when you change those laws and you threaten to 

change them or you talk about changing them. 

 

Even though you may talk about one specific sphere within the 

province, for example the construction industry in relationship 

to government contracts, and you change those kinds of 

philosophies and directions of approach of how you're going to 

handle those situations there, you send out that rippling effect, 

Mr. Minister.  You send out that rippling effect of fear 

throughout the entire industry of the private sector as well as 

those people that are working with government.  Because they 

know that it's only one step more until you apply those 

principles that you've applied in one sector, to all other sectors. 

 

And so they are watching very carefully and they are very, very 

nervous, Mr. Speaker.  The people out in the petroleum 

industry are extremely, extremely worried about what this 

government is going to do. 

 

The track record of socialist governments in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, quite frankly, have not been conducive towards 

attracting outside investment, especially from the private 

sector.  The only kind of investment that socialist governments 

have been able to attract is the borrowing of money to buy the 



292 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1993 

industries under the name of the government. 

 

And that's the kind of principle and policy that has been applied 

in the past, and our industries are very fearful that the 

nationalization of industry is another thing that this government 

will dig up.  As they start to cancel all of these Bills, they will 

go back to their old ways, their old philosophies, the Regina 

manifestos.  Those kinds of principles and ideas are definitely 

the ones that they're going to be going back to. 

 

The industry is asking the question: when you repeal a simple 

Bill like this, is this the start of something, or is this the finish 

of our industry?  That's what they're asking out there. 

 

Now you may say it's a bit strange for the member from Maple 

Creek to be defending the industry when in fact my own 

personal background is that of a farming background and not in 

the oil and gas industry.  But let me point out to the members 

opposite, Mr. Speaker, that over the years I have worked with 

the surface rights associations trying to help farmers and 

ranchers and property owners to get a good deal and a fair deal 

from the oil and gas industries and the people that were 

working with them and coming out onto the land and drilling. 

 

We've worked long and hard for 30 years, and maybe longer, to 

develop a coexistence between the two industries -- the 

industry of agriculture and the industry of gas and oil.  And 

we've accomplished that.  We've had major, major gains at 

learning how to live with one another, at learning how to 

appreciate one another and how to actually benefit from one 

another.  They need us and we need them.  It's as simple as 

that. 

 

And it's come more and more to that as the economy of this 

province has tightened up.  The jobs that are offered in the 

petroleum and gas industry in the Maple Creek constituency 

are absolutely essential to the people, to the survival of the 

farming industry.  Many of the young people that help with the 

farming and ranching programs at home depend on the industry 

for their major source of income, Mr. Speaker.  They're going 

out in the daytime, working in the petroleum industry, and after 

supper and on weekends they are investing those dollars into 

their farming and ranching operations and doing the work 

necessary to keep them going. 

 

If it weren't for that supply of money, I shudder to think at how 

many farms and ranches would have gone under financially in 

the past 10 years in the Maple Creek constituency.  But I will 

hazard a guess that probably half of them would be gone, more 

than what already are gone under and have disappeared. 

 

It is my opinion that the petroleum industry has been directly 

linked to the financial cash flow that has helped at least half of 

our producers remain in business in the agricultural industry in 

our area.  And even though agriculture remains the number one 

industry in my constituency, because simply of the fact of the 

size of the acreages involved and the amounts of dollars that 

are generated still from 

livestock and even from grains, the reality is that most of them 

couldn't exist if there wasn't that coexistence of the two 

industries working together. 

 

The concept, Mr. Speaker, that is developing where you start to 

take away all of the old Bills that are in place, has some merit.  

Some Bills obviously might be outdated.  But when the 

government does this, shouldn't they perhaps take into account 

the rippling effect of fear that this might send out, and assure 

the industry that in fact they are not going to come with 

well-head taxes, or the other tax that I've heard about lately is a 

tax on the very pipes that go underground, the well stem itself.  

And that has really got the industry worried. 

 

My colleague from Kindersley has pointed out that he lives in 

an area where oil wells are marginal.  In the Maple Creek 

constituency, while oil is heavier in density and a heavier 

product, the reality is that the wells are not quite as marginal, 

but there certainly are a number of them that are.  The gas 

wells of course have a different kind of potential return for the 

invested dollar and for the volumes of gas that come out of 

those wells. 

 

But if you attach a new tax to the actual pipe underground, it 

seems to me that you can't do anything but frighten the industry 

some more.  And those kinds of stories have been going 

around. 

 

Now I suggest to the minister in charge, Mr. Speaker, that he 

ought to get out there and talk to the industry people directly.  

He may have talked to the Canadian Petroleum Association.  I 

don't know.  But the people out in the Maple Creek 

constituency, the people that I talked to that are running the 

sub-offices, most of the head offices -- Saskoil for example, 

located here in the city of Regina, they will have a sub-office 

out in our area -- those folks haven't heard a word. 

 

Now maybe there is some communicating going on 

somewhere, but it's certainly not happening out at home where 

the people are.  And it's the people that are scared stiff that 

these kind of changes are going to cost them their livelihood 

and their way of life. 

 

We need reassurance, Mr. Speaker, in this province.  We need 

some sense not only of purpose, but some sense of convincing 

people that there's a reason to get up in the morning, some 

sense that there is something good to look forward to. 

 

(1100) 

 

We've got so much doom and gloom going on with this budget 

that we're talking about.  We've got so much fear in the people 

now that I've seen people just throw up their hands in 

frustration.  And at the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities) convention for example this past week, 

just throwing up their hands in frustration and saying, what's 

the use of trying any more.  We might as well go out and party 

and forget it, and if we can give our land away and somebody 

will take it without loading us with responsibility that will 

follow us through our lives, 



March 12, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 293 

then get out of this province and leave and be gone and done 

with it.  It was the most amazing thing how these rippling 

effects are taking effect on our people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The fact that only 45 resolutions came to that very convention, 

at the SARM convention in Saskatoon, has in it a very definite 

and distinct message for everyone in this government.  And 

that message is that people are frustrated and anxious to the 

point that they've just simply given up. 

 

I can remember a few years back, as a reeve attending those 

conventions, where you would see 110 or 120 resolutions.  And 

people would stand on the floor of that assembly and they 

would argue and debate because they believed in this province.  

They believed in what they were doing.  They believed what 

they were going to accomplish would do some good for them 

and their families. 

 

And now, in a state of frustration they have given up.  They 

have absolutely no confidence in this province, in themselves, 

in their ability, or the ability of this government to lead or to 

bring prosperity.  And that is sad. 

 

But it is clearly written in the fact that an organization, Mr. 

Speaker, of that size would only see 45 resolutions. 

 

And what is even more frightening about that is the fact that 

most of those resolutions were voted on without any debate.  

People just simply are giving up.  They wouldn't even take the 

time to stand on the floor to argue about the important issues 

that were being discussed. 

 

That's a clear sign to any observer that the people in this 

province are frustrated and they are frightened and they are just 

giving up. 

 

And we've got to turn that thing around, Mr. Speaker.  And this 

government obviously is the government that's elected and they 

are the only ones that can build that kind of confidence and 

give the people that kind of assurance. 

 

I can stand here and preach in opposition as long as you like, 

but the people are waiting for the government because they're 

the ones in control.  They'll have to say it.  They'll have to do it. 

 

People want to know that the light at the end of the tunnel is 

not a train.  And right now in rural Saskatchewan they believe 

it's a train and they believe that the Premier is running the train 

and aiming it deliberately at them. 

 

A few weeks back, Mr. Speaker, I attended an appreciation 

night for the gas and oil industry in the town of Richmound, 

Saskatchewan.  Richmound, Saskatchewan, is a small 

community that lies on the boundary of the Alberta border. 

 

Those people so much appreciate in their agricultural 

community the fact that the gas industry and the oil industry 

are located in their centre, that they put on a night of 

appreciation to show those folks how much they like them and 

how much they want them to stay.  A nice roast beef supper, 

guest speakers -- I myself was invited to be a speaker there -- 

one of the happiest events that I was able to attend and one of 

the nicest jobs that an MLA will ever have to do: to be able to 

go out and tell people that we actually appreciate what you're 

doing; we want you to stay because you're doing something 

good for yourselves and for us.  And we're willing to cooperate 

and work with you, and we're willing to admit to the world in 

public that you're good and that you do good things for your 

community and for the world around you. 

 

We did that together, Mr. Speaker, in a small community hall 

that most people a couple of weeks before had indicated would 

likely be lucky to hold 50 or 75 folks -- if you had to sell the 

tickets, that's probably all that would come out -- many more 

than 200 were in that hall.  The place had no empty tables.  The 

caterers were scrambling to get all of the people fed, did a 

fantastic job. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it's not only important to the people that 

showed their affection for that industry, it was important for the 

industry to know that they were being appreciated. 

 

And I believe that in spite of this government, because of the 

feelings that have been expressed by those people, those 

industry folks will stay in that area and they will take some 

losses, economic losses 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, point of order. 

 

The Speaker: -- What's the member's point of order? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We've been treated to a fairly 

exhaustive list of concerns in the Maple Creek area.  I'm 

wondering if we could have a ruling on precisely what is 

germane to this Bill.  It seems to me the member's getting a fair 

distance from the Bill, which after all simply repeals a Bill. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- In response to the point of order raised by the 

Government House Leader, it would seem to me that 

opposition members do have the opportunity to speak out and 

try and raise the questions and what the minister is indicating 

as being germane.  It would also appear that there are concerns 

in our areas that we should bring forward.  And certainly, I 

believe my colleague is trying to raise those concerns, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I did have a look at the new Bill 

that was brought in but the Act that is being repealed is an Act 

that covers a wide scope of taxation.  And since it's repealing 

an Act of that wide a scope, I think we have to allow fairly 

wide-scope debate. 

 

But I was going to bring the member to order when he went in 

detail on the despair of people at the SARM convention and 

had really nothing to do with the Bill 



294 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1993 

itself. 

 

But I think the member is in order.  It is a wide . . . it's a Bill 

that has wide-scope effect and the member may continue. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Minister, I can understand your concerns about the 

opposition standing in this Assembly and expressing to the 

people of this province who don't live within the oil and gas 

fields, the problems of this rippling effect that I was talking 

about to you. 

 

I can understand that you wouldn't want the rest of the people 

to hear about the problems that you are creating.  Because 

you're afraid to have the people know what's the truth out in the 

country.  And I can see how you would use whatever tactic you 

can to try to silence us.  But the rippling effect is a fact, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

When you withdraw a Bill that has as deep-reaching effects as 

this Bill has, even though the title is short and seems to be quite 

simple, the spin-off ramifications of what will happen when 

you replace that Bill has got to worry people in that industry.  

How could it be any other way? 

 

If your taxes are suddenly all taken off by the Bill that covered 

them, are you going to believe for one minute that that won't be 

replaced by this government? 

 

I ask any one of you over there.  Tell me that you believe that 

the oil and gas industry will no longer be taxed by this 

government.  That if we repeal the Bills that affects taxation, 

that they won't be replaced.  It's quiet as it's been in here in a 

long time, Mr. Speaker, and I can understand why. 

 

Because the fact of the matter is that nobody will believe you if 

you say you're going to repeal a Bill on taxation and not 

replace it with something else.  The logic is clear.  And it is 

also clear to me that the logic here is that the petroleum 

industry had better brace themselves like the rest of the 

province, because all storm clouds are about to break loose in 

the province of Saskatchewan in the budget to come and in the 

Bills that will follow to replace these ones the are being 

repealed. 

 

This government has no intention of repealing Bills in order to 

simplify the lives of people.  They have absolutely no intention 

of taking away a lot of Bills and rules and regulations that 

would make life easier in the private sector because this is a 

socialist government.  They don't do things that way.  They 

absolutely don't believe in it. 

 

They believe in ruling and controlling and contriving to 

manipulate people.  That's what socialism is about, keeping 

control.  Don't tell me that this doesn't have a rippling effect 

that's going to go far and deep throughout this province. 

 

We've talked for a minute about the fears out there, Mr. 

Speaker, about this kind of rippling effect, the 

jobs, the families.  We've got all kinds of people out in our area 

who worry about this kind of thing because their families 

depend on these jobs in order to have a future.  Half of the 

people along the west side of my constituency will be looking 

to send their children to universities or to training schools in 

Medicine Hat or Lethbridge, Red Deer, or perhaps Calgary and 

Edmonton.  Without this industry secure, those children will 

never come back.  Once they get to Alberta and see how good 

things are and with this kind of approach to government, they'll 

never come back. 

 

The biggest drain we've got in this province today is our young 

people and this government is chasing them away as hard and 

as fast as they can.  And they do it by not allowing some 

confidence to come back to our people, by saying to them 

when we repeal this Bill, here's what you can expect. Don't 

worry, we'll give you another list of things that we're going to 

do and you can be confident and you can have confidence in 

investment. Investor confidence is so absolutely important to 

the petroleum industry. 

 

I am not one to advocate that anybody get into the stock market 

but the kind of things that trigger stock markets are very little 

and very dynamic.  The petroleum industry runs on that same 

philosophy, Mr. Speaker, a little thing done by government has 

a massive effect on the quick movement of decision making in 

financial circles in the petroleum industry.  If you want the 

petroleum industry in Saskatchewan, you have to build 

confidence with them and you have to convince them that 

you're not going to stick it to them with some kind of hidden 

tax or some kind of confiscation or nationalization after they've 

done the work and made the investments. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the kind of confidence that these 

people do not have in this government.  The member from 

Kindersley talked about the spin-off effects of the industry in 

our area and how that spin-off effect can benefit other areas 

besides the jobs and the families.  And that of course, is in the 

purchase of consumer goods.  That is especially true in towns 

like Richmound where we went and listened to the appreciation 

of the industry.  That spin-off effect is being hurt by this 

government not telling the industry where they are going after 

they repeal this Bill. 

 

I was talking to the Ford truck dealer.  He told me that his 

business is surviving not too badly.  His main sales are in 

trucks, the smaller kinds that they use for checking wells.  In 

spite of the fact that there are some taxation problems between 

our province and the province of Alberta, he said he's still not 

doing too bad with gas industry in their community.  If he were 

dependent on the agriculture industry, Mr. Speaker, he would 

not be there any more. 

 

We have got to build confidence in this province for the 

petroleum industry, and we've got to do it now, Mr. Speaker, in 

order for people like our Ford truck dealer to stay in business 

so that his family can continue to live in rural Saskatchewan 

and in small-town Saskatchewan, towns like Richmound 



March 12, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 295 

and towns like Fox Valley and places like Leader and Maple 

Creek. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I have listened to the Premier of this 

province in days gone back.  I almost shudder to admit how 

many years back this conversation took place because it will 

tend to date myself, and I'm sure that my grey hair will give it 

away anyway.  But back in the 1970s when the present Premier 

was involved with government I had occasion to visit with him 

one day. 

 

At that point I was representing a group of farmers who were, 

in fact, trying to get The Surface Rights Acquisition and 

Compensation Act rewritten and brought up to date and to 

bring into effect a better arbitration board process.  A process 

that has been evolved into a dynamically good kind of 

organization and ability for people to resolve disputes and 

problems. 

 

But at that time I met with the Premier and some of his . . . he 

wasn't the premier then, but the premier of that time and the 

Premier of this time in this government, the two of them, and 

they told me that the oil companies are no friends of ours.  That 

was one of the statements they made that day. 

 

(1115) 

 

They also said we are not married to the petroleum industry.  

And being younger and not really understanding philosophy 

too much -- I pay not enough attention to that, I guess -- but it 

stuck in my mind because it seemed very significant to them to 

say this.  But obviously, as the years have gone by, I have 

grown to understand that what they were saying is that they 

don't believe in private industry; they really believe in taking it 

over and owning it and controlling it through the government. 

 

And I've come to study and learn and understand what the 

socialist philosophy is really all about, and I'm saying to this 

government that you're out of tune. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Murray: -- With leave, to introduce a guest, Mr. Speaker, 

please. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I just noticed in your 

gallery there that a good friend and neighbour, George Hubick, 

has joined us and I would ask all of us to welcome him, and I 

thank the member opposite for allowing me leave to introduce 

him.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SECOND READINGS 

Bill No. 13 (continued) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I was saying that the government is out of tune with what is 

reality in Saskatchewan.  Their long-term objectives could 

work over a long enough period of time, but it can't work in 

Saskatchewan today.  And for the sake of the people out there 

whose jobs are dependent upon getting along and surviving 

together, I want this government seriously to consider going 

out and talking to the industry and putting their cards on the 

table, face up. 

 

Tell them exactly what to expect, and they'll pack their bags if 

it's no good and they'll go.  And if it's decent and it's 

respectable, they'll make some plans.  And the story I heard the 

other day about 150 gas wells that were planned for this 

summer being put on hold, those kind of stories can maybe be 

put to rest and maybe we can get people back to work feeling 

positive that things are going to happen. 

 

Now there's just one more point I want to make here, Mr. 

Speaker.  In Alberta a short time back, the royalty taxes were 

reduced.  The government of the day said, we need to 

encourage industry in order to build our tax base, and they did 

that. 

 

Last summer we brought this to the attention of the government 

here, and we suggested to them that they ought to do the very 

same kind of thing to build the confidence that will be 

necessary and to build the competitiveness into the system that 

would allow the industry to grow and expand here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we've heard nothing of that.  All we've 

heard is doom and gloom and more taxes, inventions of new 

kinds of taxes.  And this is destroying the potential of the 

industry to move ahead.  I honestly think that this province 

could have seven times as many oil and gas wells drilled this 

summer as what are planned now.  It is not without the 

possibility. 

 

I've looked through the Energy and Mines booklets that are 

sent out -- I'm on their mailing lists -- some of the other things 

that we get from the petroleum industry.  There is potential 

here that is not being tapped right at the moment, and I want to 

encourage the government members to take a serious look at 

that. 

 

We need employment in this province desperately.  This 

industry is not famous for creating a lot of jobs for the amount 

of investment dollars, but they are here, they are real.  Every 

job is important and we ought to be pursuing them. 

 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I want to encourage the 

government to take a serious look at this and try to build some 

confidence in our province.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to make a few comments on this Bill.  Mr. Speaker, I 

would suggest that if the minister in charge 



296 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1993 

of this Bill was living in an area where there was oil 

production, he would more likely understand why we must 

bring the attention of this Bill to the minister. 

 

Well I hear the chirping going on again from the other side, and 

I appreciate the attention, but you don't know what you're 

talking about.  That's your problem. 

 

I know where the minister lives.  I've had a reasonably good 

rapport with the minister, and I'm saying this with no disrespect 

intended.  We must review this Bill.  Our job on this side of the 

House, Mr. Speaker, is to be very careful.  The people that call 

us are asking, what's going on here?  What are they doing?  

Why is this being repealed?  So it's incumbent upon us to be 

very sure we can find out what's going on and tell them what's 

going on. 

 

The oil patch, when you look at the taxes that have been levied 

on every . . . everything that moves almost, Mr. Speaker, the oil 

patch are nervous.  They're saying, how can we be left out of 

the tax grab that's going on here in the province?  That's why 

they're nervous.  That's why we have to find out and be sure 

that this Bill is as redundant as we are led to believe it is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the detail of this Bill is acceptable to us. But, Mr. 

Speaker, I believe the principle needs some comment.  The 

principle of the Bill looks very straightforward and very 

simple.  And, Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House hope 

that that is exactly what this Bill is all about. 

 

We will not give up our responsibility without checking 

everything very carefully, just because on first glance, and in 

all due respect to the minister, has indicated that this Bill is 

now redundant.  It doesn't mean anything.  We accept that.  But 

we will not accept it without research. 

 

And that is why, Mr. Speaker, there may be . . . It may seem to 

the minister that we're taking a bit of time.  I believe it's our 

responsibility to do so. 

 

The principle is that once a piece of legislation outlives its 

usefulness, get rid of it.  Repeal it.  Very acceptable to us too.  

Pretty simple and straightforward, Mr. Speaker.  No quarrel 

with that. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the government does not seem to understand 

the principle in reality.  We have this Bill because some very 

astute and bright official understands that this Bill is redundant 

and he pushed it on the agenda.  And we congratulate that 

official, if indeed this Bill is redundant.  We congratulate him 

for doing that. 

 

But if this government actually understood the principle, then it 

would not be opposing Bill 10 on the order paper, which exists 

based exactly on the same principle. 

 

When a Bill has outlived its usefulness, get it off the books.  

We're not opposed to that, sir.  The principle applies here, and 

it applies equally to The Hospital 

Revenue Act, which we suggest is redundant.  Yet when Her 

Majesty's Loyal Opposition tries to get the government to at 

least consider the principle of Bill 10, all we get is a blank 

stare.  No respect for the very same underlying matters that are 

contained within this Mineral Taxation Repeal Act. 

 

That's what I'm saying today, is there has to be consistency in 

your approach to repealing Bills. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we should expect the government to at least 

be consistent.  At least provide some logical pattern of 

behaviour.  And at least give a sound basis to the Bills you 

present by showing the principles to be consistent across the 

piece.  Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I believe we should give the 

government another opportunity, another chance, and I expect 

we will do so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people in my area will be watching this Bill 

very closely.  Our oil industry out in my area is just getting 

going good and we don't want anything, anything to disturb 

that progress, Mr. Speaker.  Whether it is real or imagined, we 

don't want anything to interfere with that.  So while we accept 

the principle of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, we make no apologies 

for scrutinizing it very, very closely. 

 

In order to give the government another chance to show their 

consistency in redundant Bills, Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

 That the Assembly now proceed to consideration of Bill 10, 

An Act to Protect Municipal Property Taxpayers in the 

province of Saskatchewan through the repeal of The Hospital 

Revenue Act. 

 

Seconded by my colleague, the member from 

Souris-Cannington. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 11:26 a.m. until 11:34 a.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

 

Swenson Toth 

Neudorf Britton 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd Goohsen 

-- 8 

Nays 

 

Van Mulligen Hamilton 

Thompson Johnson 

Wiens Trew 

Tchorzewski Serby 

Teichrob Whitmore 

Shillington Sonntag 

Koskie Flavel 

Anguish Cline 

Atkinson Scott 

Carson McPherson 



March 12, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 297 

 

Penner Crofford 

Bradley Knezacek 

Koenker Harper 

Lyons Keeping 

Calvert Kluz 

Murray Carlson 

-- 32 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It must 

be obvious by now that there are some concerns that the 

opposition has on this Bill.  And although normally debate is 

adjourned after the first session on second readings, because 

three of our members have had the opportunity to debate and 

express their concerns I would recommend to you, sir, that you 

begin the machinery in motion to move this Bill into 

committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 20 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Superannuation Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

I rise in the capacity of minister in charge of SaskTel.  At the 

conclusion of my comments, I'll be moving second reading of 

this amending Bill. 

 

As many members will be aware, this amendment is designed 

to enable SaskTel to respond to fiscal realities being caused by 

a number of challenges which are facing this Crown 

corporation in today's competitive market-place.  Foremost 

among those changes is a rapidly changing technology which 

in turn has brought about competitive pressures, some 

increased operating costs of dramatically declining 

long-distance charges. 

 

Although the corporation's present financial situation may look 

strong, in actual fact its core revenue base, that of long 

distance, is beginning to decline.  SaskTel and its Stentor 

partners . . . Stentor, as I think members will be aware, is the 

new name for what used to be some time ago the TransCanada 

Telephone System and then was Telus and now is Stentor.  All 

of the partners in this system are responding to a rapidly 

changing technology and a rapidly changing environment. 

 

The impact of factors such as national long-distance 

competition have already had a significant impact on the 

revenues shared by all of the Stentor partners including 

SaskTel.  These new realities dictate that they must meet the 

challenge of competition by increasing their focus on customer 

service and satisfaction and reducing long-distance rates. 

 

Long-distance rates were in fact reduced in this province some 

weeks ago by a very considerable degree.  This in turn reduces 

the ability to cross-subsidize local rates.  In order to be able to 

continue to remain profitable and to provide a reasonable rate 

of return to their owners, which is the public of Saskatchewan 

who we in a direct way 

represent, SaskTel's costs must be kept under control. 

 

Salary costs represent approximately 40 per cent of SaskTel's 

operating expenses, so it's an obvious area of attention when 

trying to contain costs and reduce the cost structure.  SaskTel's 

workforce, which numbered more than 4,500 at the end of 

1988, today is approximately 3,800.  These reductions have 

been achieved through attrition and retirement programs. 

 

One of the features, Mr. Speaker, of present-day technology is 

it is often more reliable and requires less service than the line 

telephones which many of us remember as children -- steel 

wires strung from one farmhouse to another.  It was an 

important innovation for its age, but modern 

telecommunications is much more reliable and requires less 

servicing that those systems. 

 

And so we've sought to achieve reductions through attrition and 

retirement programs.  In the fall of 1991 SaskTel introduced a 

voluntary, enhanced retirement program.  The program was 

favourably received by employees with 88 per cent of those 

who were eligible to choose the program taking it. 

 

Retirement programs offer SaskTel a logical and humane 

approach to reduce its long-term salary costs.  Mr. Speaker, 

that philosophy will again be evident with the amendments to 

The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Superannuation Act 

which we're proposing today. 

 

Foremost among the new amendments is a provision allowing 

cabinet to approve new early retirement programs.  This is a 

sound approach, allowing SaskTel to continue on its course of 

responsible cost reduction.  And I'm confident that future such 

programs will have a favourable reception from eligible 

employees. 

 

There are, Mr. Speaker, some other amendments which will 

improve the administration of The Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Superannuation Act.  The board will be 

granted the new power to administer non-pension payments 

granted to superannuates as part of a retirement package.  This 

in fact is something which has been done in the past.  The 

auditor, however, brought it to our attention the legislative 

provisions may not be as broad as what had always been 

assumed, and thus in a way the legislation is being broadened 

to bring the legislation into compliance with long-standing 

practice. 

 

Second, the size of the superannuation board will rise from 

three to five members to reflect the increasing responsibility on 

operational issues and the management of pension funds.  This 

new Bill will allow for one SaskTel superannuate to be 

appointed to the board to give retired employees a voice in the 

management of their pension assets. 

 

Third, employees in SaskTel's defined-benefit plan, who leave 

the corporation, will be given pension portability.  The 

employees will be given essentially the same rights that 

employees in the 



298 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1993 

money-purchase plan currently have by giving them the 

opportunity to transfer their pension earnings into the 

province's money-purchase plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments to The Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Superannuation Act will help fulfil this 

government's commitment to keep SaskTel on a sound 

financial footing for the '90s so that it can continue its tradition 

of technological innovation and providing an affordable service 

to the people of Saskatchewan, all the while returning to its 

owners a reasonable rate of return.  This is consistent with the 

logical and humane approach towards cost cutting which 

remains as a cornerstone to its future success. 

 

At the same time, it lays a foundation for more effective 

administration of the Act and ensures that SaskTel's 

superannuation plan keeps pace with changing circumstances 

of the '90s. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I therefore move second reading of an Act to 

amend The Saskatchewan Telecommunications 

Superannuation Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1145) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I listened 

with some interest to the comments made by the minister 

regarding the presentation of this Bill, The Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Superannuation Act, and I'd like to make 

a few comments regarding the Bill. 

 

Even though the Bill in itself, I suppose on the face, would be a 

pretty straightforward Bill, I think there are a number of 

implications in this Bill, either directly or indirectly, that affect 

the superannuates and certainly the taxpayers of this province. 

 

I find with interest the comment by the minister that the reason 

for the Bill is fiscally driven.  And I wonder if indeed, when he 

talks about fiscally driven, if that was . . . finances were really 

taken into consideration when you're expanding a board and 

who then is the onus put on to cover the expenses of that board 

going from three members to five. 

 

One of the major concerns I guess, Mr. Speaker, that we as an 

opposition have with this Bill is number one, I think the 

purpose of the Bill is to allow the cabinet to appoint more 

people to the board of directors of Saskatchewan 

Telecommunication superannuates board; so in the normal 

course of conduct of this government opposite, Mr. Speaker, 

gives the cabinet the power to do this or that has been 

portrayed as a perfectly routine thing -- just go ahead and get it 

done. 

 

And I think the major question and concern we have here is the 

fact that the government has talked about being open, it's talked 

about getting more involvement from individuals, and yet here 

again we see cabinet indeed has taken the authority, or the 

power, to appoint members.  And I'm wondering, Mr. Speaker, 

if indeed any consultation process had taken place with the 

superannuates regarding the appointment of these members. 

 

It would seem to be that in light of what the government has 

been talking about -- their openness and giving people more 

say and being more accountable -- it probably would be more 

appropriate and fitting if the government and the Executive 

Council, rather than taking and accepting the power to appoint, 

would have given the superannuates, the people who will be 

affected by the Bill, the ability to elect or nominate and place 

forward the two individuals that they would feel more secure 

and more comfortable with to address their concerns on this 

board. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think we as an opposition certainly must 

challenge that principle of bringing to the government's 

attention what they have . . . the promises they have made to 

the people of Saskatchewan regarding accountability and 

regarding the ability of people to have a more direct say in 

matters that concern them.  I think certainly it is imperative that 

the superannuate do have the opportunity to be involved, and 

involved directly in the appointment of these individuals, and 

without interference from cabinet; that they should have the 

ability to put the names forward, they should have the ability to 

go to the superannuates, and superannuates themselves should 

have that ability to decide who they would like to have 

represent them on the board. 

 

There's no doubt in my mind that the superannuates themselves 

would like to have someone on the board who has some 

experience in financial management; someone with possibly a 

commerce background so that as they look at this developing 

fund that is being built for them as superannuates, that indeed 

the monies would be expended wisely so that in the future 

when they come to the point of retirement -- having the funds 

available -- they indeed would have a pension that would be 

able to cover all the added costs that are being placed upon 

them as they are being placed upon people right across 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Because SaskTel superannuates have been and are and 

continue to be hard-working individuals contributing to our 

communities, contributing to our economy.  They're dealing in 

a business that technological change is taking place rapidly.  

They have to learn new ideas and new methods. 

 

And I think the people of Saskatchewan really appreciate most 

of the individuals, if not all of the SaskTel employees, who so 

diligently carry out their duties, providing a service in 

guaranteeing the communications across this province, not only 

here in the city of Regina, but right across this province in 

giving us direct access and links across Canada and across 

North America and certainly to the world. 

 

I think one of the major concerns that superannuates have is 

will the fund have adequate . . . will there be enough funds to 

adequately address the costs that they 



March 12, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 299 

will be facing in the future.  And I raise that, Mr. Speaker, 

because of the fact that we have seen, and the minister brought 

out the one area of, increases in utilities in this province. 

 

And certainly SaskTel rates have increased.  And I can expect 

the problems the government is facing in light of the CRTC 

(Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications 

Commission) ruling and the long-distance funds that we are 

facing across . . . competition that we are facing across our 

country.  But we've got rate increases in SaskTel.  We've got 

rate increases in SaskPower.  We've got rate increases in our 

gas bills, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And there isn't a pensioner or an individual who is close to 

retirement, or even a person just starting out in the workforce, 

that isn't asking themselves, down the road and looking ahead, 

will there be enough funds in my pension plan to cover the 

added costs that I will be facing? 

 

And there's no doubt that the superannuates here are certainly 

going to want to have a direct input and say into the financing 

and where these funds are invested so that in the future they 

will indeed have substantive funds available and their pension 

will be adequate enough to address the concerns and their 

ability to meet the everyday expenses that they face. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, as we look at the Bill before us and as 

we review the Bill, there are a number of areas that we must 

take a closer look at.  We must take the time as well to just 

speak to superannuates regarding The Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Superannuation Act and indeed address 

their concerns and bring them to the forefront. 

 

I believe there should be, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the 

committee that is brought forward and in increasing the 

committee, I believe there should also not only be an ability of 

the superannuates to have a say in this, but this Assembly as 

well should have the ability to address any concerns that may 

arise regarding the appointment of members to this board. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that it would . . . even the Premier of 

the province believes that it's the real reason why this 

Assembly is here and why we as members are here, is that we 

all have the ability to speak out and address the concerns, and 

certainly speak out on the issues that are being raised. 

 

And we also want to know about the new powers that are going 

to be granted to the board, and what kind of powers, and the 

questions that will be arising there in the consultative process 

that, I believe, has taken place -- at least we hope has taken 

place -- whether or not the superannuates really had, or will 

have any power or any ability to address the concerns and to 

raise concerns regarding the new powers given to the board 

through this Act today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we certainly are not against early retirement, and 

I think I commend the minister for suggesting the fact that 

early-retirement packages are 

going to be made available again, is that something that 

through the past number of years that's been a practice, and I'm 

a firm believer in it.  And the fact that by allowing long-term 

and long-time individuals to look at accepting and taking an 

early retirement, it certainly opens the door for the younger 

generation to find employment. 

 

And if there's an area of concern in our province today, Mr. 

Speaker, and amongst our young people, amongst our 

university and high school students, it's the fact of, where am I 

going to find a job tomorrow when I get out of, whether it's 

high school or whether I get out of technical school or whether 

I get out of university, what jobs are there going to be available 

for me? 

 

And the fact that Crown corporations and large companies are 

even looking at and giving long-term employees the 

opportunity to accept early and adequate -- and I must add the 

word, adequate -- retirements because an early retirement 

doesn't mean much if it isn't adequate, if it doesn't have the 

ability to meet the needs of the individual to address the costs 

of their livelihood and their ability to survive in our society.  So 

we certainly want to commend the government and SaskTel for 

expanding on this early-retirement package. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, a friend I know quite well, who happens 

to be a SaskTel employee, was indicating to me that they just 

received notice in their district of the package that's just 

coming out and he said he just missed it by a month.  And he 

wasn't sure whether he would . . . was hoping that that month 

would have been extended one month earlier, which would 

have given him the ability to choose to take the retirement 

package or not, or whether he's just as happy to maybe work 

for another two or three years or . . . as long as . . . or whatever 

period it takes before an early retirement package is offered to 

him.  But certainly it opens up the door for the younger 

generation to find employment. 

 

But I must add, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier's comments the 

other day about the fact that there would be a reduction in 

government by offering early-retirement packages, it also 

appears that it doesn't necessarily appear that there will be a lot 

more jobs available.  Because this is possibly another avenue 

the government will be using to downsize and to cut people out 

of the employment force, cut people out of the workforce so 

that they don't indeed . . . can say, well they have cut the cost of 

government. 

 

I guess the area, Mr. Speaker, when we review SaskTel as we 

go into estimates and as we review SaskTel in Crown 

Corporations, the question that will be arising, Mr. Speaker, is, 

we will be finding out how many people actually did accept the 

early-retirement package and then how many people were 

rehired.  How were they rehired?  Who rehired them, Mr. 

Speaker?  And the minister assures me that they've already 

rehired them. 

 

But I think that isn't appropriate for the minister to be 



300 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1993 

suggesting today that he has already made a decision on 

something that they're just bringing in, allowing people to 

accept and look at an early-retirement package. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that there is much more that we need to 

look at in the Bill.  Even though it in a lot of ways . . . I think at 

the end of the day we will in general be in agreement on the 

Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I believe that today we should . . . the few questions that I 

brought out, the few concerns I have raised, number one, we 

want the appointment to the boards to be open.  We want the 

appointment of these board members to be something that the 

Assembly has the ability to question or to raise.  We don't want 

to appoint board members to be appointed in secret behind 

cabinet doors.  We want to be sure that the fiscal realities that 

the government is talking on arent just another way of 

downsizing on one hand and yet back-filling, turning around 

and back-filling on the other hand.  Mr. Speaker, I therefore 

move to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 22 - An Act respecting the Manufacture, Sale, Use, 

Consumption, Collection, Storage, Recycling and Disposal 

of Ozone-depleting Substances and Products 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, after my remarks I will be 

moving the second reading of The Ozone-depleting Substances 

Control Act, 1993.  The Act has been rewritten to correct an 

error in the existing Act, which made it impossible to pass the 

required regulations and to establish a broader range of 

substances and activities which are covered under the Act. 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, ozone is a natural and vital gas of 

the upper atmosphere.  It shields the earth from the sun's 

ultraviolet rays, which can burn skin, cause skin cancer, and 

cataracts, and decrease the productivity of forests and crops. 

 

Recently scientists have discovered that the ozone layer is 

thinning.  They've detected holes in the ozone above the 

Antarctic.  As you know, Mr. Speaker, our concern is that these 

holes let increased amounts of ultraviolet radiation reach the 

earth's surface.  This increased exposure poses a threat to both 

human health and many agricultural crops. 

 

Man-made gases like chlorofluorocarbons and Halons seem to 

be major culprits in depleting the ozone layer.  Because of this 

environmental and health threat, the Saskatchewan government 

is participating in a national program to phase out CFCs 

(chlorofluorocarbon) by the end of 1995. 

 

The international Montreal Protocol Agreement of 1987 and 

subsequent amendments set timetables for phasing out the 

production of the major ozone-depleting substances.  Canada 

was one of 86 countries that ratified this agreement.  In 

response to 

this global concern, the Canadian Council of Ministers of 

Environment accelerated our phase-out of CFCs by a year, to 

no later than December 31, 1995.  This means by the end of 

1995, Canada will cease to produce or import CFCs. 

 

(1200) 

 

The Ozone-depleting Substances Control Act, 1993, will 

replace the existing Ozone-depleting Substances Control Act.  

This new Act improves on the existing one.  In addition to 

correcting our inability to pass regulations covering the 

manufacture, processing, and list of products that contain 

ozone-depleting substances, the new Act establishes a broader 

range of substances and activities which are covered under the 

Act. 

 

Saskatchewan doesn't have any CFC or Halon manufacturing 

facilities or any significant manufacturing activities which 

require CFCs.  But we do use these substances in our 

automobiles, refrigerators, air-conditioners, fire extinguishers, 

rigid and flexible foams, cleaners, and solvents.  The gases 

from these devices travel slowly upward and break down the 

ozone.  These CFCs contribute to global warming. 

 

In many cases industry has found safe substitutes for these 

chemicals rather quickly and are currently developing further 

acceptable replacements.  They no longer use CFCs in aerosol 

spray cans or foam container packaging.  Companies that make 

insulation products have begun to find ways to make their 

products without CFCs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because of global concerns, ultimately these 

chemicals will be banned from total use.  This Act will help us 

better manage the way we recharge, recycle, and dispose of 

these substances and make an acceptable phase-out process 

possible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Ozone-depleting 

Substances Control Act, 1993. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

we on this side of the House also have concerns about CFCs 

and ozone-depleting substances.  And because of this, 

governments across Canada and around the world have taken 

action to try and correct the situation which has been 

developing with the ozone. 

 

Some of this elimination process is scheduled to come in over 

the next period of time.  The elimination of new CFCs is set for 

December 31, 1995.  These are the Montreal accord 

agreements as signed by various nations across the world. 

 

Also the elimination and importation of new Halons is set for 

December 31, 1994.  The reduction of methyl chloroform as a 

non-feed-stock use is set for December 31, 1994 also.  And the 

complete phase out of these chemicals in non-feed-stock use is 

set for the 



March 12, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 301 

year 2000.  The elimination of non-feed-stock use of carbon 

tetra-chloride is set for December 31, 1994. 

 

Also this accord limits the use of HCFCs 

(hydro-chlorofluorcarbons) as substitutes for CFCs or Halons. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is not new legislation around the world.  

It's new perhaps in Saskatchewan, but not across the world.  In 

fact the federal and provincial governments have agreed on 

some recycling procedures.  A working group has been set up 

to harmonize the regulation approaches to the recycling and 

recovery.  This group has been set up to develop a national plan 

for the recovery and recycling of all CFCs in Canada. 

 

Perhaps we should stop and take a look at how CFCs and Freon 

came into play in various uses across this country.  In particular 

they are used as refrigerants.  And it was in 1928 that the U.S. 

(United States) chemist, Thomas Migley Jr., stumbled upon 

CFCs and Freon.  He was asked to find a new coolant for the 

refrigeration industry, and Dr. Migley began his research for 

substances that would boil between 0 and minus 40 degrees 

Celsius.  And he chose carbon tetra-chloride whose boiling 

point he mistakenly listed in his chemical tables as minus 15.  

In actual fact, it turned out to be minus 128 degrees C 

(Celsius).  This error led him to investigate the potential of the 

related element flourine. 

 

Two years later he announced the invention -- and I'm not 

going to say the chemical word, Mr. Speaker -- but it's known 

as Freon.  This was the first of the now-famous family of 

chlorofluorocarbons. 

 

When you eliminate these products, Mr. Speaker, there will be 

a cost associated.  It's estimated that in the U.S. this cost could 

reach $36 billion between now and the latter part of the next 

century.  That cost, $36 billion, is just for the U.S.  Those costs 

would be greatly increased across the entire world. 

 

Recently in 1988, the electronics giant, Northern Telecom, 

came up with a new idea.  They were using solvents which 

contain the chemical to remove sticky residues from their 

production of circuit boards.  This company decided to use a 

new CFC-free solvent.  Instead, it decided to do away with . . . 

instead of going to another chemical to use in this process, they 

decided to do away with solvents altogether.  Today the flux is 

applied to the circuit boards in a fine mist that boils off during 

the manufacturing process.  While the new process has cost 

Northern Telecom $1 million to develop, it is expected to save 

the company $50 million by the year 2000. 

 

Another company in Canada has taken the initial steps to 

correct the use of CFCs.  Lily Cups Inc. of Toronto was using 

CFCs to make polystyrene cups and containers.  Earlier in their 

research, Lily researchers discovered that in 1960 scientists 

considered using carbon dioxide or oxygen as blowing agents 

in making their foams.  These gases were rejected because the 

foam bubbles they produced dissipated 

too quickly.  But through some belt-and-braces tinkering with 

their process, including the adapting of temperature and speeds 

to the foam extrusion process, Lily was able to overcome the 

problem.  Lily Cup in Canada stopped using HCFCs last April.  

This cost the company $1.5 million over the last three years.  

But they have succeeded in eliminating the HCFCs from their 

process. 

 

Success has not proved quite as available for other companies, 

especially in the refrigeration and air-conditioning industries 

which in 1988 accounted for 35 per cent of the CFC use in 

Canada.  But now the federal regulations and the new 

legislation coming forward in Saskatchewan will require 

certain industries to phase-out of CFCs.  The federal legislation 

is set for phase-out by 1997.  Bans will take effect in 1993 for 

CFCs used in blowing agents in flexible foams, in 1994 in 

sensitive electronic equipment and hospital sterilants, and by 

1995 for automobile air-conditioners. 

 

But that's not the only areas that are affected, Mr. Speaker.  The 

food industry is one of those areas that is affected by the 

reduction of these chemical uses, particularly in the container 

field.  Christopher Kyte, the head of the Food Institute of 

Canada, recognizes that there will be additional costs involved 

here. 

 

And one of the alternatives to using Freon in refrigeration is 

ammonia.  While ammonia poses no atmospheric threats, it has 

costly safety precautions involved in that otherwise.  Because 

ammonia is a flammable substance and if anybody has been 

around ammonia perhaps in applying ammonia nitrates on the 

soils as farmers, you know what it smells like.  So it has other 

potentials involved with it. 

 

Kyte says that the industry is in for a shock within the next few 

years when forced into a sudden change because the price of 

alternatives is going to rise 10 to 20 times over today's prices.  

So the food industry is looking at a major economic impact 

with the changes in the CFC regulations. 

 

Why are we concerned about the changes in CFCs?  What is 

our point?  What are we trying to prove by eliminating these 

products?  Well about three months ago, Mr. Speaker, as an 

example, the depletion level in the ozone layer in the upper 

atmosphere above the city of Toronto was 21 per cent greater 

than it was in 1980.  That's a very significant increase, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

An alternative to the CFCs being considered are called HCFCs.  

But they, while they don't endanger the ozone layer, they have 

the potential, a much greater potential as greenhouse gases.  

They can cause much more global warming than what the 

CFCs do.  And also with the HCFCs, they have a life 

expectancy or a life span of 50,000 years. 

 

I received a book two days ago in the mail and it turned out to 

be quite appropriate with this legislation coming forward, 

because the title of the book, Mr. Speaker, is Climbing Out of 

the Ozone Hole.  This book was sent to me by the Greenpeace 

organization 



302 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1993 

and it deals exactly with what this Bill deals with and what the 

federal government has been trying to do with the elimination 

of CFCs and other ozone-destroying substances. 

 

And we know that the ozone is causing severe problems with . . 

. the ozone-depleting substances are causing great problems 

with the ozone as we have all heard about the ozone hole over 

the Antarctic.  This allows ultraviolet light to enter onto the 

earth and can have a very severe impact on all life forms in the 

world. 

 

What we need to do as a society, Mr. Speaker, is change our 

consumption patterns and our production processes to eliminate 

these CFCs.  But when we do that, Mr. Speaker, we also have 

to find alternatives.  And we should be considering all of the 

alternatives, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When we consider alternatives, there are some that are 

currently available, but we also need to get involved in 

researching and developing other alternatives with industry.  

And government should also be involved in this and they 

should give this a very high priority. 

 

We have two good universities in this province, Mr. Speaker.  

We also have a very large number of people who are 

technically able.  And this government should be providing 

some encouragement to them to get involved into the fields of 

research to find alternatives to the use of CFCs and HCFCs. 

 

When we start considering these alternatives, Mr. Speaker, we 

need to look at the subject of regulation and independent 

monitoring of what kind of effect these new alternatives will 

have on our environment.  We need to look at the toxicity these 

elements may have, at how energy efficient they are if we're 

going to develop an alternative that is going to consume 2, 3, 4 

-- who knows how many times the energy that we are 

consuming today in developing CFCs; and in using CFCs, 

perhaps we're causing more damage in another area of the 

environment than we're already causing with the ozone. 

 

We need to look at the chemical lifetimes of these alternatives, 

at the costs, the economic costs that will be associated with the 

transition period from CFCs to whatever alternatives may come 

forward. We need to look at the volumes of the new 

alternatives of the CFCs and Halons that are currently in use, 

and what volumes will be necessary as alternatives. 

 

And we need to look at how safe those systems will be that 

come forward as alternatives, in the sense, will they put out 

more emissions into the environment than what the Freon 

systems we're using today in refrigerations. 

 

We still have to be able to meet those needs as society wants.  

The things that society wants, we still have to be able to 

provide for them. 

 

The economic aspects of this legislation have not 

been discussed, have not been brought forward by the minister.  

We need to look at all those areas where CFCs and Halons are 

currently in use.  And one of those areas is in refrigeration.  We 

all have refrigeration within our homes; we have it in our 

fridges, our deep-freeze, we have it as air-conditioners. 

 

There are various other areas within our homes that use it.  But 

perhaps what we need to be considering is whether or not all of 

this use of refrigerants, Freon, CFCs, is really necessary within 

our homes.  And we as a society have to look at the costs we're 

imposing on the environment when we want to have our homes 

set at 72 degrees all year round. 

 

And that's up to society to decide.  Government can guide, but 

government cannot legislate that you will not be able to have 

an air-conditioner.  But we need to take a look at that as a 

society to find out where our people really want to go to, what 

kind of a cost they're prepared to pay to accept the end solution 

that they desire. 

 

So when we're talking about refrigeration we need to look at 

what kind of alternatives are available.  Right now we're 

basically using a vapour compression system with Freon in 

developing our refrigeration.  But there are other alternatives 

which basically use the same system, and one of those is the 

ammonia system. 

 

(1215) 

 

Some of the other areas that we are also using these chemicals 

in are in solvents, in aerosols and in fire-fighting.  I mentioned 

the case of Northern Telecom which was using the solvents for 

cleaning some of their electrical equipment, but these are also 

used in developing . . . Any area of the electronics industry in 

particular is quite involved in that.  The building of computers 

is one area.  We should be developing fluxes that do not need 

to be cleaned so that we can control the atmosphere, or perhaps 

atmospheric soldering which would spray it on and it would be 

part of the system in a proper manner. 

 

Another possible solution is aqueous or semi-aqueous cleaning 

methods or specialized cleaning methods, particularly ice 

particle sprays or pressurized gases such as air or oxygen. 

 

Now most of the CFCs have been eliminated from aerosols.  

As a society we have gone to our Ban roll-on deodorants and 

this has eliminated the aerosol needs.  But there are other types 

of things that we can do.  There are mechanical sprays that can 

be used.  There are compressed gases or hydrocarbon 

propellants that we could use in those cans rather than using 

CFCs. 

 

Another area in which these chemicals are used is in the 

fire-fighting area.  Alternatives could be carbon dioxide, water, 

foams, and powders.  A new method of carbon 

dioxide-nitrogen-argon mixture could be a major breakthrough 

in replacing Halon-1301 in fixed systems.  At present some of 

the applications which are using the Halon for fire-fighting are 

such as 



March 12, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 303 

protection of aircraft cabins which are still considered to be 

essential uses, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the use of Halons in aircraft is particularly 

important to me personally because I am a pilot.  I fly a small 

airplane at times. 

 

And if you consider the use of an ABC dry powder chemical 

within an aircraft cabin, you have the potential of fire to start 

off with, or else you would not be using your fire extinguisher.  

But beyond that point, you want to know that if you do put the 

fire out, what other effects will the use of that extinguisher 

have. 

 

Well the most obvious example, Mr. Speaker, is that when you 

fire off a dry powder chemical extinguisher within the small 

space of an aircraft cabin, you're going to have the entire 

surface of the inside of the cabin covered with the powder.  

Now hopefully when you fired that off, you have indeed put 

the fire out.  But you have also caused a problem with all of 

your equipment within that airplane.  Now your equipment is 

not of any value to you if you don't put the fire out and it 

causes some alternatives you'd rather not consider. 

 

But with Halon, Mr. Speaker, you don't have that problem.  If 

you put the fire out, it has no effect on the rest of your 

equipment. 

 

With the dry chemical powders we've all seen the effects of 

static electricity.  Using a dry chemical powder inside the 

confinement of a small aircraft cabin the powder sticks to the 

windows.  You run into a problem of not being able to see 

outside of the cabin of the aircraft that you're trying to fly.  And 

this has a great deal of difficulty in controlling your airplane. 

 

With Halon, Mr. Speaker, you do not have that problem as it is 

a clear, odourless gas and dissipates very quickly.  You have to 

vent your aircraft cabin of the gas once the fire is out, but you 

are able then to control your aircraft in a proper manner.  

Which if your visibility is totally restricted by powder on your 

windows, you no longer have that control, Mr. Speaker, and the 

results are obvious if you cannot control your aircraft. 

 

Some of the other items that we use these CFCs for is in 

packaging.  Cushions, steering wheels, and head rests in 

automobiles.  Those are some of the items that, Mr. Speaker, 

we need some time to also eliminate. 

 

If Saskatchewan says today that you will not be able to bring 

any of these chemicals into Saskatchewan, does that indeed 

mean that you will not be able to bring any automobiles into 

Saskatchewan? 

 

So we need to have a longer time frame involved.  We need to 

work in conjunction and in tandem with the national 

government and with the governments of the rest of the 

provinces.  Saskatchewan cannot be going off on their own in 

one particular direction, which we have seen in other pieces of 

legislation.  Saskatchewan will have to move in tandem with 

the rest of the governments in this country. 

Even Greenpeace, Mr. Speaker, advocates a precautionary 

approach towards protecting the ozone layer.  They recognize 

the fact that there are indeed some essential uses although they 

would severely restrict just what those uses could be. 

 

I'd like to go through some of the alternatives that are available 

for uses in the various areas of the economy that we use CFCs 

in.  In the refrigeration and cooling area there are a number of 

alternatives.  Right now we're using the vapour compression 

system in most of our units.  But there's also absorption and 

evaporative cooling that are old technologies that we could use.  

They're fairly inefficient in a lot of cases; they're not practical 

particularly in a country like Canada.  For the evaporative 

method you need to have a climate which is hot and dry.  Well 

in the summertime we do have the hot and dry climate in this 

particular area, particularly the dry.  But there are other times 

of the year where that type of a method would not serve us 

well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the new methods that has been talked about is called the 

Sterling method.  And this method uses helium rather than 

Freon in its cycle.  And it has some good potentials, Mr. 

Speaker.  But one of the problems with using helium as an 

alternative to CFCs is that there is a very limited amount 

helium available in the world.  So that would . . . if a large 

sector of society was to move towards a Sterling-type system, 

we would have a very economic impact on the helium and it 

could be very expensive because of the lack of supplies. 

 

One of the other types is the water vapour recovery cycle in 

evaporative cooling systems.  As I mentioned before, these 

have already been used years ago and are not necessarily that 

efficient. 

 

A new type is the zeolite water absorption cycle.  Zeolite is a 

naturally occurring mineral that is hygroscopic.  It means it 

absorbs water, Mr. Speaker.  And in tests in the U.S. with a 

heat pump using zeolite and natural gas as a heat source, it 

proved out to be quite a successful system.  In fact a German 

automobile manufacturer is planning to install zeolite water 

air-conditioning units in their production of cars in early 1993. 

 

Another possible system that could be used, Mr. Speaker, is the 

liquid carbon dioxide and nitrogen gas expansion systems.  

These systems are being looked at in highway freight trailers.  

We see the large refrigerator trucks that travel up and down the 

highway, and this type of system is being considered in there.  

And one of the advantages that this system has is that it's 

lighter than current systems and therefore would perhaps be 

more cost effective because you're hauling less weight up and 

down the highway.  This system contains a storage container 

mounted under the trailer, a propane tank, heat exchangers, and 

controls.  So it's a fairly simple system, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I mentioned also that ammonia could be used in the 



304 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1993 

vapour compressor cycle.  Research has shown that ammonia 

to be superior to HCFC-22 which is one of the alternatives 

being considered for CFCs.  In terms of efficiency it's more 

effective at most temperatures.  It is available, and at a 

competitive cost. 

 

In other comparison studies, ammonia has been shown to be 

technically superior to HFC-134a and typically about 4 per cent 

of the cost of that system.  So there are some alternatives out 

there for the refrigeration system. 

 

Hydrocarbons such as ammonia can be used.  Other 

hydrocarbons are also possible to use, pentanes and propanes.  

They have excellent refrigeration properties with 

thermo-dynamic efficiencies equal to the CFCs and their 

operating temperatures are also comparable.  A domestic 

refrigerator using a propane-butane mixture as a refrigerant is 

being produced by one of Germany's leading manufacturers at 

the current time. 

 

U.S. companies are also testing an air-conditioning unit with 

propane as the refrigerant and the test performance results are 

highly promising.  Flammability should not present a problem 

because of the small amount of refrigerant charge used.  It still 

presents some problem but it should not be an excessive 

problem if properly controlled and vented in a proper manner. 

 

Ammonia-absorbing refrigerations are currently being used in 

such applications as mobile homes and hotels, mini-bars in 

hotels, and hospitals. 

 

Lithium bromide water absorption cycle is another alternative.  

This system however has the distinct disadvantage in that it 

must be used at above-freezing temperatures, which in a 

country where we have 11 months of winter and one month of 

poor sledding that is not a very viable option. 

 

So there are alternatives, Mr. Speaker, to the applications of 

refrigeration and cooling.  The Sterling system using the 

helium is a good example for a short- to mid-term. 

 

The decisions to produce commercially or expand the market 

of these systems are blocked, Mr. Speaker, not by technical 

barriers such as performance and efficiencies, but rather by 

political and economic ones.  We as a society are just starting 

now to move in the direction that we are prepared to make 

some of the political choices necessary to make these changes.  

But we also have to take into account the economic costs that 

can be brought forward in this concern. 

 

Aerosols in 1989, Mr. Speaker, accounted for approximately 20 

per cent of the CFC consumption worldwide.  And when we 

look at these aerosols we have to look at what do we consider 

to be essential in aerosols that need to have the CFCs.  The 

only application which CFCs could still be considered essential 

would be in the use of metred-dosage inhalers for medical 

reasons.  However even in this area, Mr. Speaker, dry powder 

inhalers, nebulizers, 

and other inhalants and non-inhalant products can be used to 

replace this CFC use. 

 

So that is one of the areas that we should still be looking at, 

Mr. Speaker, is our use within the medical system of the CFCs.  

We could use mechanical spray applicators to provide the 

medication to various patients.  We could use compressed gas 

propellants such as carbon dioxide and nitrogen or even air to 

provide this to the patients that need to have metred doses. 

 

Even dry powder inhalers, Mr. Speaker, can be used within this 

system.  Nebulizers -- nebulizers provide a non-irritating 

air-propelled delivery system for inhaling drugs.  There are two 

disadvantages to the system, Mr. Speaker. The delivery time is 

long.  Administration of the medication takes about 10 minutes 

as compared to 20 seconds with metred-dose inhalers or the 

dry-powder inhalers.  Metred-dose inhalers are currently using 

the CFCs. 

 

The nebulizers are also much more costly than the metred-dose 

inhalers and the dry-powdered inhalers as the system requires a 

compressor, which represent an extremely expensive one-off 

cost to the patient.  Now with the cut-backs that we are seeing 

in health care, I'm sure that the government is not prepared to 

bring forward any assistance in this matter. 

 

Fire fighting is one of the other areas in which CFCs are . . . in 

particular, Halons are used.  And I already mentioned the use 

of Halons within the aircraft industry.  They're generally used 

within confined spaces and closed-in areas where the chemical 

can be contained within one area, used as a suffocant on the 

fires. 

 

But the new chemical mixture of carbon dioxide, nitrogen and 

argon, seems to be a major breakthrough in replacing 

Halon-1301 in fixed systems.  At present some of these 

applications are, as I mentioned, the aircraft cabins, which are 

considered to be essential uses. 

 

There are two types of fixed systems in which Halons are used 

in a total flood, where a uniform concentration of extinguishing 

agent is built up within the protected area and localized.  The 

other is localized, where the agent is discharged directly onto 

the flammable materials. 

 

Halons are used to combat specialized fire and explosive 

situations, including in the areas where computers and 

electronic equipment facilities are; in museums because they 

do not put a chemical onto whatever it is you are trying to 

protect; engine spaces on ships and aircraft; and the ground 

protection of aircraft and facilities for processing and pumping 

of flammable fluids. 

 

(1230) 

 

So when they're filling up your airplane while you're sitting on 

the runway in Regina, they will have Halon extinguishers 

nearby to prevent explosions. 



March 12, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 305 

The substitution of Halon in fixed systems is considered to be 

more difficult than that of portable system.  So where you have 

an enclosed space in a confined area, it seems to be more 

difficult for industry to come up with some alternatives for the 

use of Halon in those areas. 

 

Carbon dioxide is one of the chemicals that can be used as a 

replacement for Halons.  But with carbon dioxide, when it does 

fire off, you do have some problems which result in that, as it 

comes out and freezes on whatever is in the area.  In fact as I 

have seen it in my own, where I was employed before, where a 

carbon dioxide system fired off and it looked like somebody 

had left the building doors open during a blizzard, because the 

floor was all covered in frozen carbon dioxide.  And actually in 

that particular time, there was no fire.  It was an accidental 

firing of the system. 

 

And carbon dioxides are less efficient than Halons.  Therefore, 

when you have a system using carbon dioxide, you must have a 

larger system which weighs more and requires a greater storage 

area.  And if you're using those systems on an aircraft, you do 

not want anything that creates added weight or takes up added 

space. 

 

So carbon dioxide would take up a much greater space than one 

of the Halon systems.  And they also have a shorter, what's 

called a throwing distance.  You cannot project the carbon 

dioxide as far from you as you can with a Halon system. 

 

I mentioned also the carbon dioxide-nitrogen-argon mixture 

system.  When you convert a Halon system to this new gas, 

you have to change all of your release nozzles and your storage 

tanks, but you can use the existing Halon system, piping 

system, for the protection. 

 

The other thing that is used in fire fighting is powders.  Now 

some of these powders work very well.  The Ansul powders are 

excellent materials.  They rapidly knock down the fires and the 

flames that you are trying to prevent from progressing beyond 

the point that they are.  They're considered to be more effective 

than Halons in this regard. 

 

However, the disadvantages of powder are poor penetration 

behind obstacles, and possible secondary damage to equipment.  

If you were going to spray ABC powders on your computer 

equipment, your computer equipment is not going to be worth 

anything after you're done with it and you may as well let it 

burn up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I look through the Act and we consider the 

name of this Act even, I find some contradictions within the 

Bill.  The Act is entitled, The Manufacture, Sale, Use, 

Consumption, Collection, Storage, Recycling and Disposal of 

Ozone-depleting Substances and Products Act.  And yet when 

you go through the Bill, it says that certain uses, without 

defining them as being essential, are exempted.  And I 

can understand that, Mr. Speaker, because there are some uses 

for which there are a viable reason to have these type of 

chemicals. 

 

But it also says that nobody's allowed to sell them.  So I'm just 

wondering, it's legal to use them but it's not legal to sell them.  

So what is this telling the consuming public?  Is it telling them 

that if they want to use this particular brand or this particular 

chemical, that they're supposed to go cross-border shopping to 

acquire it? And if you do go cross-border shopping to acquire 

it, it's perfectly legal to use it. 

 

But what do you do with it afterwards?  Because when you go 

back further in the Bill you find out it's illegal to have it.  So 

there seems to be some problems in here, Mr. Speaker, that 

perhaps the government should be able to take a look at and 

correct. 

 

Now I would hope that the minister would be amenable to 

some amendments later on in the process and would be 

prepared to listen to what I consider that the opposition will 

have some good ideas that may be very relevant on this type of 

legislation.  Because it is important legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the other areas that I have a concern with in this Bill is 

when you deal with the penalties that may be given to a person 

if they do not follow the mandates of this Bill.  And there are 

some very harsh penalties set out in this Bill. 

 

And yet when you look at the court situation across this 

province and the results that we have been seeing in court 

decisions dealing with some very, very severe situations, it 

seems that it is worse to own an aerosol can full of CFC than it 

is to go out and kill somebody.  And I think that there needs to 

be some proportion brought into here, Mr. Speaker. Either this 

is too heavy or the other is too light.  And so perhaps the 

government should take some look at both of those areas. 

 

At this time, Mr. Speaker, I will take my place and allow some 

of my colleagues to make their comments.  Thank you very 

much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am pleased as well to 

join my colleague in making a few comments regarding the 

Bill No. 22, An Act respecting the Manufacture, Sale, Use, 

Consumption, Collection, Storage, Recycling and Disposal of 

Ozone-depleting Substances and Products. 

 

And certainly I believe, Mr. Speaker, as I make my comments 

we'll find, I think I'll bring out the fact that there are . . . the Bill 

in itself, as people out in the rural areas of Saskatchewan and in 

fact across Saskatchewan, will probably go further than just the 

ozone-depleting substances.  Because environment and the 

discussion of our environment is something that has become a 

major topic and discussion focus not only in our province, but 

certainly across our nation, across North America, and around 

the world. 



306 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1993 

From our teenagers, from our young people, to parents and 

adults right across this nation, the concerns regarding the 

environment are a major issue. 

 

And when we talk about ozone-depleting substances, we are 

aware of the fact that there are many people who are very 

concerned today about the so-called ozone hole developing in 

our atmosphere and the consequences that can be faced by 

humanity if indeed we don't gain control or bring under control 

any of the substances that would destroy this atmosphere that is 

. . . and create such a delicate balance in our society to allow 

each and every one of us to even breathe and exist and live our 

daily lives. 

 

I say the principles, Mr. Speaker, of this Bill and the content of 

the Bill and the idea of cleaning up our environment and 

making a cleaner world for us is a good idea.  And most people 

would certainly agree with that.  I don't think there is any 

argument out there. 

 

And I believe even in our schools, many of our children are 

becoming more aware of consequences of many of the 

mechanizations and the economic activity that has taken place 

over the past number of years in the development of industry 

and the problems we are facing. 

 

But as we stand together to address these concerns and to 

address the consequences, raise these issues . . . And indeed 

what we're doing today by bringing forward an Act is bringing 

forward some guidelines and some rules that are addressing the 

concerns and laying out a playing field for people to work with 

so that we can all work together to develop sound, solid 

policies and which we can pass on to future generations -- a 

sound and beautiful world in which we can all live. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think as we look at the Bill before us today, 

we're all aware of many areas of the world, and certainly on the 

North American continent there are major cities that are facing 

very severe problems because of the environment and because 

of the pollution contributing factors that take place in their 

environment. 

 

And I think of the city of Los Angeles.  And I haven't had the 

privilege of visiting that city, but I'm aware of the fact and I've 

talked to a number of people who have been there. And 

certainly I guess there are times when people would like to be 

there, and there are other times when you'd prefer not to be 

there, especially on a sort of a cool, damp day and when the fog 

rolls in and the smog that builds up from vehicles and the 

problems it creates, and certainly for many people.  And I 

would assume that especially people . . . it's difficult for people 

who are quite healthy and able to breathe quite freely.  It must 

be awfully difficult for people who are asthmatics and people 

who have difficulty in breathing. 

 

And I'm pleased to see that in the Bill that's before us today, the 

use of substances in inhalers is not going to be prohibited until 

they come up with new solutions 

to address this concern.  I think the questions that we raise here 

are . . . we must look at some of the health problems that are 

being created but we must take into consideration that as we go 

to try and address all the ozone-depleting substances that we 

presently use such as in our aerosol cans and inhalers, that 

there must be an alternative made available so that indeed the 

livelihood of people can be expanded on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm not opposing the main objective of Bill 22, 

but I certainly want my children, and I'm sure all members in 

this Assembly want their children and grandchildren of the 

future, to indeed be able to grow up in a more healthy 

atmosphere with clean water and clean air. 

 

I think it's appropriate that here in Saskatchewan we have been 

discussing this over the past number of years.  There has been a 

fair bit of discussion and consultation take place in trying to 

address the issue and trying to design a Bill, that in addressing 

the issues and the concerns out there regarding our 

environment, regarding ozone-depleting substances, that we are 

now at a point, Mr. Speaker, of being able to put forward a Bill 

that not only addresses the concerns, Mr. Speaker, but also 

creates the healthier environment that I'm talking about, that we 

can live in, because of the fact that our children are looking to 

us to set an example. 

 

And I believe our children themselves would like to set an 

example, and as well possibly we in Saskatchewan can provide 

some leadership in this field.  And in providing leadership -- 

and I believe we are fortunate to live in an area, in a geographic 

area of this continent and of this globe where we are quite . . . 

we have the ability and we have ready access to clean water 

and actually very pure air supplies.  And it's incumbent upon 

us, Mr. Speaker, that we indeed protect it.  That we indeed take 

the time to protect the sources of clean air. 

 

And I am pleased that we can, and possibly through the Bill, 

we can provide the leadership for other jurisdictions to follow 

as they address the problems of ozone-depleting substances. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, as well that we need to listen to 

individuals.  We need to take the time to listen to people on the 

street.  We need to take the time to listen to housewives.  And I 

think we must be aware of all the major concerns that people 

have.  And the minister is giving me the nod that they have 

been.  I know that when I had the privilege of being on 

Regulations Committee certainly there were a number of 

questions we were raising at the time too with the environment 

about the consultation process of talking to all the interest 

groups. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, one of the major areas of concern that 

people are going to . . . that is going to arise, even though this 

Bill really doesn't get into addressing that aspect and probably 

come at a later date, but one of the major areas of concern that 

arises out there as far as the business community and we talk 

about hazardous substances . . . When they hear of the 



March 12, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 307 

collection, storage, recycling, and disposal, the first question 

that arises for most people in the business community -- 

specifically the gas service stations owners -- is the fact of how 

they address the problem of their storage tanks. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is a question that I know that many 

people will be raising with me.  And they're going to say, well 

is the government telling me today that I've got to dig up my 

storage tank?  And really, Mr. Speaker, the question is and the 

suggestion is, the comment is, I really can't afford it. 

 

And we're led to believe -- in fact I'm quite positive -- there's 

some 2 to 300 businesses in this province that would be very 

severely hampered and affected.  And I believe my colleagues 

who travelled on the Environment Committee were made 

aware of that as well.  It was brought to their attention, of the 

severe economic impact the very strong environment Bill 

would bring to many small businesses. 

 

And there's no doubt in people's minds . . . In fact our service 

station owners and many people involved in the handling of 

hazardous substances such as fuel are more than willing and 

more than prepared to address some of the concerns and to 

make sure that they are providing a safe, healthy atmosphere 

and location for people to be involved in a workplace. 

 

(1245) 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, when we address the issue of storage 

tanks, and possibly digging up these storage tanks, we're going 

to have to look at ways of helping people through that process, 

of alleviating the cost of this storage and the recycling and the 

collection agencies.  And certainly the Bill here talks about the 

use and collection. 

 

I'm wondering as well what process the Bill is talking about 

when it talks about collection.  The Act is talking about the 

manufacturing, about the sale, consumption, collection, 

storage, and recycling, and disposables, and depleting 

substances.  When the minister talks about collection of these 

substances, does the minister or the does the department have 

in place a program or a process to help people? 

 

I take it that they are talking of giving . . . offering a way in 

which people can bring in many of the harmful products they 

have on their shelves today that possibly they aren't using, 

giving them a safe and adequate way of disposing of these 

ozone-depleting substances. 

 

And I think that . . . if indeed that is taking place.  But certainly 

that's a question we will have to raise -- what type of collection 

system is available.  Is it going to be the type of system that is 

accessible to the public, that doesn't put an undue burden on the 

public, but indeed gives them a safe and adequate way of 

delivering their old cans, aerosol cans, or whatever, into a 

central collection agency. 

 

And possibly, Mr. Speaker, I just toss out the fact that 

we have a source right now, the SARCAN units, of collecting 

bottles and cans and plastic bottles.  Right now that's an area 

that I think we could even utilize to help collect all these 

aerosol spray cans that are sitting out, and I know in many 

cases, Mr. Speaker, they're in the back corner in a garage or 

they're in the back corner of an old building and certainly the 

problems that can arise should a fire break out, it could be very 

drastic.  So I think, Mr. Speaker, we want to know and follow 

up and see where the government has gone regarding this 

process of making a collection, a sound collection process 

available and accessible. 

 

What about storage?  Are we going to run into another situation 

as we had out here just west of the city?  I think that's one of 

the major concerns.  What about the storage of all these 

substances?  How do we dispose of it?  And I guess that is one 

of the . . . we can talk about . . . By limiting the manufacturing 

of the substance, Mr. Speaker, is I guess, the easiest way of 

taking care of ozone-depleting substances.  But for the product 

that is already still out there and a lot of product that is still on 

the shelf, how do we dispose of that product once it's been 

manufactured, once it's made available to the public and just 

sitting out there? 

 

And I'm certain we have seen over the past number of years 

some of the major problems that can take place when these 

substances are handled very, if I could use the word, carelessly 

or just not really, not really a lot of consideration isn't taken 

into the careful handling of these substances. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, it's an area that we will be looking at and 

discussing with the department, is the storage process.  What 

are they doing?  What avenues have they looked at in 

developing a sound, solid storage program to indeed protect 

people as they collect these substances and bring them 

together. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many other areas I guess we will get 

into and certainly as we get into the details in committee -- the 

recycling process and certainly the disposal -- there are a lot of 

questions that we can raise and I think my colleagues, a few of 

my other colleagues have some comments to make as well on 

second reading.  But there are other concerns that we'll raise as 

we get into committee.  So I'll at this time take my place.  

Thank you. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to add my 

questions and concerns to the Bill, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 22, 

An Act respecting the Manufacture, Sale, Use, Consumption, 

Collection, Storage, Recycling and Disposal of 

Ozone-depleting Substances and Products. 

 

The principle of this Bill is protection, protection of the ozone, 

of the atmosphere, Mr. Speaker.  And we in the opposition feel 

that the Bill that's being brought forward to us in the last few 

days is an important Bill, Mr. Speaker, and we have virtually 

no objections to it. 

 

We have a few concerns about it and a few questions that need 

to be addressed and answered and I'm sure the minister will be 

able to address those concerns 



308 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1993 

once we reach the Committee of the Whole.  We look forward 

to raising our concerns with the minister, and indeed finding 

out whether the minister has taken the time to give some 

thought to all of those areas.  There always is a question, Mr. 

Speaker, whether or not the minister is aware of what he is 

doing.  And that's why -- precisely the reason why -- we'll be 

asking those types of questions when we get there. 

 

This Bill will effectively halt the manufacture, sale, and use of 

any product containing an ozone-depleting substance.  Mr. 

Speaker, that alone raises a couple of questions, and first of all, 

I would ask the minister to take into consideration the potential 

for job creation when we look at this type of Bill, Mr. Speaker.  

What technology is available for cleaning up substances of this 

nature?  Are there any potential jobs that could be effected or 

potential jobs that could be created as a result of this piece of 

legislation?  The disposal of these products as well offers some 

potential jobs or potential job effects.  And I think it's 

important that the government give some consideration to what 

those job effects or creation of jobs could be. 

 

There's also the concern and interest in the time frame for the 

implementation of this Bill.  Is it just immediate, or is it phased 

in over a period of time, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And the minister, I'm sure, will be able to address those types 

of concerns as well as federal implementation of any 

regulations and laws that they may have concerning this type of 

Bill might be of interest to the minister and I'm sure is of 

interest to the public of Saskatchewan -- what consultation and 

what kind of phasing-in and what kind of cooperation there has 

been between the two levels of government with respect to a 

Bill of this nature. 

 

I'm not sure if this is something that is happening right now in 

Saskatchewan, but I do plan . . . we do not plan on protesting 

the regulation of manufacturing of this sort.  The minister 

maybe will able to address that as well.  Do we actively have 

companies in Saskatchewan that are producing CFCs and what 

kind of impact the closure -- I suspect it would have to be 

closure of facilities of that nature -- would be. 

 

As I said though, Mr. Speaker, we want to make it clear that we 

agree with the principle of this Bill.  We just have a number of 

concerns and questions.  I'm sure the public has as well. 

 

I think that many people will applaud the passage of this Bill, 

Mr. Speaker. Everyone we have seen over the past couple of 

years, Mr. Speaker, sort of an evolution of environmentalists 

throughout society. People in general, I think, all of us in 

society have become an environmentalist of one sort or 

another.  All of us have certain areas of the economy or certain 

areas of public life or whatever that we feel are important and 

we also look at.  You know, I'm, Mr. Speaker, involved in the 

agricultural field and we certainly have concerns about the 

agricultural field with respect to the environment as well.  And 

we're all, as I said, becoming more and more conscious of the 

environment.  I think we all in our personal lives are 

beginning to take into consideration what kind of impact we 

are having on the environment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I had the pleasure, Mr. Speaker, of sitting on the Committee on 

the Environment that toured the province over the last few 

months, several months.  And there were various concerns that 

were raised about the environment and the impact that society 

is having on the environment.  And this was just another one of 

those types of things that came up. 

 

I don't recall there being a great deal of discussion about the 

ozone, Mr. Speaker, and the effect that society and people are 

having on that.  But there was . . . As I recall there were a 

number of areas in the environment that were brought forward 

before that committee.  And I just want to touch on them.  I 

think they illustrate the point, Mr. Speaker, of how important 

the environment is and how much it is on the timetable of 

society today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There was a great deal of discussion about waste disposal of all 

kinds, Mr. Speaker.  Just the simple garbage that we throw out 

every day, Mr. Speaker, gave a great deal of concern to a lot of 

people and how society should be handling it. 

 

We see, Mr. Speaker, there was a great deal of discussion about 

garbage dump sites in rural areas and how that's going to be 

handled by the Department of Environment and the Minister of 

Environment in the future.  And that impacts on our 

environment as much as a lot of things. 

 

The burning of these disposal sites is always a concern in rural 

Saskatchewan.  I think it was an interesting comment at the 

public meeting in Maple Creek and I think it's an important 

point that we all have to consider. 

 

There was a great deal of concern about burning of disposal 

sites.  And yet the same people that are burning . . . or I mean 

are raising concerns about burning at disposal sites are also the 

same people that like to go down to the Cypress Hills Park and 

sit around in the evening at a camp fire and enjoy themselves 

that way, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And those folks at Maple Creek are saying to the Committee on 

the Environment: why is it any different for several thousand 

people to come out from the major population centres of 

Saskatchewan and burn forest products at our camp, at the 

Cypress Hills Park?  Is that any different than us burning our 

garbage dump sites, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And those are, I think, very legitimate types of concerns.  Is it 

any different for a small community to be burning, or is it any 

different than a larger centre to be burning?  There's a concern 

about the disposal and the potential for rat infestations at 

garbage disposal sites, Mr. Speaker, and that's important as 

well. 

 

There was a whole host of environmental concerns that came 

up over the past few months at those 



March 12, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 309 

Committee on the Environment meetings.  Underground 

storage sites -- the minister while he talks about . . . while we 

agree with him that this Bill is very important, I think it's 

important as well, Mr. Speaker, that he make some allowances 

for what is happening in the environment with the underground 

storage tank sites. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there's something in the order of, we were told, 

1,500 disposal sites in this province.  And I think it's incumbent 

upon the minister, when we look at not only Bills like this on 

the ozone depletion, but we also have to look at the information 

that people are bringing at those committee meetings, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The minister has extended the time frame for one year before 

those sites have to be cleaned up, Mr. Speaker.  But I think it's 

important that people realize that putting it off for one more 

year really isn't going to be a whole lot of benefit to them.  

They're still going to have to go through the costly exercise of 

tearing those . . . digging up those sites and removing them. 

 

There is also the concern, Mr. Speaker, about forestry and its 

impact on the environment, Mr. Speaker.  And I think it's 

important that the Minister of Environment take into 

consideration all of the concerns associated with that industry, 

as well as uranium mining.  We heard a great deal about that 

particular one when we were in the North, Mr. Speaker, about 

the impact on the environment. 

 

We are happy . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . We should burn 

it.  The member from Shaunavon says, we should burn them.  

I'm not sure, Mr. Speaker, if we want to get into burning of 

uranium sites just yet.  I would think that that would have a 

fairly significant impact on the environment.  And maybe the 

member from Shaunavon would want to take into consideration 

the impact on the environment before he makes such a . . . oh I 

was going to say, such a stupid statement, Mr. Speaker.  I was 

close there for a moment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's important this Bill . . . In the closing few 

minutes of the day, Mr. Speaker, I think it's important that we 

recognize the importance of the environment and the 

ozone-depletion substances that are out there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, environmental groups would say it is most 

important that this Bill of the legislature would be dealt with in 

this session.  And we wholeheartedly agree with that. 

 

As I said, we had some concerns about the Bill, Mr. Speaker.  

We think that it's important that the Bill goes forward.  But we 

think it's important that there also be adequate consultation 

with the affected groups, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We wonder whether the minister has taken the time to address 

those concerns.  Has he found out what the economic impact of 

this Bill is.  Has he taken into consideration the potential jobs 

or loss of jobs.  And I think that's an important consideration, 

Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, there are a whole host of environmental groups 

out there that are wondering, Mr. Speaker, how quickly this 

Bill will be implemented and indeed industry is wondering how 

quickly this Bill will be implemented, Mr. Speaker.  When we 

think back about the environment, Mr. Speaker, a lot of things 

that have happened in the past in Saskatchewan, we realize 

now were wrong, and we saw examples of that throughout the 

Environment Committee meetings around the province. 

 

And I think it's important, Mr. Speaker, that a lot of those 

things will be brought forward over the course of this session 

and I think that the people of Saskatchewan are counting on 

this government to do some things that would address those 

concerns, Mr. Speaker.  We all think back, you know about . . . 

for example, in agriculture we can look at the spraying of crops 

and the spraying of different kinds of pesticides over the past 

number of years, Mr. Speaker, and their impact on the 

environment. 

 

I can think of the chemical dieldrin and we all had experiences 

with that chemical for grasshopper control, and the potential 

impact and indeed, the impact that it did have on the 

environment, Mr. Speaker.  And it was taken off the market 

and it should have been taken off the market, Mr. Speaker, 

because of its impact on the environment.  And people were 

wondering at the time, why.  And now I think they're seeing 

carefully and very importantly that those kinds of things were 

indeed hurting the environment and needed to be addressed, 

Mr. Speaker. But when we had the opportunity to travel with 

the Environment Committee, I think we found out that indeed 

people are conscious of the environment and want to deal with 

the environment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a whole host of questions that we had 

about this Bill, Mr. Speaker.  We would move to, because of 

the importance of it and the opportunity we feel is necessary 

and incumbent upon the government, we would move to 

adjourn debate on this until we have the opportunity to consult 

with the people in the industry. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1300) 

BILL WITHDRAWN 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- With leave, Mr. Speaker, I'd like first 

of all to congratulate the member on an excellent speech and I 

may say a very timely adjournment of the Bill. 

 

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, with leave, for reasons I've 

discussed with the opposition, I seek leave to withdraw item 

no. 6, first reading of a Bill to amend The Urban Municipality 

Act. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 

move: 



310 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 1993 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 29, An Act to 

amend The Urban Municipality Act, 1984, be discharged and 

the Bill withdrawn. 

 

I so move, seconded by the member from Regina Churchill 

Downs. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Bill withdrawn. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1:04 p.m. 

 


