




















































Hansard: April 23, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1145 

 April 23, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my pleasure 

today to present several pages of petitions with respect to 

health care. The people who have signed this petition are from 

the south-east part of the province — Oxbow, Carnduff, 

Alameda, Estevan, Frobisher, Glen Ewen, to name a few. 

 

And I'll read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of The Health Districts Act so that 

communities may continue their efforts to organize their 

people and have a genuine impact on the process without 

intimidation or threat of arbitrary action by the government. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I now table it. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have petitions 

here. And the prayer is related to The Health Districts Act so 

that the communities may continue their efforts to organize 

their people and have a genuine impact on the process without 

intimidation or threat of arbitrary action by the government. 

And the petitioners humbly pray. 

 

And they are from Rockglen, Lisieux, Scout Lake, Killdeer, 

Bloom, Wood Mountain, various places, Willow Bunch. And I 

want to present these on behalf of these people to the Assembly 

here today. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I as well have petitions 

with respect to health care in the province. They are consistent 

with the petitions that we've been presenting up till now. They 

are from the extreme southern part of the province — Willow 

Bunch, Assiniboia, Rockglen area of the extreme southern part 

of Saskatchewan, and they have a concern about this as well. 

Mr. Speaker, I present these now. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 

read the prayer of the petitions that I'm going to be handing in: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of The Health Districts Act so that 

communities may continue their efforts to organize their 

people and have a genuine impact on the process without 

intimidation or threat of arbitrary action by the government. 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these petitions are signed by individuals from the 

communities of Rockglen, Scout Lake, Regina, and Willow 

Bunch. I so present them to the Assembly. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have 

petitions to present to the house. I will read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of The Health Districts Act so that 

communities may continue their efforts to organize their 

people and have a genuine impact on the process without 

intimidation or threat of arbitrary action by the government. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions comes from Oxbow, Frobisher, North Portal, 

Glen Ewen, Alameda, Carnduff, Alida. Mr. Speaker, I present 

these petitions. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have petitions to 

present today. I'll read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of The Health Districts Act so that 

communities may continue their efforts to organize their 

people and have a genuine impact on the process without 

intimidation or threat of arbitrary action by the government. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 

From the communities of Fife Lake; Lisieux, Saskatchewan; 

Rockglen. We have Scout Lake, also Willow Bunch, 

Assiniboia, Prince Albert, Estevan, and North Portal, and 

surrounding communities. I'll present these now. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

The Clerk: — According to order, the following petitions have 

been reviewed and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read 

and received. 

 

 Of citizens of the province humbly praying that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to order SaskPower to facilitate the production of 

non-utility generated power in areas of increased demand. 

 

 Of citizens of the province humbly praying that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to postpone 

consideration of The Health Districts Act. 



1146 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1993 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 

Tuesday next move: 

 

 That the special report to the Legislative Assembly by the 

Provincial Auditor on Bill No. 42 — The Crown 

Corporations Act, 1993, be referred to the Standing 

Committee on Public Accounts. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on Monday next move first reading of a Bill to restore 

health care services to the community of Gull Lake, and out of 

respect for your ruling that we only present one, I'll just hand 

the other two in. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it's my distinct 

pleasure to introduce to the Assembly, to members of the 

Assembly and yourself, a distinguished guest who's seated 

behind the rail on our side, and I'd ask Merv Johnson to stand 

up and be recognized. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Merv Johnson was a very well-known member of 

the Parliament of Canada from 1953 to 1958 for the 

constituency of Kindersley, for the CCF (Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation) back in the 1950s. 

 

I want to indicate to the Assembly that Mr. Johnson was a 

graduate of the College of Agriculture, who farmed in that 

area, a well-known community leader, as well as he was the 

former Sask agent-general in London for a number of years 

following his retirement from active politics. 

 

Mr. Johnson is now retired officially, although he's very much 

involved in his own local community. And I'm sure all 

members will want to join with me welcoming, I'm sure 

everyone would agree, one of the best MPs (Member of 

Parliament) from that area of the province, and I want to 

introduce him at this point. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have two 

introductions to make. The first one is two people seated in 

your gallery, Mr. Speaker, are Cheryl Kearns and Dr. John 

Coneghan. The doctor is a resident physician in Regina here, 

and he has . . . this is the first time that he is going to be 

watching the proceedings here. And I want to welcome Cheryl 

and the doctor here today, and I hope you enjoy yourself. I ask 

the Assembly to join me in giving them a welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — The second introduction I have, Mr. Speaker, 

it's a distinct pleasure for me to do this on behalf of the Leader 

of the Opposition, the wives of the employees of the company, 

Saskatchewan fertilizer company, are here in your gallery 

today. I would like to ask them to stand please and be 

recognized. Thank you, ladies. 

 

These ladies, Mr. Speaker, are wives of some of the employees 

of the Saskatchewan fertilizer company. And I want to ask the 

Assembly to join me in welcoming them. And I want the 

Assembly also to know that we're very pleased to have that 

facility in Saskatchewan. And we want to encourage you and 

your families to be very proud of the opportunity you have to 

work in Saskatchewan. And I want the Assembly to join me in 

welcoming them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In your gallery I'd 

like to introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

Assembly a group of women from across Canada with the 

Navy League of Canada. And I welcome you to the legislature 

and ask my colleagues to join me. And I'll meet you later for 

drinks in the members' lounge. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to piggyback on a 

couple of introductions. I want to welcome Mr. Johnson to the 

legislature and congratulate him on his work that he did in 

Great Britain as our agent-general. I obviously believe that 

some of our people in various kinds of foreign offices can do a 

good job, and he certainly did for us. And I congratulate him. 

 

I also want to add a welcome to the women that are here today 

from Saskferco and congratulate them and their families for 

being involved in a very productive company. I hear it's going 

to be quite profitable. I know everybody in Saskatchewan is 

cheering for you. Welcome to the legislature. 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Public Employees Dental Plan 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as you're 

aware and most members of the Assembly are aware, it's 

Secretaries Week across the province. And I would like to 

address a question to the Provincial Secretary of the province. 

Mr. Secretary — just so you have this straight — I would like 

to once again ask you the question . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Secretary — just so you have this straight — 

I would like to, once again, ask you a question that it appeared 

you worked so hard to avoid answering yesterday. Mr. 

Secretary, you told the House to . . . we would like you to tell 

the House exactly how much it's going to cost the province to 

provide dental benefits to the children of government 

employees who are no longer covered under the government's 

dental plan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well I'm, Mr. Speaker — I 



April 23, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1147 

want to thank the member opposite for the question — and I'm 

disappointed he hasn't sent me any daffodils. 

 

An Hon. Member: — They're at the office. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — But then on the other hand, maybe 

I'd rather he didn't. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I'd be pleased to 

answer the question of the member opposite, the member from 

Moosomin. As I said yesterday, the cost of the dental plan in 

the public service is .45 per cent, not five-five per cent as the 

member opposite had indicated, I think by error. It is .5 per 

cent of gross salary. 

 

There is a surplus in the fund, I am informed, of approximately 

$6 million so that any increased benefits that are provided to 

members in the plan in the public service will incur no 

additional costs because the interest from the surplus, plus the 

ongoing premiums which are the .45 per cent, cover the full 

cost of the plan. It is an excellent plan; it is a plan that is 

managed well. We wish that other programs of government 

that were worked out in the 1980s would work as well as this 

one. And therefore there is no additional cost that will be 

incurred. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And to the minister. 

The minister tells us there's no additional cost to the plan. The 

fact is I think at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, the plan is 

going to be picking up a number of individuals in the ages of 5 

to 13, adding them to the plan. That in the long term is going to 

add an additional cost to the province of Saskatchewan. And 

the minister tells us that the plan can carry itself. 

 

Well if we have such a good plan in this province that can carry 

itself and that can pay for dental benefits for public sector 

people, their employees and their children, then I ask the 

Provincial Secretary if he won't expand the plan to include all 

the families of the province of Saskatchewan. Are you willing 

to do that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to state 

right off the beginning in response to the member from 

Moosomin that I don't mind giving credit where credit is due. 

And I think I've given due credit to the fact that this is a 

workable plan. It is actuarially sound. It is an excellent 

arrangement which provides services. 

 

It's not any different than many other people in Saskatchewan 

because 80 per cent of the citizens of Saskatchewan are under 

some form of a dental plan, I am told. I don't know about their 

particular plans. I don't know about the plans in the private 

sector, but this plan is actuarially sound. It pays for itself along 

with the regular annual premiums which are paid by 

the province on behalf of the employees at .45 per cent of the 

gross salary, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the minister has said that the plan is actuarially sound 

and the government has just taken away a dental plan that 

covered all residents of the province of Saskatchewan, all 

children of . . . not just the employees, public sector employees, 

but all families in the province. 

 

And the minister tells us that the plan he has in place is 

actuarially sound. I ask the minister if he would expand it to 

include all families across the province. Why has he destroyed 

the dental plan to the taxpayers of the province and then 

included public sector employees under a plan that they call 

actuarially sound? Would you expand that to all people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let me put this 

little debate into context here. I want to say to the member 

opposite that there are some things in the province that we are 

having to restructure in a big way. Many things in the province 

we have to restructure in the big way because of the financial 

circumstances which the former administration left not only 

this government but the people of Saskatchewan to fix up. 

 

The budget plan which was presented by this government deals 

with that. It has been widely acclaimed not only in the province 

of Saskatchewan, but it has been widely acclaimed across 

Canada and North America and indeed the world. Even the 

World Health Organization has written to the Minister of 

Health asking for a report on our wellness model because they 

are so impressed that they feel it may be a model they may be 

able to use in other parts of the world. 

 

Now that is far different, that is far different, Mr. Speaker, from 

— and I hear the member from Estevan chirping from his seat 

— far different from the approach they took when in 1993 he 

said in New York: Saskatchewan has so much going for it that 

you can afford to mismanage it and still break even. 

 

We have never taken that position. We are managing, and we 

will provide the best possible services for the people of 

Saskatchewan that we can within the means that are available 

to us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Recommendations of the Provincial Auditor 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the Provincial Secretary. Mr. Secretary, you have made a great 

to-do about being open and accountable. However I want to 

quote one statement of the Provincial Auditor on page 49 

where he refers to 24 different appointed boards and says the 

following: 



1148 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1993 

These agencies made payments totalling $703,445 to their 

directors. In our opinion, these payments lacked proper 

authority. 

 

How can you justify these illegal payments made to your 

appointees at a time when you are slamming the door shut on 

hospitals around this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 

from Morse for his question. And I want to respond to him by 

saying that we respect — contrary to what was the case with 

the members opposite when they were on this side of the House 

— we respect the views and the opinions and the 

recommendations that are offered by the Provincial Auditor, 

because he has a very important role to play on behalf of this 

Legislative Assembly and on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And the recommendations and the findings of the Provincial 

Auditor will be duly considered by the Public Accounts 

Committee during this session and however long it takes. And 

we will deal with those recommendations in order to make sure 

that if there are any deficiencies in different departments or 

agencies, that they are corrected. 

 

I can tell the members opposite and the people of 

Saskatchewan that that will be done because we are going to 

recognize that from time to time there are deficiencies that are 

there, and that's why we have a Provincial Auditor, in order to 

be able to identify them so that then we can deal with them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Secretary, these payments 

were made contrary to law. That is what the Provincial Auditor 

reported. He says you failed to meet the requirements of The 

Interpretation Act and says you paid your own appointees 

without authority, 24 boards, Mr. Secretary. In any language, 

Mr. Secretary, that is called making illegal payments. 

 

It is well known that your government is vindictively going 

after an individual in Swift Current, trying to take back a year's 

salary because you claim she was paid illegally. I ask you 

therefore, Mr. Provincial Secretary, if you will be going after 

your own appointees to recapture illegal payments made to 

those 24 boards and committees in the province of 

Saskatchewan; or are you going to say no, you're not going to 

take these people to court and ask for them to pay back the 

monies that they have received illegally? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I can only express 

some concern about the approach that the members opposite 

take, and I think it's best expressed by a report in the 

Leader-Post today by one of our prominent journalists when he 

said . . . when he referred to the issues that the members have 

been 

raising in the House on the dental plan, and now on this thing, 

as grandstanding at its worst, Mr. Speaker. If this is the best 

that the members opposite can do, Mr. Speaker, then I fear, 

then I fear for the role of the opposition in the democratic 

process. 

 

And the member opposite wants to ask the question about the 

board of directors' pay and expenses. And I want to read from 

the Provincial Auditor in order to assist him to understand the 

issue. Where the Auditor says on page 49: 

 

 In our 1990 and 1991 Annual Reports, we reported on 

directors pay and expenses. In 1991, we reported that for 24 

Crown agencies the Government did not specify directors pay 

and expenses in Orders-in-Council or Minister's Orders. 

These agencies make payments totalling $849,569 to their 

directors. 

 

Now in 1990 and 1991 those members opposite were on the 

treasury benches and were the government of the day, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now I want to be not unfair and I want to be very direct here. 

There are some cases in which some of those corrections have 

to be made for 1992 as well. And I'm telling the member 

opposite, that other than what happened in 1990 and 1991, for 

1992 — because we now know that there is some problems — 

those omissions will be corrected, as they should be. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, my question was 

to you, are you going to require the payments back from those 

individuals that you said were illegally appointed and shouldn't 

have received remuneration? Are you going to require that 

money coming back from them as you are taking to court men 

and women from across this province to get money back that 

the Provincial Auditor said the last time. Are you going to do 

that with your appointees as well, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let me assure 

the member opposite that we will do what is required to make 

sure that the necessary authority that is there is in place. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that one of the reasons why some of 

these circumstances exist is because during the 1980s the 

whole process of government became so perverted that there 

are so many things that need fixing that it's taking some time in 

order to identify all of them and be able to deal with them. 

 

But I'm telling you, Mr. Speaker, they will be dealt with and we 

are serious in taking positively the recommendations of the 

Provincial Auditor and we appreciate his work that he does in 

order that we can identify as a government where we have to 

look at things and do what is necessary to put them into the 

correct place. 



April 23, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1149 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, you have 

made illegal payments to your appointees. I'm asking you, have 

you set the precedent of suing individuals where the Provincial 

Auditor makes such a finding? Do you justify suing one person 

but not the rest? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, if the member 

wanted to put his questions into perspective, he should look at 

the earlier pages in the Report of the Provincial Auditor in 

which there are some comments which I can't recall ever 

having been made for at least 10 years in the Provincial 

Auditor's reports in Saskatchewan. And that's clearly the days 

when the member opposite was on the treasury benches. 

 

And the auditor says very clearly that there are very significant 

improvements in accountability that this government has put 

into place since it took office in 1991. And I quote, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

 During the last year, I observed the Government making 

steady progress in improving our system of public 

accountability . . . I do believe, on the whole, our system of 

public accountability is improving. 

 

 The government issued, for the first time, an audited 

summary financial statement . . . 

 

And he goes on and on and lists many recommendations and 

many comments on the progress that has been made. I am 

proud of the progress . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Next question. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, on page 49 there are significant 

contraventions of the Act, and I want to ask you why you are 

not taking the people mentioned — for instance, the 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation, $89,000, 

overpayment without authority; Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan, $49,000; Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance, $80,000 — I want to know from you 

why you are not taking these people to court the same way you 

are taking to court other people who have been similarly 

addressed by the Provincial Auditor. Why do you not do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to 

repeat again that we will make sure that the appropriate steps 

are taken to correct whatever may have been a shortcoming. 

This is not unusual that this kind of thing happens from time to 

time, Mr. Speaker, and it's particularly not unusual, knowing 

the kind of record that the former government left behind. 

But the point that is really important here, Mr. Speaker, that all 

of that is public today because we're allowing the Provincial 

Auditor to function as he must be allowed to function. And 

therefore that is accountability, Mr. Speaker. And that's far 

different than, for example, the establishment of the 

Saskatchewan development corporation which was done in 

secret by the members opposite, and the public knew nothing 

about it until the election campaign. Somehow it was exposed, 

and then we made sure that that was done away with. 

 

We will continue to make that kind of progress, Mr. Speaker, 

because the public of Saskatchewan deserves the highest level 

of public accountability for the expenditure of their tax dollars. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — That's why, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, 

we're asking you why you paid to the Saskatchewan Crown 

corporation, the SaskPower Corporation, $108,000 illegally, 

and then SaskTel you paid illegally $121,000. 

 

We're asking you this one question, Mr. Minister, we're asking 

you this one question: are you going to recover those funds the 

same way you're attacking those people before, who the 

Provincial Auditor identified? Are you going to take that 

money and sue those same people for that same . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I would ask members 

not to interrupt when the member is asking his question. Was 

the member finished? Member, ask his question please. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, my question 

to you is this: are you going to sue the individuals like you are 

suing the individuals who did exactly the same thing prior to 

the election? Are you going to sue these people as well, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make very 

clear for the record and for the public that the issues that the 

members are raising is no less frivolous, in many ways, and 

misleading than the issue they tried to make of the dental plan. 

 

When you talk about unauthorized, it means lack of proper 

documentation, Mr. Speaker, as in this case, and not illegal. 

And the members opposite know that. 

 

Now that is far different than what they did when they were in 

government, and it is revealed here in the auditor's report when 

it deals to a $4.2 million contract which is awarded by one Mr. 

George Hill under the authority of those members opposite for 

construction at the Shand power plant, even if the construction 

had never taken place, Mr. Speaker. Now that, Mr. Speaker, 

could very well . . . might very well be illegal. 



1150 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1993 

But what's happening here is not illegal. It needs the required 

kind of documentation and that will be put into place. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, my question 

to you is: if you are going to make the documentation proper in 

the case of these individuals, extend that same privilege to all 

of the individuals that are accurately recorded in the same 

perspective by the Provincial Auditor as these are. If you have 

the courage to do your own appointees, why don't you make it 

a level playing-field for everybody in the province of 

Saskatchewan and do the same thing for them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I don't know that 

there is any more that can be said other than what has already 

been said. And that . . . other than that the fact that we do have 

a Provincial Auditor's report. It is an extensive report. I think 

it's worthy of note that the Provincial Auditor commends the 

government for the substantial progress that has been made — 

that's important. 

 

But the Provincial Auditor, as he must, has made some 

recommendations, and those recommendations will be, as they 

ought to be, considered by the Public Accounts Committee. It 

will deal with them. It will make a recommendation to this 

legislature. 

 

And I can assure the member opposite that we will pay close 

attention to the recommendations of the Public Accounts 

Committee when it studies the Provincial Auditor's report, as 

we have always done, and we will take the necessary steps to 

implement the recommendations of the Public Accounts 

Committee. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 

you have directly avoided answering the question, directly 

avoided answering the question. You are suing individuals who 

made the same representation and were reported in the same 

fashion by the auditor prior to this report coming forward. 

 

And I want to know from you, are you going to sue these 

people for the same reasons that you're suing those people? 

That's the question, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, this is not a question 

of who is being sued or who is not being sued. This is a 

question of following the appropriate procedures as set out by 

the Legislative Assembly or set out by various pieces of 

legislation that this Assembly has passed. I'm saying to the 

House and to the member opposite, those procedures are being 

followed. 

We have a procedure here when it comes with the Provincial 

Auditor's report, where we have a committee of this legislature, 

the Public Accounts Committee. The committee of this 

legislature is now to study this report, make a recommendation 

to this House on which the government will act. And I can tell 

the members of this Assembly that the government will act 

positively. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, in the same 

report, Mr. Minister, the Provincial Auditor says that you 

yourself stand in contravention of The Government 

Organization Act. The Provincial Auditor says you are 

breaking the law because you were refusing to table annual 

reports detailing the spending activities of your political 

agency, the Department of the Provincial Secretary, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

In keeping with your government's pledge of an open and 

accountable government, will you promise to quit breaking the 

law yourself and become fully accountable to this Assembly as 

required by The Government Organization Act? Will you do 

that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once 

again the member opposite is putting words that are 

inappropriate in this place in this particular circumstance. The 

Provincial Auditor has said, and I look on page 21: 

 

 In the past year, the Government improved disclosure 

practices. The most important significant step is to require, 

by law, that the Public Accounts be issued by the end of 

October. 

 

And there are many such examples in which he refers to. 

 

And I'll you, Mr. Speaker, and I want to say to the House, that 

when it comes to annual reports, we are providing annual 

reports in areas that the members opposite never even 

considered providing annual reports for. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Simply because, Mr. Speaker, we 

are not in the habit or in the practice of hiding information as 

was the case in the 1980s. 

 

Now there are some departments which the legislation of those 

departments does not require the tabling of an annual report, 

and so in their total existence there has never been one tabled 

even in the 1980s for the Provincial Secretary's department. 

 

But I want to tell you this: that since I have become minister I 

have instructed the Provincial Secretary's department that that 

department will prepare an annual report and it will be ready 

for this fiscal year 



April 23, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1151 

because we are determined to keep up with our commitment of 

full and complete public accountability and disclosure on the 

expenditures of the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, on April 14 

the Provincial Auditor tabled a special report on Bill 42 that 

seems to have gotten lost in the cries of pain because of rural 

hospitals. This report recommends that Bill 42 be amended to 

allow the Provincial Auditor to audit the books of the Crown 

Investments Corporation. 

 

Prior to this report, Mr. Secretary, I wrote to the Minister of 

Finance and asked her if she would be willing to refer Bill 41 

and Bill 42 to the Public Accounts Committee. It has been a 

long time since the minister has had my request and I want to 

ask the Provincial Secretary whether your government believes 

this legislation touching the basic accountability structure of 

the Government of Saskatchewan, whether you will allow that 

to be discussed with the Public Accounts Committee. Will you 

do that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I want to state to the 

member from Morse, first of all, that the Provincial Auditor has 

now in fact been designated to be the auditor for the Crown 

Investments Corporation and indeed is auditing the Crown 

Investments Corporation. 

 

When it comes to legislation, legislation will be dealt with by 

the government and in this Assembly in due course in the same 

way as we deal with any other legislations, large numbers of 

which are before the House already. And when the government 

has considered all of the legislative measures that we have to 

deal with in any session, those measures will come forward for 

the due consideration of this House including Bill 42. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, Bill 42 states 

that any auditor who is appointed by Crown Investments 

Corporation outside of the Provincial Auditor will have the 

authority to do the audit and exclude . . . and you have a 

notwithstanding clause there that says the Provincial Auditor 

cannot deal with those items under The Provincial Auditor Act 

and that is the reason why he made a special report. 

 

Mr. Minister, the Provincial Auditor is very seriously 

concerned with that. And will you allow the Public Accounts 

Committee to go through both Bill 41 and Bill 42 so that the 

public of the province of Saskatchewan can deal with it 

adequately? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — I'm afraid, Mr. Speaker, that the 

member from Morse puts a wrong interpretation on the 

legislation that deals with that 

issue again, because there is a clear provision in the legislation 

which provides for the authority of the Provincial Auditor 

wherein the Provincial Auditor is able to look into the audit of 

any government organization, including audits that are done by 

private sector auditors as is the case in some Crown 

corporations. That is clearly an authority which the Provincial 

Auditor has already. 

 

Now what the Public Accounts Committee wants to consider, 

Mr. Speaker, is in the hands of the Public Accounts Committee. 

If the Public Accounts Committee decides to consider a certain 

matter on the Provincial Auditor's report, on Public Accounts, 

or legislation that is relevant to those issues, that committee is 

quite capable to deal with that issue and I'll leave it in the hands 

of the Public Accounts Committee. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

A Bill to restore health care services to the 

community of Oxbow 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 

the first reading of a Bill to restore health care services to the 

community of Oxbow. 

 

The division bells rang from 10:38 a.m. until 10:39 a.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Devine Toth 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd Goohsen 

— 6 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Pringle 

Thompson Lautermilch 

Simard Hamilton 

Tchorzewski Johnson 

Lingenfelter Trew 

Teichrob Serby 

Koskie Flavel 

Anguish Cline 

Solomon Scott 

Goulet Kujawa 

Kowalsky Knezacek 

Carson Harper 

Upshall Keeping 

Hagel Kluz 

Bradley Langford 

Koenker Jess 

Lyons  

— 33 

 

A Bill to restore health care services to the community of 

Nokomis 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 

first reading of a Bill to restore health care  



1152 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1993 

services to the community of Nokomis. 

 

The division bells rang from 10:41 a.m. until 10:42 a.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd Goohsen 

Toth  

— 5 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Lyons 

Thompson Pringle 

Simard Lautermilch 

Tchorzewski Johnson 

Lingenfelter Trew 

Teichrob Serby 

Koskie Flavel 

Anguish Cline 

Solomon Scott 

Goulet Knezacek 

Kowalsky Harper 

Carson Keeping 

Upshall Kluz 

Hagel Langford 

Koenker Jess 

— 30 

 

A Bill to restore health care services to the community of 

Loon Lake 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 

first reading of a Bill to restore health care services to the 

community of Loon Lake. 

 

The division bells rang from 10:45 a.m. until 10:46 a.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd Goohsen 

Toth  

— 5 

Nays 

Thompson Pringle 

Simard Lautermilch 

Tchorzewski Johnson 

Lingenfelter Trew 

Teichrob Serby 

Koskie Flavel 

Anguish Cline 

Solomon Scott 

Goulet Knezacek 

Kowalsky Harper 

Carson Keeping 

Upshall Kluz 

Hagel Langford 

Koenker Jess 

Lyons  

— 29 

A Bill to restore health care services to the community of 

Edam 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — I move first reading of a Bill to restore 

health care services to the community of Edam. 

 

The division bells rang from 10:47 a.m. until 10:48 a.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd Goohsen 

Toth  

— 5 

Nays 

Thompson Pringle 

Simard Lautermilch 

Tchorzewski Johnson 

Lingenfelter Trew 

Teichrob Serby 

Koskie Flavel 

Anguish Scott 

Solomon Knezacek 

Kowalsky Harper 

Carson Keeping 

Upshall Kluz 

Hagel Langford 

Koenker Jess 

Lyons  

— 27 

 

A Bill to restore health care services to the community of 

Gainsborough 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 

Bill to restore health care services to the community of 

Gainsborough. 

 

The division bells rang from 10:49 a.m. until 10:50 a.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd Goohsen 

Toth  

— 5 

Nays 

Thompson Lautermilch 

Tchorzewski Johnson 

Lingenfelter Trew 

Koskie Serby 

Anguish Flavel 

Solomon Scott 

Kowalsky Knezacek 

Carson Harper 

Upshall Keeping 

Hagel Kluz 

Koenker Langford 

 



April 23, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1153 

 

Lyons Jess 

Pringle  

— 25 

 

A Bill to restore health care services to the community of 

Imperial 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 

Bill to restore health care services to the community of 

Imperial. 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I'll ask the member from 

Humboldt to please withdraw those words. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker, I withdraw the 

statement. 

 

The division bells rang from 10:51 a.m. until 10:53 a.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd Goohsen 

Toth  

— 5 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Pringle 

Thompson Lautermilch 

Tchorzewski Johnson 

Lingenfelter Trew 

Shillington Serby 

Koskie Flavel 

Anguish Cline 

Solomon Knezacek 

Carson Harper 

Upshall Keeping 

Hagel Kluz 

Koenker Langford 

Lyons Jess 

— 26 

 

A Bill to restore health care services to the community of 

Watson 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 

Bill to restore health care services to the community of Watson. 

 

The division bells rang from 10:55 a.m. until 10:56 a.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd Goohsen 

Toth  

— 5 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Pringle 

Thompson Lautermilch 

Tchorzewski Johnson 

 

Lingenfelter Trew 

Shillington Serby 

Koskie Flavel 

Anguish Cline 

Solomon Knezacek 

Carson Harper 

Upshall Keeping 

Hagel Kluz 

Koenker Langford 

Lyons Jess 

— 26 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, with leave of the Assembly I 

move that the . . . and before orders of the day: 

 

 That the special report of the Legislative Assembly by the 

Provincial Auditor on Bill 42 be referred to the Public 

Accounts Committee. 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 3 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Simard that Bill No. 3 — An Act 

respecting Health Districts be now read a second time, and 

the amendment thereto moved by Mr. Britton. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we've 

talked at some length about the motion and the amendment to 

the motion on respecting the principles of medicare and the 

fairness and just treatment of citizens all over this province 

with respect to medical services and medicare. Mr. Speaker, 

I'm going to be relatively brief this morning in my comments 

about the Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — I want to go on the record, Mr. Speaker, as 

saying that we are very definitely opposed to Bill No. 3 and in 

favour of the amendment to that Bill. Mr. Speaker, we are not 

opposed to health care reform. We've said that right from the 

very outset. What we are opposed to is the manner in which 

this government is doing it, the heavy-handedness that it's 

being approached with. 

 

The people in communities all over this province and 

particularly the communities that I represent, Mr. Speaker, 

have told me and have told the government that they want this 

process slowed down. They want the process reviewed. They 

want their hospital to remain open. They don't believe in what 

they're saying the government is telling them. They don't 

believe that the rationalization is going to result in 



1154 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1993 

better health care services for their area. Mr. Speaker, they 

don't believe that the process that's been set out has been fair or 

equitable, or anything else for that matter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, initially, as I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, initially 

there was a great deal of support for changing of the 

rationalization of the health care system to some degree, but 

they never in their wildest dreams, Mr. Speaker, imagined that 

this was the kind of health care reform that was going to be 

forced upon them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in an editorial from a gentlemen in the Eatonia 

area, Mr. Ken Clarke in the Star-Phoenix of April 22, he 

maintains that this is going to be the last nail in the coffin of 

rural Saskatchewan. I believe he's correct. I believe what he is 

saying is exactly what the people of rural Saskatchewan are 

feeling these days. 

 

I think there is clear evidence to show, Mr. Speaker, that the 

people of rural Saskatchewan don't think they're being treated 

fairly. I think the evidence is overwhelming. I think it's just by 

the kind of turnouts that we're seeing at public meetings all 

around this province and indeed in front of the legislature the 

other day. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the enhanced type of services that the 

government is talking about that's going to be available to rural 

Saskatchewan, they don't believe is going to be adequate, and 

neither do I, Mr. Speaker. It's plain nonsense to suggest 

increased ambulance coverage will alleviate the strain caused 

by downsizing or closing rural hospitals. 

 

Rural Saskatchewan is also the target for cost cutting in the 

highway system. We've already swallowed the news of the 

rural highway system being allowed to deteriorate in order to 

save cost. The equation is clear. No road means no ambulance. 

And that, combined with no local hospital, equals no health 

care. That's what the people of rural Saskatchewan are saying, 

and they don't believe it's fair, Mr. Speaker. They don't believe 

that they're getting the services delivered fairly or equitably or 

just treatment to the rural residents of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that there is ample evidence to show now 

that the government's restructuring plan is just an exercise, a 

fiscal-driven exercise, Mr. Speaker, an attack on rural 

Saskatchewan. And that's exactly what it's being shown for all 

across the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it's a deliberate attempt by the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) government to destroy rural Saskatchewan 

because they know that rural Saskatchewan doesn't normally 

support these people, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, they are 

talking, we are talking, about the very foundations of the 

communities of rural Saskatchewan. Fifty-two hospitals, 1.7 

per cent of the public health budget is being spent currently in 

hospitals with an average daily census of under 10, like most of 

these hospitals are. I believe, and I think the people of 

Saskatchewan believe, rural Saskatchewan is worth 1.7 per 

cent of 

the health care budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will indeed be supporting this amendment. I will 

be voting also against Bill No. 3. I am opposed, totally opposed 

to the government in their actions in this health care reform. 

Mr. Speaker, I thank you now. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy at long 

last to have an opportunity to speak to this Bill. 

 

I have to say that I'm particularly upset with the government 

and the process that we've entered into on this Bill. I'm 

particularly upset as an individual MLA (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly) having been elected to represent a group 

of people in this province. 

 

I can't believe that our democratic system has sunk so low that 

on such an important issue as this, I as a member representing 

many thousands of people, have not had an opportunity in this 

House to debate this issue before closure is put on closure to 

end the debate on the Bill. 

 

I shudder to think where our democratic system and process is 

going to go if we are no longer allowed the opportunity and the 

process to debate the issues of legislation. 

 

I know that it can be somewhat boring at times to listen to 

people that you don't agree with. I know that it can be 

frustrating to have to be here and listen to arguments that might 

dissuade your own opinion. But that's what democracy is all 

about, Mr. Speaker. And the health Bill is a prime example of 

the need for people of both sides of the view to be heard, and 

not only that, to be listened to. 

 

And I know that the gentlemen opposite and the ladies, will 

want to hear our arguments because I don't genuinely believe 

that they want to destroy the province of Saskatchewan 

altogether. I can't bring myself to believe that any government 

elected by the people would deliberately set out to destroy the 

very province that they're elected to govern. And yet what is 

happening in this Bill is going to do exactly that. 

 

This is not just the beginning. We are fully in stride now into a 

process of running this province into a situation where there 

will be no tax base left; where there'll be no opportunity to pay 

the Bills of the province if you have no one left in the province 

to do those payings. How can you pay for things without a tax 

base? And how are you going to hold a tax base without the 

fundamentals of health care required by people in order to have 

them stay? 

 

Those are questions, Mr. Speaker, that have got to be answered 

not only by this opposition, but by the government members. 

 

I have a long list of things that need to be talked about under 

this Bill, Mr. Speaker. But to save the members opposite some 

anxiety, I will remind them that as I haven't spoken on this 

issue before, I am speaking 



April 23, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1155 

concurrently to the Bill as well as to the amendment, and they 

won't have to whip out their points of order and try to hold me 

onto one subject or the other because I have a lot to say about 

both. 

 

Now I want to start, Mr. Speaker — because I know that some 

of the ministers are very busy and will have to get on with 

some of their work — so I want to start with the most 

important part to my constituency, and we'll go on from there. 

 

Obviously the town of Gull Lake is the most important part of 

my constituency with regards to the turn of events that we've 

witnessed over the past few days. The town of Gull Lake was 

informed, Mr. Speaker, that their budget will be cut from 

800,000 down to $119,000. And at the same time and in the 

very same breath, the people that made those announcements 

said, but you aren't going to lose anything if you don't want to 

lose it; you can have everything you want or anything you 

want; you can do anything you want. 

 

And of course it makes it a very, very hollow argument when 

you tell people that you can do whatever you like, but you're 

taking away almost $700,000 of the funding with which it 

would have to be done. And so it is an unacceptable 

proposition, to say the least, because it can't possibly work. The 

people can't possibly have the right to do anything if they have 

that kind of cut in their funding. 

 

Had there been some rationalization, some reasonable 

consultation, some reasonable approach to a compromise, the 

people of Saskatchewan could have survived these changes. 

But you have to have a two-way street here. That's what the 

people are saying out home. They're saying, we aren't afraid of 

the change so much as being destroyed by the change. We 

recognize the need to restructure. That is quite clear by the 

actions of our community. 

 

Let me just go back for a brief history of what's happened in 

our community so that the members opposite will understand. 

 

A few years ago the people in the Assembly have discussed the 

Murray Commission, and that commission in fact was a reality 

that happened. The people in our community were not sleeping 

at the switch. They're very astute, very bright individuals that 

are involved with our health boards in our community. Those 

people studied the commission and recognized that even 

though this commission might not be put into effect . . . or the 

recommendations might not be put into effect, there were some 

very interesting and specific things mentioned in that report 

that indicated to our community that change was in fact 

coming, that in fact it would be inevitable, and that in fact if we 

didn't get on board and start assisting in the process of making 

those changes, that we could in fact lose our health care 

system. So that realization was there loud and clear. They had 

the message. And to prove the point that they knew what was 

happening, I'll go on in the history of the development of what 

occurred in our town. 

The chairman of the hospital board took it upon himself to go 

to all of the rural municipal meetings in the locality as well as 

to the town meetings of the town fathers and explained exactly 

what he had determined was going to happen. And he told 

them that we have to voluntarily restructure or the heavy hand 

of government would hammer us down into submission and 

force us to do something along that line. So he convinced the 

town and the people in the rural area to get together and to 

make a decision to have one health board for the entire 

community. The hospital, the special care home, the ambulance 

board, the low-rental housing board — all of these 

health-related boards in the community would get together. 

They would form one board, and they would save a lot of the 

administration overhead involved there. 

 

Now when I say a lot, what I'm talking about is pretty small 

dollars because the reality is that most of these people are 

volunteers, and those that do get paid, get a very small 

remuneration with a bit of money for their car and truck travel 

to get to and from the meetings. For the most part it is 

classified justifiably as a volunteer process, but there are a few 

dollars involved. And in order to show an act of good faith, that 

would be a good start in our community, the fathers of our 

community decided. 

 

And so it was done voluntarily. The communities got together, 

and it wasn't easy. Change never comes easy. Remember our 

human nature in Saskatchewan is to resist change, and that is a 

fact of life. So it wasn't easy for that one individual to 

spearhead that. He was probably mentioned with some 

derogatory remarks occasionally as a result of his efforts at the 

beginning, but as time went by and people realized he was on 

the right track, the folks decided to go along, and they did 

organize this one health board. It is in place, and it was 

working out quite well. 

 

They also recognized in our community, Mr. Speaker, that we 

would have to start to do something about controlling our costs 

and to manage our costs and to try to eliminate the duplications 

of services. So discussions began in the area of how we could 

operate both our hospital and our special care home more 

efficiently and with less dollars and less duplication. So 

discussions led to how we could use one service for preparing 

the meals in one facility and transport them to the other, 

thereby having only one staff for preparing the meals for both 

facilities. Those kinds of discussions were being carried on 

with a genuine commitment to trying to make it work. 

 

The other option of course considered then was that if one 

facility provided that service, the other one perhaps would do 

the laundry service and we would take things back and forth 

perhaps with the ambulance or the other vehicles that are 

available. And it's a short distance. We're not talking about 

miles; we're talking about a few block across town. 

 

So it could be done and it was going to be workable. And there 

would have been tremendous savings there. Those boards and 

the people involved with 



1156 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1993 

them had determined that they would try to get along with the 

needed changes in our health care system. They would try to 

work with the government, whoever the government would be. 

They never gave any thought whatsoever to partisan politics. 

They simply said that we can see this happening in the future 

and we're going to start working it out and making it work. 

We're going to cooperate. We're going to negotiate. We're 

going to consult with other people. And we're going to 

compromise. And that meant to them that they would be 

willing to give some things up. 

 

But what this government has forgotten is that compromise 

after negotiation is not a one-sided thing. When you negotiate 

and compromise, both sides have to do some giving if you're 

going to have a happy end result of any kind. If you're not 

going to have an absolute confrontation and an absolute hatred 

and anger, then both sides have to be willing to give. 

 

It's no different than the explanation given by one of the 

gentlemen at the public meeting in Gull Lake the other night. 

He said this is very much like a marriage and if both sides don't 

give a little, it will collapse. Everyone has to do some giving. It 

can't all be from one side or it just won't work. 

 

(1115) 

 

So let me go on in the process of what happened in our 

community, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As the process unfolded and 

people were getting things into place, the government came 

along with their new wellness program, after much of these 

changes had been done in our community. It was suggested at 

that point that the numbers of beds being utilized in our 

hospital might not be enough for the suggestions being reported 

by the government. The suggestions of the numbers of beds 

simply would not provide us with an opportunity to keep our 

facility operating. 

 

I believe the magic number was that if you didn't have more 

than 5.5 beds, you were most likely to close, and if you were 

under 10, you were very likely still to be closed. And of course 

if you were over 10, you were supposedly at that point 

reasonably safe. That was before we changed the relationship 

of the numbers of beds to the population. It used to be, I think, 

3.5 to 4 beds per 1,000 people. And now of course the minister 

has announced that it's going to be 1 or 1.5. 

 

Now even before that, our community recognized the need that 

we would have to utilize our hospital facility more effectively. 

The people in charge of our health care system suggested quite 

frankly some things that annoyed our nurses' union at the start, 

and obviously so. These are trained professionals who have a 

role to play in society according to the training and the abilities 

that they have achieved through a long study at various 

institutions, and the commitment of a lot of time and effort. 

 

But the reality was that after some months of discussion and 

negotiation and talking to these people, the nurses themselves 

said yes, we admit that 

we may have to change our job description somewhat in order 

to utilize the hospital effectively enough to justify keeping it, to 

justify the cost to the government and to the community. 

 

And so it was suggested that we should look at alternatives of 

how we could use those beds that weren't at the present time all 

being used at all times. 

 

Sickness is a funny thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as you are 

aware. At some times nobody in a community is very sick 

except perhaps one or two or three people. Then all of a sudden 

somebody will go out to the neighbouring community and 

catch a germ and bring it home. And the first thing you know 

you've got a flu going around and you've got 10 or 20 people in 

the hospital in three or four days. 

 

It's unfortunate, but that's the way the epidemic type of 

spreading of diseases happens to work in our world. And you 

can't predict in small communities when that's going to happen 

or to what extent. But there's always a rising, falling kind of a 

process where you have a lot of people in the hospital at one 

time and a few at the other. 

 

But even with that, and even taking that into consideration, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the people there realized that they weren't 

utilizing enough of those beds to a full enough extent, so they 

proposed some alternatives. They said, perhaps we can bring in 

some special-care-home quality of patients and residents, and 

use those beds in that way. Obviously that's where the nurses 

started to protest a bit because that would mean their job 

description would change. 

 

But having negotiated, as I've said earlier, to the point where 

they understood after a few months, that if they didn't willingly 

do that there was a possibility that we would lose our health 

care system and that we would no longer receive funding, they 

decided, I guess reluctantly but nevertheless decided, that they 

would go along with that kind of change. They said yes, if it 

means saving our jobs, we'll have to make the change and we'll 

have to go along with it. 

 

Some place in the interim, word came that no, you wouldn't be 

allowed to do that. Now who is the almighty person that 

suddenly decided that if the community could not utilize the 

beds for other kinds of health care, I have yet to put my finger 

on, but the word came from on high somewhere. And so other 

options were being discussed and studied and we were in the 

process of doing that. 

 

Before any of the members get too busy, I do want to throw in 

another thing that really surprised me, but happily so. And that 

is the fact that, recognizing in the last few days and weeks that 

our health care facility was seriously in jeopardy of losing its 

funding, the nurses themselves had a meeting. 

 

After their meeting they came to the board and they said to the 

board: we are here willingly of our own free will and we are 

here to tell you that we have decided to make you an offer. And 

our offer is this. We are 



April 23, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1157 

willing to take a 10 per cent cut in all of our wages if it will 

help to save our jobs. 

 

Now that is quite a thing for a nurses' group to do. That's a 

commitment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to a community and to the 

profession. That's a commitment that should be praised with 

awards all over this province. People that are willing to take 

those kinds of steps to save their communities and their jobs 

should be patted on the back and applauded. 

 

And imagine this now, if you take that a step further. This was 

a genuine offer. It was repeated in a public meeting of 300 

people the other night in Gull Lake, and no one of the nurses 

who were there disputed it whatsoever because it's a fact. They 

did that willingly and voluntarily. 

 

But take this premise a step further. Suppose all of the nurses 

and all of the health care staffs of the province were to get 

together and make that same offer. I wonder how many 

millions of dollars that would come to? Somehow I have a 

feeling that it would be enough that we could save the jobs for 

those people. And that's a major concern. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, health care is extremely important but 

jobs are also important, especially in an economy that has been 

hit as hard as ours by depression and recession. I'm not sure 

which word works the best here because I've never quite 

known how you draw the line between the two, so I'll use them 

both because I think they apply in our province. 

 

We are in serious, serious financial trouble in a world scale 

because of a depression. This has got nothing to do with the 

individual province being in trouble; all the world around us is 

in serious trouble. There are no jobs any place, any more. Take 

a look at what happens in the biggest province we've got of 

industrial base, Ontario. We've got a terrible, terrible crisis on 

our hands of not having places for people to work. 

 

And so the jobs become almost as important as the service 

because you have to give people a chance to work. They want 

to work; they don't want to be on welfare. I suppose there's a 

few, there's always an exception. But the nurses there said, our 

jobs are important enough that we're willing to take a cut in our 

pay to try to save them and to try to help to get this province 

through this depression. 

 

Now I would suggest that some of the members of the 

government would say they shouldn't have to take cuts. And I 

agree, you shouldn't have to. But if you're into a situation 

where there's no alternative, then what do you do? Do you fire 

half of them and let the other half do double the work? Is that 

fair, that some people do double the work so that the rest can 

collect unemployment insurance from the taxes of the few that 

are still working? That doesn't seem sensible either. 

 

You're better off to have everybody take a little less 

and have a bigger tax base and more people employed. And 

that way you give people some dignity so that they can say 

they're doing their own thing, they're providing their own 

livelihood for themselves and for their families. And I think 

that's good and I think it's remarkable that those people made 

that kind of commitment and that kind of an offer. 

 

And yet the people there are told that in spite of all of your 

willingness to cooperate, setting up of a new, one board within 

the whole town, the setting up of planned exchanges of 

workloads between the two facilities, all of these things that 

were offered, all of these things that were done, and still the 

government never even came and discussed the possibility of 

having that kind of an approach accepted — no offer to 

negotiate and no offer whatsoever of a compromise from this 

government in a town, Deputy Speaker, that we have to take a 

look at in terms of the town itself and whether or not it justifies 

having a health care system. 

 

Here we have a community that tops in population at about 

1,200. It bottoms at some place about a thousand in 1960. The 

town in fact had the good fortune of some oil exploration in the 

area, and following the 1960s, through that period, that 

exploration brought in some extra people and enhanced our 

population to about 1,200. 

 

As you people in the government know, when the oil industry 

is first starting its work in an area a lot of people come in with 

the drilling rigs and a lot of people are there with the servicing, 

populations naturally go up. When that activity is over, then 

like everything else, only those people who are employed to 

operate are still there, and a lot of the people that were involved 

with the main exploration are gone. 

 

So understanding that our population base then fell to about 

1,100 isn't really too bad. That's not a result of the depression 

or anything like that. The reality is that this town, even though 

the agricultural economy has fallen, has maintained that 

population of about 1,100 to this day. From the 1960s right 

through to the present time, our population has taken that little 

undulating swing that is very explainable because of the 

secondary industry. 

 

And with a town that maintained itself through all the tough 

times we've had, there must surely then be some proof in this 

argument that that town is able to exist and continue to exist in 

the future. And if so, then justifiably it should have some health 

care. Why would you take health care out of a community like 

that when it is probably going to be there for a very much 

longer time? 

 

One of the reasons that town is going to be there for a long 

time is because of the people that live there and their 

determination not be swallowed up by a city like Medicine Hat 

or Swift Current. They want to be there. They love their 

community. 

 

A handful of individuals went out, bought a building, and 

initiated the construction of a new skating rink 



1158 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1993 

complex, a recreational complex a few years ago, and that 

community worked side by side together, volunteering their 

labour, their time, and their money. One of the most beautiful 

facilities you'll find in any community in Saskatchewan — all 

done by the people because they believe in that community. 

 

And the health care system is a part of that metaphorical circle 

that we talk about when we talk about how communities 

operate and survive. Every piece in the circle is important. The 

school is important; the recreational facility is important; the 

elevator is important; and the health care system is important. 

Take out any one of those and you have broken the circle, 

metaphorically speaking, of how a community survives and 

keeps on going round and round. 

 

What will happen to our community if we lose our health care 

system? I know the member opposite will be interested in 

knowing the answer to that. Our community will suffer more 

greatly than what is apparent on the surface. If we lose the 

hospital itself as a hospital, with the number of beds that we 

have been allotted and the monies that we've got to operate, 

initially on the surface it will appear that we will lose our 

hospital and our doctor. And if our doctor goes, you will say, 

well you can get in the ambulance and go to Swift Current or 

you can go to Medicine Hat. But that's not where it stops. We 

have a special care home in Gull Lake with a lot of people in it. 

It's a big facility. How long will people trust to put their old 

folks in that facility if there's no doctor in that community? 

 

I suggest to you that if you're fair in your minds, members, it 

won't be very long that people will say, if my parents or 

grandparents have to be in an ambulance going to Swift 

Current to see a doctor, that's unacceptable. If you suggest to 

me that doctors will come from Swift Current to Gull Lake to 

look after those people, I say that you're not being rational. 

Because doctors don't have the time to do that. These are 

professional people that are occupied full time where they are. 

And so the town will virtually lose its special care home by the 

effect of not having a doctor in a period of time. 

 

Obviously this won't happen overnight. Some of the people that 

are in that home will voluntarily say no, we won't want to 

move; we'll take our chances here and we'll die if we have to. 

But the choices of not putting people where there is no doctor 

will be made by other people in time and that facility will be 

lost. 

 

Now what happens to our community if that happens? We've 

not only lost the wage base and the tax base of the nurses and 

the doctor in the hospital, which is our initial problem, but now 

we're going to lose another 5 or $600,000 in wage base from 

the special care home. I see some of the members are amazed 

at how high that figure is. But the reality is that our facility is 

that big that our wage base in the special care home is between 

5 and $600,000. 

 

You take that out of a community with mostly an agricultural 

base and who do you take that money 

away from? Most of these people are the wives and the 

daughters and the mothers of the farmers in the community. 

 

(1130) 

 

Everybody in this Assembly is now aware of the depression in 

the agricultural sector. Every one of you knows in your heart 

that if these ladies don't have those jobs, those farms most 

likely won't have a breadwinner that can feed their kids. That's 

just the unhappy truth of life in agriculture today. Those are the 

breadwinners that are keeping those families there. If they don't 

have that breadwinner, I tell you now that those farms will go 

broke and they will be gone into some kind of conglomerate 

organization, and those people will have to leave our 

community. It's either that or stay there and go on welfare 

because unemployment will only last so long, and you all know 

as much about the timing on that as I do. 

 

The restrictions on unemployment insurance are tightening at 

the federal level all the time, and the time that you can be on it 

is only for so long. So who picks up the bill? When these folks 

end up— the percentage that stay — and go on welfare, who 

picks up the tab? The taxpayers of Saskatchewan pay for the 

monies that go into Social Services and Social Services are the 

people that pay the welfare in this province. And so those half 

of the people that are still working have to pay more taxes to 

pay for the social services to pay the welfare for the people that 

we're unemploying in these communities. 

 

It doesn't make any economic sense to do that. You might be 

spending $5 million more, but if you keep a tax base of all of 

these other people working, would you not recover your 5 

million just by the circulation of those dollars through the 

communities? Think about the possibilities here. If we continue 

to cut jobs out from under people that would spend their money 

in the community and put those dollars back through our tax 

system, then the system has to collapse. We can only absorb so 

many unemployed people in our system. 

 

Suppose you take the other alternative and they don't stay in the 

area on welfare and they move to the cities. Whose job do you 

think they're going to come after? Are there any spare jobs in 

Regina that you know about? I'm sure there's a lot of people 

watching today that would like to hear about them. We've got a 

serious unemployment problem. A lot of people are 

unemployed in our city, right here in Regina, and if you force 

those people from the country to come in here looking for jobs 

and if they're successful in getting one — there isn't an extra 

job — what it means, that somebody else is getting pushed out 

of his job and that person ends up on either unemployment or 

welfare down the line. Because we're not creating jobs in this 

province right now. We aren't putting a place for these people 

to come to. We aren't developing that. 

 

The proof is in the statistics that I quoted in this Assembly the 

other day, that I'll remind you of. And 



April 23, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1159 

the proof is this: since last year to this year we have a 2 per 

cent increase in unemployment in our province, and the cost of 

welfare through Social Services is up by sixteen and a half per 

cent. That tells me that we are pushing people out of jobs onto 

assistance programs. We're not creating enough jobs to absorb 

the people that need work. And yet now we have a health care 

program that is designed to streamline with the primary result 

of unemployment, not to mention the hurt in our local 

community, as I have been pointing out earlier. 

 

It's a complex issue with a lot of ramifications that are not seen 

on the surface. I could point you to Weyburn and say exactly 

all the same things. It'll be the same for their community as it is 

for Gull Lake. And I know that the people in these other towns 

have tried just as hard as the people in Gull Lake to try to find a 

way to make this thing more streamlined, more efficient, and 

more workable. And they're willing to work with the 

government, any government of any political stripe, to try to 

make the system work. 

 

But simply to wipe out the whole facility, to wipe out 

thousands of jobs is not an acceptable way to negotiation or 

compromise, and it's not an acceptable way to run a province. It 

has to be done better. These people deserve to have more out of 

their province. They deserve to have better from this 

government no matter what they promised in the last election. 

And you all know about that — more for less, better health 

care. In spite of all those things, the people - 

_ even if those things weren't said — the people deserve a 

better plan, and they deserve a chance to be included in the 

process so that they can help to work out their own problems. 

 

At a meeting in Gull Lake the other night 300 concerned 

people came out. My understanding is that no one particularly 

was invited from the government to come to the meeting. It 

was advertised as a community meeting of concerned citizens 

to get together to decide how they would survive, how they 

would go about searching out the alternatives to see if there 

were ways to save the health care system in the town. 

 

The Minister of Environment did come to the meeting and 

we're glad that he showed up. I'm not sure how he found out 

about the meeting, but after people got over the initial surprise 

that he had taken the time to come, it was very interesting that 

the whole attention of the meeting focused on questions to him. 

 

Unfortunately, it destroyed the whole motivation of why the 

meeting was called because no one ever got back to discussing 

any rational approach to what we could do in our community to 

save the system, because when the minister got finished 

talking, all hope had been destroyed. Absolutely not one 

answer to all the questions asked lent itself to any hope in that 

community that there could be any compromise on the part of 

the government. 

 

And the people were dismayed. And they got angry. And I 

don't apologize for them at all. They had every 

right to be angry and they screamed and they booed and they 

yelled. But they had to because they're fighting for the life of a 

community that they believe in. They're fighting for their jobs 

and their families and their security and their way of life. 

They're fighting for the things that were built by their fathers 

and their forefathers, three and four generations of people on 

the land in that community, built that community, a stable 

community, a solid, sound community, a community that has 

gone through tremendous change. 

 

We used to have a lot of machine dealers; the changes in 

agriculture have changed that. But now we have other things in 

our community. The community has learned to develop and 

grow with the changing times. This is a prime example, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, of a community that has survived with a 

stable population because they have learned to roll with the 

punches. 

 

They have learned to adjust to the changing times of our 

society, and given half a chance, they could do that with the 

health care system in our community. They could develop a 

different process. They could amalgamate. They could cut 

corners. They could do whatever has to be done if they were 

given the opportunity to do it. But this government says no. 

You're cut off and you have no allowance to do anything else. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the folks out home are not giving 

up. They still believe that sanity will prevail in the world 

around them. They still believe that the government may relent 

and talk to them in a genuine process of negotiation and 

compromise. 

 

I have received, without any doubt, hundreds of letters on this 

health issue from all around my constituency and quite a few 

even from outside of my constituency. And I can't possibly 

read them all and of course there wouldn't be any object to that 

because the message is generally the same in all of them. But I 

did receive just a whole lot of letters from the community of 

Leader and I've got one that is particularly credible and pretty 

well explains what all of the hundreds of letters have said. 

 

So I'm going to just quote out of this letter to let you know 

what some of the people out there think. It's addressed to me 

and I'm sure copies probably went to the Minister of Health. 

But it says: 

 

 I am writing to you to obtain support against the 

Government's proposed Health plan. I realize that the deficit 

must be brought under control, but I believe the government 

is trying to do it in . . . (the) wrong . . . way. I am referring 

particularly to the health care plan that is being proposed. It 

will spell DEATH to the rural areas. In my opinion, the 

province of Saskatchewan, as we know it, will cease to be if 

the present trend of destroying the rural areas continues. (It 

says) Let me explain. 

 

 For example, according to the plan, there must be 15,000 

people in a Health District — 



1160 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1993 

regardless of distances. For us in the Prelate-Leader area, it 

amounts to about 2.5 hospital beds in the Leader hospital. What 

doctor will remain at Leader with this type of facility? We 

understand, too, that senior citizens Nursing homes also are to 

be cut and that people are to care for the elderly in their homes. 

What happens if the husband and wife both have jobs. Who 

cares for their elderly? To make matters even worse, according 

to my information, even the ambulance service is to be 

decreased. 

 

 We are situated fifty miles from Kindersley, ninety miles 

from Swift Current, one hundred miles to Medicine Hat. 

 

Now I'm sure that those who are into the metric system can 

make a quick conversion to kilometres by simply adding a third 

to each of those numbers. 

 

 Suppose someone has a heart attack or is in a serious 

accident, where do we go? Sometimes, time is of the essence 

in such situations. The medical staffs at local hospitals have 

saved many lives throughout Saskatchewan because they 

were able to administer emergency treatment immediately. I 

know the Government says that clinics will replace the 

hospitals, but have they thought of how many doctors will 

stay in the rural areas without a hospital? 

 

 Perhaps from the ivory towers of Regina and Saskatoon, 

many people have never had to be in such situations. They 

need to ask the people who live in rural Saskatchewan what it 

is really like. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . Oh, sorry. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member for Regina 

Wascana Plains on her feet? 

 

Ms. Hamilton: — Asking leave to introduce guests, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. I introduce to you and through you to all members of 

the Assembly, 45 students from Campbell Collegiate, with 

them exchange students from Montreal. They are from grades 

10 and 11 and with them this morning they have Mr. Luc 

Lermineaux and Tanis Wood, teachers that are accompanying 

them. 

 

We will be together in room 218 following a picture on the 

stairs and a tour that they are taking or have just taken and I 

hope they find their stay here very interesting and enjoyable. 

And I would ask members of the Assembly to join with me in a 

warm welcome. Bienvenue. 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 3 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I certainly 

would echo the words of the member. We're happy to see 

visitors in our gallery at all times, and I hope that it is a 

productive day for you. 

 

We are dealing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with an issue of health 

care and medicare that is deeply ingrained within the people of 

our province and most certainly is one of the most important 

issues to people in general. Without your health, life is of little 

value. People who are sick will be the first to tell you that. 

They will struggle hard to have a good life, but they will 

recognize that it's much easier with a good, strong body and a 

good, strong mind. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in order to get from Leader their points of 

view, I will finish off the last bit of the letter from this person 

from that area. It goes on: 

 

 As well, we, the Ursuline Sisters, operate a residential girls 

high school in Prelate where we have students coming from 

Saskatchewan, Alberta, B.C., Manitoba, Northwest 

Territories, etc. 

 

By the way, the letter was written by Sister Rosetta Reiniger 

from the Prelate, St. Angela's Academy. It goes on: 

 

 We depend on the local hospital and ambulance services for 

the safety and health of our students. If the Leader hospital 

closes — or is cut back to such an extent that the doctors 

leave, I do not know what will happen. 

 

 Is the Government really saving so much money by these 

health cutbacks? What about all the lost jobs? What about 

people having to go on welfare? What about the number of 

people moving to other provinces? What about the money 

lost from oil and gas companies and pipelines because the 

municipalities can no longer tax them for health? 

 

 Please do everything in your power to prevent the 

Government from implementing this health plan. 

 

And it's signed, yours truly, the Sister. 

 

(1145) 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm happy to stand in my place as the 

elected representative representing the Sisters of St. Angela's 

Academy in this province, and I'm happy to say that I am going 

to do everything that I can to change the government's mind 

about its approach. I 



April 23, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1161 

can't say to the sister that I will be able to stop the government 

putting this Bill in, because obviously we will be outvoted. But 

we can try to make the government see the common-sense 

rationale of keeping hospital care and medical care in 

communities in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

If the academy does not have access to medical care, members, 

believe me . . . the sister says she doesn't know what will 

happen, but you and I know what will happen. People won't 

send their children to that academy any more — flat fact of 

life; no question about it. People are not going to send their 

children to facilities for education or anything else if they can't 

be assured that their lives are protected with good quality 

health care within a reasonable distance. 

 

And you must ask yourselves and talk to your consciences: do 

you really believe that a trip 50 miles to Kindersley, 90 miles to 

Swift Current, or 100 miles to Medicine Hat, do you really 

think that the people who put their children in that school 

would consider that to be a reasonable approach to safe 

medical facility and safe medical-provided service? They will 

not. They will not consider that safe. They can't. I wouldn't 

with my children. And I would never put my children in that 

kind of a position. And neither would you. 

 

And yet you're asking the people from this province, from 

British Columbia and Manitoba and all over, to have faith and 

put their children in an academy at Prelate with no service for 

medical attention. How in good conscience can you do that 

when every argument that you have heard shows that the 

dollars you're going to be saving are in fact lost in many other 

ways, when we can show you so many other ways where you 

could save that much money? And we've done that. My 

colleagues have done that. 

 

And I want, Mr. Speaker, to thank my colleague from 

Kindersley for having not only brought forward such very good 

arguments in this debate, but for also attending a meeting at 

Leader some days back. I had a commitment personally to be 

in the south-east corner of the province at a meeting and the 

member from Kindersley, hearing of my plight of not being 

able to be in two places at once, immediately volunteered to 

cover the meeting at Leader for me and I'm very, very happy 

that he did that and I want to thank him publicly for that. 

 

The people at Leader want to thank him as well. I've had a 

message from the mayor and they were so very, very happy to 

see at least one MLA show up for their meeting when in fact 

they'd hoped some government MLAs would show up as well, 

but only health workers from the system were able to find the 

time to come. 

 

The people there in a community, Mr. Speaker, of about 700 

people in Leader — a lot of rural residents around and some 

close, small towns make the population significantly larger that 

have to be served by the hospital — but at that community 500 

people show up at a public meeting. Almost the whole town 

comes to the public meeting in terms of number 

comparisons. That's got to show somebody that those people 

really care. They really want to save their facility and they 

really want to save their communities. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the list of towns and communities goes on 

and on up to 52. And we've had communications not just from 

the towns that are going to have their health care jeopardized 

and their towns and their economies jeopardized, we've heard 

from a whole host of other people who feel that they have deep 

concerns. 

 

We have here a brief to the Minister of Health regarding the 

failure of the wellness program, submitted by the 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses and the Canadian Union of 

Public Employees, March 1993. I have it in my hand, from 

SUN (Saskatchewan Union of Nurses). These people are 

genuinely concerned about the people that they represent. 

 

I'll just go through just a little bit of it to show you the genuine 

interest that they have and I'll indicate to you that I think this 

document is 30-some pages long, not just something 

frivolously dreamt up — a long, deliberate debate presented in 

the form of a brief to the government to show them that there 

are alternatives to what they call the failure of the wellness 

program. 

 

On page 10 they refer to: 

 

 Primary health care includes at least (one of) the following 

eight essential elements: 

 

No, not "one of"; I shouldn't have had that word in there. 

 

 . . . at least the following eight essential elements (all of 

them): 

 

 1. Education of people to understand the causes of ill health, 

methods of preventing and controlling them, and 

promoting their own health-care needs. 

 

 2. Ensuring an adequate, affordable food supply and a 

balanced diet. 

 

 3. Providing an adequate supply of safe water and basic 

sanitation. 

 

 4. Providing maternal and child health care including family 

planning. 

 

 5. Ensuring immunization against the major infectious 

diseases. 

 

 6. Preventing and controlling locally endemic diseases. 

 

 7. Appropriate treatment of common diseases and injuries. 

 

 8. Providing essential drugs. 



1162 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1993 

 If the Saskatchewan health-care reform does not result in the 

provision of primary health care to all citizens, it will fail to 

implement genuine health-care reform. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is from all of the nurses through their SUN 

organization. All of the nurses of this province collectively are 

telling this government that we must provide the primary health 

care to all citizens or it will fail to implement the genuine 

health care reform that the government wants and the people 

know that we need. 

 

In other words, they're saying you're doing it wrong. They're 

saying that you've got to go back to the drawing board. They're 

saying that your Health minister has to start over and do it 

better. That's the nurses' union of this province, supported by 

the unions of nurses throughout this country. 

 

They see what's happening here. They see the deterioration of 

their job base and they see the deterioration of health care. And 

these people are people of heart and soul and conscience who 

genuinely do their job because they want to help people. They 

work hard and they're proud — proud of the results. 

 

Every day nurses see people that would have died walking 

away from hospitals because of the care they've given. And 

they want that to stay that way. They want this kind of health 

care for everybody, not just for a few. 

 

Now leading into that line of debate, Mr. Speaker, it has been 

said that with all of these hospital cuts in rural Saskatchewan 

that we are here drawing a line of division between cities and 

rural. That's not really a fact. It's not drawing a line between the 

cities and the rural at all. 

 

It does appear that the cities may benefit at the beginning 

because they haven't been cut as much. But the reality, 

members of the government, is this. The cities will suffer as 

much as the rural people as a result of this plan or perhaps 

more. And here's two directions it could go. Let me explain this 

to you. I'm sure you've got it figured out in your minds, but just 

let's put it into words, so you can think about it. 

 

First of all, if all of the sick people come from the rural areas to 

the city of Regina and Saskatoon and you don't improve or 

expand your service — in fact you're cutting back; you're being 

cut back; we know the figures — will there not be long 

line-ups of people waiting to get into those facilities if there is 

already line-ups, as I'm told there is? 

 

A lady phoned me the other day, told me about a friend who's 

been waiting for 30 days for treatment and hasn't been able to 

get in for his first treatment. If that is happening already and all 

of these rural people now come into the city looking for health 

care, those line-ups will be backed up from the central hospitals 

right back to Albert Street. And if the people in the cities can 

get to the front of the line, they'll get service. 

 But if they get at the back of the line, they are going to have to 

wait a long, long time. And that has to be a hurt to them as well 

as to everybody else. That can't be good for them. And they 

must understand this is not a division of a problem between 

rural people and city people; this is a problem of all of the 

people of this province. 

 

It could go the other direction. Perhaps those people will come 

into the city and take away jobs of others. Or on the other hand, 

perhaps they'll all leave the province. You may not have the 

line-ups, but you no longer have the tax base to support what 

you have. 

 

I suggest that the first proposition is more likely to happen. The 

Saskatchewan people are a stout-hearted people. A lot of them 

will leave, but most of them will stay and fight on. They will be 

the people that will form the line-ups to get to the few doctors 

that we have left. 

 

It is going to be a tragic situation when we find ourselves with 

an example such as the one that the doctor from Gull Lake 

outlined the other night. He said: how can I possibly do my job 

if I'm not allowed to have a nurse on duty to take care of a 

patient? 

 

He used an example. He said: suppose a fellow broke his hip 

and is brought into my hospital. And he said: I phone the 

specialist in Regina and he says, I'm sorry, my beds are all full; 

all the beds in Regina are full; you'll have to wait two days, 

maybe three, before I'll be able to get somebody out to get your 

patient in. 

 

Now he said, the doctor, what do I do with that patient with the 

broken hip? It's a fair question for him to ask. He said, should I 

put him in bed in the hospital and leave him there by himself? 

Because he said, you haven't provided any funding for a nurse 

in this whole process. Nobody is going to be there to take care 

of this person with the broken hip for two or three days. So 

maybe somebody'll volunteer. 

 

Now I suggest to you, the doc's problem goes a little further 

than even what he had suggested to the crowd because he had 

made his point. But the reality of life in medical circles is that 

those bones start to heal after they're broken. And after three 

days of waiting, you have a healing effect across the end of 

those bones that where you reset them they may not grow back 

together. So even if you do get into the specialist in Regina, 

you may still have a very serious problem of never being able 

to heal up. Now that is especially complicated if you happen to 

have a side-effect like diabetes or something like that. 

 

So where is the fairness in the wellness program, and how can 

it possibly work? The doctor used some other examples to 

make his points, and I'll get to those later because I want to go 

on into some of the more important parts about the rest of the 

community. 

 

The Bill was originally designed, Mr. Speaker, to try to 

improve the health care system of our province. And we can't 

fault the government for having that initiative to want to try to 

do something. 



April 23, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1163 

We have said in our own party that if we had formed 

government then I think quite honestly that we would have to 

do something too. The member of the independent party has 

stated in this Assembly and around the country that yes, if she 

had formed government, she would have to have looked at 

some health care reforms too. 

 

So we have general agreement in one area. Obviously though, 

the problem comes in deciding how we carry this out in 

fairness, and to make it work. The question has to be asked 

then, are we doing this for financial reasons, are we doing it for 

health care reasons, or are we doing it for political reasons? 

 

If we're going to make these manipulations and changes in the 

whole system to try to gain political stripes or political points 

or political advantage, then we're wrong and we shouldn't be 

doing it. 

 

If we're doing it for finances, to some extent that's acceptable, 

so long as what you're doing financially does not destroy the 

individual right to have some basic guarantee of health care 

and his basic rights as an individual in a free and democratic 

country to expect to be treated the same as others in terms of 

being able to be cured or to see a doctor. 

 

(1200) 

 

And then we have the argument coming from the government 

that they say, that by our opposing their approach, we are 

causing the privatization of health care. How can an opposition 

cause anything in the province to happen when they're 

outnumbered 56 to 10 is beyond me. 

 

But day after day I've sat in my seat and listened to the 

government make the argument that the opposition, because 

they're opposing the government, is forcing the privatization of 

health care. 

 

The reality is that health care is being privatized in Alberta. If 

you don't believe it, I'll use an example that you can clearly 

understand. Optometric service in Calgary has been offered for 

some time now in a private clinic where they remove the part 

of the eye that becomes cloudy when you get cataracts, and 

they replace it with a small piece of plastic for $2,500. For the 

last number of years you've been able to go to Calgary and get 

that operation. You get that operation one day and you go 

home the next day. Hundreds upon hundreds of people have 

flocked to Calgary to buy that service, even though there is a 

service in Saskatchewan. 

 

The other thing now is that we have new clinics developing or 

growing in Calgary. I understand now that you can go in for all 

kinds of scans and X-rays and things to be done there, and you 

have the money and you do it. 

 

How many people in this government really believe that if a 

fellow that has some money — take a school teacher for 

example; they're not the highest paid 

people in the world, but they do get a decent wage — suppose 

one of them had a serious operation that was needed right away 

to save their life. Do you think they'd not use the security of 

their job to go to the bank and borrow the money to go to 

Alberta to get it, to save their life today, rather than to wait for 

three months down the road to get it done in Regina or 

Saskatoon, standing in line? Do you think for one minute that 

they won't go there? Do you think for one minute you're not 

forcing these people into the necessity of going for the 

privatization of medicare. 

 

This wellness program has in fact, Mr. Speaker, done exactly 

what the government has said they don't want to do. They've 

said they don't want to privatize health care, and yet what 

they're doing through Bill 3 and the process that is going on in 

the province, they are forcing the privatization of health care. 

The spin-off effect of what happens can do absolutely nothing 

else. 

 

Health care is going to be privatized by this Bill, and the reality 

is that medicare, as we have known it and understood it, is 

dead. This government is shovelling the dirt on the grave right 

now. It is dead and gone. It cannot survive under this program. 

The people of this province will know that as clearly as can be 

the first time they get sick and they have to stand in line outside 

of the hospital to get in. 

 

There is no question that anybody that has a dollar or the 

ability to borrow money, and they're sick, they will go and buy 

the service if it's offered some place else. Anybody that can get 

their hands on a dollar somehow is going to take care of their 

health. 

 

Now perhaps it's for health care that they have the other third 

alternative that they're changing the plan. Tell me, tell me how 

you can improve health care by not having a doctor. Please 

somebody explain to me how the town of Gull Lake is going to 

have better health care for its 1,100 residents and the several 

hundreds that live around the community. Tell me how their 

health care is going to be enhanced when their doctor is cut 

down to the point where he can't financially survive. 

 

The question was asked the other night: doc, will you stay in 

the community under this new program? He said, rather than 

me answering the question for myself — because, he said, I'm 

almost at retirement age — he said, you have to ask yourself 

the question: what other doctor would ever consider coming 

into this community? Or if you were the doctor, the new 

doctor, would you come into this community under the 

proposition of this new plan where you have only two beds that 

you get paid for and you have no access to put your patients 

any place else, and therefore your hands are tied to be able to 

provide health care? Would you come? The answer was 

resoundingly no. 

 

Even the minister himself would not answer that question. The 

Minister of the Environment, sitting right over there, came to 

Gull Lake and said nothing on that point. He would not answer 

the question of whether he would take that job. 



1164 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1993 

And you wouldn't take it either, members. Nobody in this room 

would go out and work their lifetime at their profession without 

pay. Society doesn't work that way. There is no . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — On salary, on salary. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — The member chirps from his seat that if they 

were on salary they would come. Who would pay the salary? 

 

Let me talk to you about the economy here and the economics 

involved. I want to explain this for the member because I 

genuinely think he doesn't understand. The government has 

unilaterally declared that the budget is cut from $800,000 a 

year down to $119,000 a year. And here's the crunch of the 

reality. The chairman of the board says: if you get out your 

calculator and the books of the hospital, you will find that that 

will pay for the heat, the power, and the lab services and that's 

it; there is no money left for nurses, doctors, janitors, or 

anything else. 

 

So without any money, how are you going to pay the doctor's 

salary? You can't even keep the building open hardly. And if he 

hasn't got the services of a janitor to sweep the floor, how are 

you going to make this work? You tell me where you're going 

to get the money then to pay the doctor's salary. That's going to 

solve the problem, putting him on a fixed salary? He still wants 

to get paid, and he has to be paid. 

 

Let's face some genuine realities here. Nobody in this 

Assembly would take that job, absolutely not one of you, even 

if you had the doctor's certificate to be able to do it. Now I 

know there's one here that does. And I know that he won't stay 

and work for nothing either. So we've got to face some realities 

here. We can't just say we're going to change this whole thing 

without thinking about the realities of what we're saying. 

 

Just because the doc was there for 25 years and the community 

used him right and he treated the community right, is no reason 

why you have to expect him now to become a charitable 

organization donating his time for free to the community. 

That's not right and that's not fair. You can't expect people to 

do that. Even though the nurses have voluntarily offered to 

contribute 10 per cent of their wages, I know doc would do the 

same if everybody else was. He's that kind of guy. He likes his 

community and he loves it or he wouldn't have stayed there for 

25 years. 

 

The people of our community are not the only ones affected. 

We've got people who've had hospitals that have been rebuilt. 

We've got hospitals that have been built brand-new. We've got 

special care home facilities. How can a government justify 

announcing the building of a new hospital in Moose Jaw and 

then suggest that they're going to close a brand-new one in 

Eston? Where does that make any sense? What would not be 

provided in a new hospital in Eston that a new hospital in 

Moose Jaw is going to provide? 

 

Surely it'll be bigger and more expensive, but who will be in 

that hospital? I'll tell you who's going to be in 

there — the people from Eston whose hospital has been closed 

and now will stand empty with its brand-new windows letting 

in the sunlight as the dust particles sift through it and the mice 

and the rats gnaw through the walls. And those people from 

Eston will be in Moose Jaw in the new hospital there, half of 

them probably on the psychiatric ward because you guys are 

going to drive them all crazy with frustration. 

 

So we see everybody in the community of Saskatchewan 

protesting against this move. And yet we have a government 

dug in so hard and so deep that they will not even open their 

ears to listen to the debate. 

 

It's gotten so far that even the other day when I turned on 

CKCK television, I heard somebody had made up a song about 

the offloading — the offloading of this government onto local 

communities. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Sing it for us. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — I wish I had taken the words down. I'm not a 

real good singer; otherwise I would have wrote the words 

down. It would have been too embarrassing for this 

government though, and I suppose that in reality that wouldn't 

have been very good parliamentary form. 

 

I want to, Mr. Speaker, offer into this debate some more of the 

people and their reactions rather than just my own, to fortify 

the fact that it is the people who are speaking through us and 

not just things that we have created. 

 

I have here a letter from the Sand Hills Home Care District No. 

1 Incorporated. 

 

 We are writing in regards to the recent announcement that 

Regional Services will be disbanded effective March 31, 

1993. As health care providers, the loss of these services raise 

significant concerns for us which we would like to share with 

you. 

 

This letter was sent to the Premier and to the Leader of the 

Opposition and myself and several other people, I guess. I'm 

not going to read it all but I want to read a couple of parts of it. 

 

 All of the various entities provided by Regional Services will 

leave our district in the most disadvantaged situation. The 

greatest loss, for our group directly, will be the withdrawal of 

Social Worker . . . 

 

And it gives the name. And I think I won't mention the name 

because I haven't got permission from her to read it out loud. 

But I do have the letter, and if the minister wants to see the 

letter and hasn't got her copy, I'll be happy to let her read this 

one. It goes on: 

 

 Since assuming her position, (this person's name again) . . . 

has played a major role in meeting the needs of the clientele 

in the whole southwest region. She was our sole contact 



April 23, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1165 

 person for arranging proper placement of individuals 

requiring resources not available in our communities. (This 

person's name again) . . . was our liaison between the rural 

and urban centres. She actively participated in all of the cases 

— providing direct consultation with the clients and families. 

As a resource individual, she provided workshops to care 

givers and health care workers on such pertinent topics as 

Elder Abuse, Alzheimer's Disease, Care Giver Burn-out, and 

Crisis Intervention — just to mention a few. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I read this letter to bring to the attention of 

the Assembly the fact that when we talk about health care we 

sometimes think about the doctor and the patient with the 

broken hip or the serious flu bug that folks get and we forget 

about a lot of the other things that are extremely important to 

the health care of our communities. I'll bet that not many 

people realize that there was such a person and how important 

they were to our system. The letter goes on that: 

 

 At the time the District Coordinating Committees and 

Screening Committees were established . . . (this person's 

name again) was instrumental in (this matter) . . . sitting as an 

active member on a number of these committees. Her 

absence will be felt by all of these organizations. 

 

 As a social worker . . . (this person's name again) acted as a 

liaison with various government services, a resource 

individual on legal issues, and the only contact we had when 

dealing with individuals whose needs expanded beyond their 

physical health . . . 

 

You see there's a whole area of health here that we have 

somehow almost missed. And yet it's all being jeopardized by 

this plan: 

 

 The loss of (this person; her name is here) . . . services will 

leave a significant void in the services we provide to the 

people of our communities. The loss of this essential resource 

individual will directly reduce and limit the services we are 

capable of providing our clientele. Who will be there to meet 

our needs as health care workers in the rural communities? 

When we require a social worker now — who will we 

contact? 

 

I suppose that might be a comparison to the situation that we 

are aware of with Rural Development. As the people know, the 

Department of Rural Development was consolidated into the 

Department of Municipal Affairs and all of the urban municipal 

things are lumped in there too. 

 

The first month after that was done, people from rural 

Saskatchewan were phoning my office, asking me, who do we 

call about our concerns with rural development? We had a 

number from before. When we call it, it transfers us to a new 

number where no 

one answers. It took us a considerable length of time and a lot 

of phone calls to find who in fact answered for that department. 

There wasn't anybody assigned. 

 

You see, when we start making these changes, it sort of goes 

right over our head that we have to provide some contact to 

take the place of those who are removed in the changes. 

 

It goes on to say that: 

 

 At this time the concept of health care districts formation is 

still very much in the planning and discussion stage. 

 

Now obviously, Mr. Speaker, this letter was written a little 

while ago. 

 

 Formal budgets have not been established nor has any 

binding provincial legislation received formal assent. 

 

And of course that still hasn't happened. 

 

 And yet a serious change has already been imposed that 

virtually dismantles the provisions of essential services to the 

towns and communities of rural Saskatchewan. 

 

 It is our understanding that the provision of these services 

would become the mandate of the new districts in 1994. Why 

then have these services been terminated in 1993 before the 

districts have been established? 

 

Good question. I haven't heard an answer. 

 

(1215) 

 

In conclusion, it goes on: 

 

 We urge you to reconsider this decision. We appeal to you to 

reverse this decision regarding regional services in order to 

grant us the time required to establish our districts and 

subsequent service so that the needs of our clientele can 

continue to be provided for. 

 

 We trust that you will give our concerns serious 

consideration. 

 

Now that comes from a whole group of people who have 

attested their name to this document. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not, as the minister said yesterday, 

fearmongering. These are genuine people who have identified a 

clear and absolutely real problem. This very real problem has 

to cause fear in the minds of those people because there is no 

resolution — no resolution suggested, no resolution even 

contemplated. I suggest that someone simply decided to start 

passing out pink slips without considering the implications. 

 

We have documentation of these kinds of concerns, Mr. 

Speaker, from all kinds of people around the 



1166 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1993 

province. 

 

I have another one that is a particular interest of another area. 

As I said earlier, I've got hundreds of letters, but most of them 

get to the same issues. So I've just picked a few that deal with, 

in a general way, the issues that are not covered by the others. 

 

This is a letter here to the Health minister and a copy to myself: 

 

 This letter is a response to the letter that I have received from 

you in regards to establishing a dialysis satellite program in 

our Leader Union Hospital. 

 

 Many other people have received a letter from you and we 

thank you for taking the time to reply to us. 

 

 However, (and the Health minister's name is here), we are not 

satisfied with your response. I have also read a letter from 

your department which had been sent to our hospital board; 

this letter had stated that we need 10 or 12 patients to make a 

dialysis program economical. However, when I checked this 

out with the head (I think it's) nephrologist (I hope I've 

pronounced that right) of Saskatchewan, Dr. George 

Pylypchuck of St. Paul's Hospital, he informs me, that any 

more than 6 patients is not economical because then, more 

than one dialysis machine is required and more staff is 

needed. He informs us that 3 or 4 patients is the best 

economical number. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I should explain why this letter is so 

important. The people in Leader, like the people in Gull Lake 

as I indicated in my discussion earlier, knew that they were 

going to have to contribute and help in the health reform of 

their community. They understood that we have to become 

more efficient, that we have to become more cost-effective. 

 

And because they are aware of some patients in their area that 

require this specialized service, they started doing their 

homework and determined in so doing that if they could bring a 

dialysis machine into the Leader hospital it would not only 

save the government money because these patients wouldn't 

have to collect the Social Services monies to either live in 

Saskatoon or to be transported back and forth, but in fact they 

could save a lot of money by having that machine in the Leader 

hospital. 

 

That machine would then serve the purpose of providing more 

jobs to that hospital, of better utilizing the people's expertise 

who are in the hospital. And of course it would help the people 

in the community who need that particular medical service for 

their health. It's a service you can't live without once you're in 

that condition. 

 

A lot of work went into tracking down a machine. At one point 

we were told that there was in fact a machine available. And in 

fact there was even at one 

point a serious consideration to bring a small machine into a 

private home just for one patient. Now if the system was 

willing to do that, how could it not be willing to bring a larger 

machine into the hospital that would serve perhaps three to six 

patients, the ideal case-load for a machine. 

 

And how could it not make sense, Mr. Speaker, to provide that 

service away from the big city where the line-ups are so big 

that people can't get in to get the service. How can it possibly 

make sense not to put that machine there when in fact private 

individuals can be trained to operate these machines to assist a 

family member or a friend, especially when you consider that 

there are two qualified nurses in that hospital who volunteered 

to take the training program. These are already trained 

professional nurses. Obviously they have the skill and the 

ability to learn how to provide this service, and obviously they 

would pick it up a lot quicker than someone who is just a friend 

or an acquaintance or a relative of a patient in need of this 

service. 

 

Those nurses were willing to do that. Again a tremendous 

tribute to these professional people willing to take the extra 

mile, the extra step to do what is necessary to save their 

hospital and their community. 

 

It would have made that hospital unit more efficient, more 

effective. The heat bill has to be paid, the power is turned on, 

the lights are burning. All of that is there already. The machine 

would have had a place to be put; they assured me that they had 

room for it. They have assured me that everything was in order 

for this service to be delivered to that community. And yet the 

minister refused to give it to them. Now we wonder what 

would be the motive for that. If you're thinking about trying to 

close a lot of hospitals in rural areas and you refuse to allow the 

people to do the things that would make their operation 

efficient, then it is by nature inefficient and you can justify 

closing it. 

 

That's why the people of Saskatchewan were not allowed to use 

the process of their own mind development to create better 

efficiencies in their communities, because this government 

wanted to close those hospitals because there is a fever of rural 

revenge in this government. The plan was initiated from the 

start to stop people from being able to do things to help 

themselves. 

 

And I have examples, not only of this kidney dialysis machine, 

but of other things that people were willing and able, 

realistically, to be able to do to more economically utilize their 

facilities in their towns. And it is, Mr. Speaker, with assurance 

from people in some of those larger hospitals in the city that it 

would be a great benefit to them to free up some of their 

case-load time if some of these services could in fact be 

provided by someone else. 

 

Why then are we so intent on following this one direction only? 

It boils down to the number three consideration in my list. If it's 

not money and it's not health care, then it has to be somebody's 

political 



April 23, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1167 

agenda that we're trying to follow. And where is the rationale 

to following a political agenda for partisan political reasons in 

such an important area as health care? 

 

I could see it if it was a defence of the things that Tommy 

Douglas set up, but this is destroying the very fabric and the 

very network that that honourable gentleman put together in 

this province. Everyone will concede that he proved his point 

that this is a good working system. Obviously there will be 

some out there that will argue the point that there are other 

systems around the world that are working, and working well 

too. But this system does work and we live here and we're 

aware of it. So we understand it and we see that it's working. 

 

The new wellness program is touted as being step two. Step 

two I've never heard of before this year. I don't know if Tommy 

Douglas had a step two in his mind or not. I suppose someone 

might be able to dig up some documentation in writing to prove 

that point, and I truly challenge the government to supply that. 

I want to see this. I don't believe the man ever had a 

comprehended thought in his mind, in his whole life, about the 

wellness program that we're going into. 

 

Tommy Douglas would roll over in his grave if he saw what 

you guys were doing to the philosophy that he believed in. He 

absolutely would not tolerate this. He'd fire the whole bunch of 

you. He'd call an election and let the people fire you. That's 

how honourable a gentleman he was. He wouldn't tolerate the 

members destroying the very fabric of the thought of the social 

justice that he believed in. 

 

I believe he was more inclined to the social justice than the 

economic justice, but I believe that the man would have been 

fair enough to say that social and economic justice is necessary 

to be tied together for all of Saskatchewan. And this program is 

destroying exactly what that man built. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, some of the members are bound to 

disagree, because obviously they know that if Mr. Douglas 

were here and called that election, they wouldn't have a job for 

very long. They'd be the unemployed and the welfare people 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well that's not, member, 

something that we will have the opportunity to decide. The 

calling of an election obviously is in your ballpark. But when 

you call it, we will be ready. 

 

And I suggest to you that the people of Saskatchewan could 

probably find no better, no better issue to want to have an 

election fought over than the preservation of their health care 

system. And I believe that would run across the lines of 

everyone in this province, all of the rural people and all of the 

city people. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that you will find that the folks in the 

city are not napping on this issue, as the government members 

hope they are. I believe that the people in the cities are quite 

aware of the impact that these changes are beginning to have 

on health care and health care delivery services within the city 

structures. They have to be aware of it. With all of the media 

coverage that we've seen in the past days, people in the cities 

have to know that this issue is not only important to the folks in 

those 52 communities, but extremely important to them. 

 

I'll give you a few examples of the kind of media coverage that 

they've been exposed to. 

 

I have here headline: Rally opposes health care changes. 

 

 Prince Albert: about 300 people attended a rally Saturday 

against proposed changes to the health care in Prince Albert. 

The event was organized by concerned citizens of health 

care. They oppose Prince Albert Health Care Board's 

decision to make the Victoria Union Hospital the sole acute 

care hospital in Prince Albert. Speakers called for a freeze on 

all decision making by the board until a majority of its 

members are elected. Presently all 12 board members are 

appointed. 

 

(1230) 

 

Mr. Speaker, you remember how people said after that meeting 

that the member from Prince Albert had tried to speak to that 

crowd and was so dissatisfied with what the crowd was asking 

him that he turned his back on them. You all heard about that. 

The people in the cities have all heard about this. They know 

what's going on. 

 

And if they haven't noticed that particular one item, we can go 

onto the coverage that some of the other meetings have had 

around our province and the reactions of the people — not just 

these so-called fearmongering opposition members as the 

government likes to call us. The people of Weyburn for 

example: "Centre closure forecast. WEYBURN (Special)": 

 

 The Souris Valley Regional Care Centre is headed for 

eventual closure says Harold Crossman, chairman of the 

board of directors. 

 

 In an interview from his home in Stoughton Friday, 

Crossman said he sees the recent 12-per-cent budget cuts as 

the first step towards closure of the complex. "That 12 per 

cent causes a fair bit of down-sizing and continual reductions 

in funding mean that soon you cannot operate." 

 

Because of course they've been told that there will be further 

cuts as we go on, and that's what he was referring to. 

 

I was at that meeting, Mr. Speaker. These were genuine people. 

These weren't rabble-rousing, partisan politics people 

organized by one group or another, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I believe you have someone that needs your attention. 



1168 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1993 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Hamilton: — With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, when I was out speaking with 

the students and the exchange students from Montreal, I was 

fortunate to bump into a delegation who are here today from 

Surrey, British Columbia. They are here to attend the 

graduation of their son from the Canadian Bible College. And 

in my haste to return, I didn't receive the names but I thought it 

would be good for us to give a warm welcome to our visitors 

from Surrey, British Columbia. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 3 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Certainly I would 

join with the member in welcoming the folks to the gallery. I 

hope that you enjoy your day and have fun in our city. 

 

We are discussing today the health Bill that is before us. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I want to go on with my part of the debate to try 

to prove to the government that they have gone wrong on this 

issue, to try to bring them to considering some alternatives, to 

try to get them to understand that the people of this province 

want to renegotiate their position on this issue. To try to 

convince the government, Mr. Speaker, that they have to 

compromise, that they've got to go back to the drawing table 

and go back to the people, talk to them, discuss this issue, and 

work out something that can in fact keep this province running. 

 

This Bill in effect, and the unilateral decisions having been 

made in the past few days by the Minister of Health, is 

destroying the faith that people have in our province. It is 

producing a mental doom-and-gloom fear for life throughout 

our citizenry. And this cannot be allowed to go on. 

 

If we serve no other purpose in this Assembly but to convince 

you to go back to the people and redraw this program, if we 

can convince you to do that, if that's all we ever achieve, we 

will have served our purpose very well. And that is our aim. 

 

We do not do, as suggested by some of the people in the letters 

that I have read, we do not try to kill your Bill. We want you to 

do that. We don't even want you necessarily to kill it dead; we 

want you to consider putting in some amendments and to take a 

different 

direction to your approach of how you handle the people. 

 

To stand in this Assembly and wave your finger like that and 

say, we're going to do this because we know better than you, 

we can do things better for you that you don't understand, that's 

not what people in this province have become accustomed to. 

That's not the kind of preaching they want to hear. 

 

And yet we see the Health minister doing it all the time. She 

stands on her pedestal and preaches down to the people about 

how intelligent she is, as though the rest of the people haven't 

got a sound thought in their head. 

 

Well I assure you, members of the government, the people of 

this province do have some very good thoughts and they have 

some very good ideas and those ideas incorporated with your 

plan could make this system work better. It could make it work 

fair. 

 

Right now what you're proposing is not fair. It is not right and 

it cannot be acceptable. And we must change it. No matter 

what it takes, we have got to change your minds and get you 

back to talking to the people. You've got to get back out to 

these communities and discuss things with people like the 

medical association. 

 

The other night in Gull Lake the doctor stood up in front of 300 

people with a microphone in his hand and said: no one, no one 

consulted with me on this program. He said that no one had 

consulted with him or his association. So far as he knew there 

had been no correspondence whatsoever, and that man is on 

record in a public forum in front of 300 witnesses. 

 

And you sit there and try to tell me that you consulted with the 

people. Give me a break. My doctor would not stand up and 

say those things if it weren't true. This is an honourable 

gentleman. And I challenge any one of you to say otherwise. 

 

I want to go back to the comparison we made from other 

communities because the government has staked great amounts 

of their argument on the fact that they claim that all of the 

protests from all of the people is nothing more than political 

fearmongering initiated by 10 opposition members in order to 

achieve some political advantage. I'm going to show you in this 

debate how wrong you are, how many people are genuinely 

concerned. 

 

And I'll use an example of a gentleman whose name I will not 

use again because I didn't get permission to do it. But he stood 

up in that same forum, in front of the same 300 witnesses, and 

said, I supported you in the election, and you have betrayed 

me, and you have betrayed our community. This gentleman is 

on record, and he said exactly this. He said: you told us, Mr. 

Minister, that you could make $4.5 billion do, that it was 

enough to run the province on. And at the same time you would 

improve the medicare of this province. That's what the man 

said to the minister. And he said, you betrayed us. 



April 23, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1169 

Now that wasn't the man who said, I supported Jack. He said he 

voted for your member. He voted for the NDP. And he got up 

and said you're wrong. He said you are doing things and you 

have betrayed the people. Now I didn't tell him to do that 

because he wouldn't have done it even if I had asked. 

 

I don't know how that man's going to vote next time, but I'll bet 

you it isn't for you guys. He might even be tempted to vote for 

me. 

 

I wanted to talk a little bit, Mr. Speaker, about the comparisons 

of other communities. And in so doing I want to draw your 

attention back to the meeting at Weyburn, all the way across 

the province, the south end of the province, from one corner 

almost to the other. Gull Lake lies in the south-west corner, 

Weyburn's in the south-east corner. 

 

And we were talking about the opinions of Mr. Crossman. And 

he says, and I'll go on here to quote a bit of what is written 

about him: 

 

 He predicts (it says) the Souris Valley complex may be 

forced to shut down within eight years. 

 

 He said the statement by Health Minister . . . (and her name is 

here so I'll skip that) that the future of the facility rests in the 

hands of the yet to be established district board is "just 

another bail out." 

 

 This is another case of offloading of both monies and 

responsibilities by the provincial government. 

 

 Funding cuts amounting to about $1.8 million will mean 

Souris Valley will have to reduce its numbers of beds to 250 

by April of next year, he said. The facility is licensed to 

operate 300 beds and currently has 268 residents. 

 

 "I don't think the provincial government realizes how 

desperately this facility is needed," Crossman said. "We are 

the only institution in the area that is fully equipped and has 

the space and personnel to handle these patients." 

 

That's what he said. I'll add this. There is an alternative that he 

never thought about when he made this statement, and that is 

the new hospital in Moose Jaw, isn't it? Who are you going to 

put into that hospital to justify spending those millions of 

dollars in one of your hot seats politically? Who is going to fill 

that hospital up to justify having it there? The people from 

these hospitals that you're closing are the only ones available to 

fill that kind of a big facility. That's what's going on here. 

 

Two members from the government come out of that city. It's 

much more politically advantageous to hold those two safe 

seats than to risk leaving the hospital dollars in a city like 

Weyburn where they're going to get chucked so fast they'll 

never know what hit them. 

Ask the member how he got treated out there. He's an honest 

man, but he will be defeated in the next election. You fellows 

go over and talk to him. Isn't he the one that said, I felt the heat 

in more ways than one, when he came with his nose burnt from 

the sun as he toured through the audience that was out on the 

steps of the Assembly the other day? I know that he's taking 

care of his sunburn, and it'll get better. But the burning he got 

from the people out there will stick, and it'll stick through the 

next election, and he knows that he's going to have to preserve 

his last position as a workplace because he's going to have to 

go back to it. His job security in this Assembly is finished. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we've talked about trying in this debate to 

prove our point that this is an issue that runs not only across 

political party lines, but it's an issue that runs across the whole 

province. It runs through the cities. It runs through the rural 

areas. It is a people problem against the government in every 

respect. It is a people problem of all people, of all political 

persuasions, and of all other kinds of definition, no matter 

what. 

 

Because no matter if you're purple or green, you have to worry 

about your health. No matter if you voted NDP or 

Conservative, you have to be concerned about your health. And 

people of all persuasions will some day have to face the reality 

of growing old. And having a place to spend your last days 

with some dignity and respect is something that all of us face if 

we're fortunate enough not to get killed in some accident. And 

it's important that we provide the safe security in our system 

that people know that those facilities and those needs will be 

taken care of when the time comes. 

 

I could talk about some very personal things here. About my 

father growing older, as all of you will have experienced with 

your fathers and mothers and relatives. And you all know the 

kind of story that I could tell you, about how he dreads the 

thought of getting old enough to have to go to a home. 

 

But he knows that someday it's coming. He himself sat on a 

board, helping to build the very structure in Gull Lake that is 

now threatened. He sat on that original board and was 

instrumental in helping his neighbours and friends to organize 

the funding and the building of that facility. 

 

Believe it or not, the administrator of that facility did all of the 

work of administration free of charge on a voluntary basis the 

first year. Free of charge. No cost to anybody, in order to get 

that facility built and off the ground. Man's name was Emanuel 

Zubot, I'll pay him tribute right now. He did it for nothing 

because he believed in his community. He believed enough in 

his community to do all that work free of charge until it could 

get organized and set up. 

 

Now my father, as I've pointed out to you, wouldn't like the 

idea of having to go and spend time in a home. But he knows, 

because he's a smart man and he helped to build that facility, 

that someday he will have 



1170 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1993 

to be there, someday he will have to go to that facility. And he 

dreads the thought that it would have to be in Swift Current or 

Regina or Medicine Hat. Because he knows full well that those 

people that care about him live in and around Gull Lake. 

 

If he's in a home in Gull Lake, he'll have some friends to visit 

him. He might even have a chance to see me once in a while 

when I get out of here. But if he's in Medicine Hat, who will 

ever visit him? You tell me, who will visit my father in 

Medicine Hat that he knows? Nobody. If he's in a home in 

Regina, who could take time and money out of their lives to 

come in here more than maybe once a year? And in his old age 

he won't even recognize who they are. 

 

(1245) 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Pursuant to a special order of the 

Assembly, the Speaker is now required to call the vote on the 

main motion and the amendment on second reading of Bill No. 

3. 

 

The division bells rang from 12:46 p.m. until 12:56 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Boyd D'Autremont 

Toth Goohsen 

— 4 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Pringle 

Thompson Lautermilch 

Tchorzewski Murray 

Lingenfelter Hamilton 

Shillington Trew 

Koskie Flavel 

Anguish Kujawa 

Goulet Crofford 

Kowalsky Knezacek 

Carson Harper 

Upshall Keeping 

Hagel Kluz 

Bradley Langford 

Lyons Jess 

— 28 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 12:59 p.m. until 1:23 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Van Mulligen Lyons 

Thompson Pringle 

Simard Lautermilch 

Tchorzewski Murray 

Lingenfelter Hamilton 

Shillington Trew 

Koskie Flavel 

 

 

Anguish Kujawa 

Goulet Knezacek 

Kowalsky Harper 

Carson Keeping 

Upshall Kluz 

Hagel Langford 

Bradley Jess 

— 28 

Nays 

Boyd D'Autremont 

Toth Goohsen 

— 4 

 

The Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee of the 

Whole at the next sitting. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1:25 p.m. 

 


