




















































Hansard: June 08, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2297 

 June 8, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I have 

petitions here this afternoon that I would like to present to the 

Assembly.  And I'll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation 

introduced to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. 

corporate governance and financing arrangements. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions come from the Hudson Bay 

area, as well as the North Battleford, Wilkie, Delmas areas of 

the province. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I as 

well would like to present petitions to the Assembly.  And I 

will read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation 

introduced to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. 

corporate governance and financing arrangements. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the petitions are signed by individuals from 

Parry, Milestone, Lang, Mossbank, and Moose Jaw.  I so 

present them to the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have several 

petitions I would like to lay on the Table today.  And I'll read 

the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate finance and 

financing arrangements. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These, Mr. Speaker, predominantly from the Saskatoon area 

although they do go into Warman, Osler, and I notice a few 

from Spruce Lake, Saskatoon, a lot of Saskatoon, Martensville 

and all through that area, Mr. Speaker.  I'd be pleased to lay 

these on the Table. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have 

petitions to present today.  The prayer reads: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that 

 your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to defeat any 

legislation introduced to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. 

corporate governance and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the North Battleford 

and Cut Knife area of the province.  I present these today. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I as well have 

many petitioners wanting to be heard by the Assembly.  I'll 

read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangement. 

 

These come from the Regina city area as well as from La 

Ronge and from Stanley Mission, and it almost looks like every 

person at Stanley Mission must have signed them.  I now 

present them. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have 

petitions to lay on the Table today.  I'll just read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangement. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these signatures are from . . . this page is all Swift 

Current, a couple look like Regina addresses on there, and the 

rest is from Bjorkdale, Saskatchewan and Crooked River. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I lay these on the Table. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have some 

petitions I would like to present to the Assembly.  And I will 

read the prayer, Mr. Speaker, into the record: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitioners come from a variety of areas: 

from Martensville, Saskatoon, 



2298 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1993 

Hanley, Kindersley, Clavet, and many more from Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure to present these petitions at 

this time. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have 

petitioners that have petitioned this Assembly, and the prayer 

reads this way: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

We have them here from Regina, Mr. Speaker, Indian Head, 

Saskatoon, Clavet, Vanscoy, and Warman.  And I want to lay 

these on the Table for these petitioners today. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also have 

Saskatchewan citizens who wish to petition the legislature 

today.  I'll read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I have several dozen petitioners here, Mr. Speaker, all from the 

city of Regina, who would like their names tabled in the 

legislature today. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order, the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7), they are hereby read and 

received: 

 

 Of citizens of the province praying that the Assembly may be 

pleased to defeat any legislation introduced to redefine 

NewGrade Energy corporate governance and financing 

arrangements. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much.  Mr. Speaker, 

it gives me great pleasure to introduce two people, two special 

guests from the United Kingdom, Tony and Margaret Flux.  

These are people I have not met before.  Margaret Flux's 

brother lives across the back alley from us, our children have 

played together in the South Saskatchewan Youth Orchestra.  

They're on their first visit to Canada.  They're from Clevedon, 

England. 

 

Clevedon has some famous literary associations.  Arthur 

Hallam is buried in the Norman church there.  He was a close 

friend of the poet Tennyson.  Tennyson wrote the poem "In 

Memoriam" for Hallam and 

named his son Hallam Tennyson.  Also the poet Coleridge 

lived at Clevedon. 

 

Margaret Flux has other literary skills.  She is an expert 

lacemaker and has done some work for Her Majesty the Queen.  

Margaret Flux and her brother, Harry Sweetman, were born at 

a place called Leicester.  It's of importance to people in this 

Assembly.  SaskTel International is building a cable and 

telephone system in Leicester, a city of about 600,000. 

 

So we have some business relationships and some close 

friendships.  I would ask all members to join me in welcoming 

these two very special guests to Saskatchewan and to this 

legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Draper: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you and 

through you to the members of the Assembly, a group of 

students from Lafleche Mathieu Elementary School, grade 5, 

16 of them all together along with their teachers, Ray 

Morissette and Linda Lovo.  They're in the Speaker's gallery up 

there on the left side of the clock from here, and we'll be 

visiting with them later.  We're having drinks and photograph 

downstairs, and we'd like you to join with me in welcoming 

them to the Assembly today.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is indeed a 

pleasure today to introduce to you and through you to the 

Assembly two groups of visitors.  In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, 

are 17 young adults, grade 9 students from the Bjorkdale 

School. 

 

They're accompanied by Jeff Kyliuk, and I had the privilege of 

already meeting with the group and they had a lot of tough 

questions, Mr. Speaker, especially Mr. Kyliuk, the teacher.  We 

had a really good meeting. 

 

The other group, Mr. Speaker, are seated in the east gallery, 

and on behalf of my colleague the hon. member from Nipawin, 

who would like to welcome the group from Ridgedale, 78 

people -- 64 students and 14 teachers and parents -- grades 5 to 

12. 

 

The teachers are Allan Brown, principal; Garry Mutch, 

vice-principal; Randy Bergman, Betty Mutch, Robert Bratvold; 

and of course with that size of group, Mr. Speaker, they needed 

12 cars so they had a lot of friends drive them, and Margie 

McCullough, Dianne Barber, Debbie Valleau, Dean Sturby, 

Allan Breadner, Pat Carlson, Mildred Kennedy, Marlene 

Miazga, and Linda Peterson are also with the group. 

 

I would ask that everyone join with me in wishing them a very 

enjoyable visit to Regina and a safe trip home. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.   It is my pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to the 



June 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2299 

Assembly seven grade 7 and 8 students from Sweetgrass 

School in my constituency.  They have travelled a great 

distance to be here with us today and I hope that they enjoy 

their tours and all the information that they get.  I'd be willing 

to meet with you after question period. 

 

This visit is impromptu, but I'm really glad that they were able 

to make it.  And when question period is over, I will meet with 

you.  Please, everyone in the Assembly say hello to these 

people and welcome them here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm happy today to 

introduce to you and through you, Mr. Ernie Jelinski, from the 

city of Regina here.  Ernie has worked tirelessly over the years 

in an attempt to help injured workers to receive fair 

compensation and that sort of thing.  And we're happy that 

Ernie was able to be here today and we hope that the rest of the 

Assembly will join with me in welcoming him today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to introduce to 

you and to other members of the House some visitors from 

Cumberland House.  Mr. Speaker, up in your gallery we have 

Chief Pierre Settee from the Cumberland First Nations, as well 

as Mayor Harold Carriere from the town of Cumberland.  And 

also with them is Bob McAuley and George Ward, also from 

the Cumberland House Development Corporation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be giving them a warm Cumberland House 

welcome. 

 

(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like you to give them a warm welcome, 

and other members of this House as well. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you for your patience, Mr. Speaker.  I 

inadvertently forgot to mention that the teacher with the 

Sweetgrass students is Gwen Ashley, and please welcome her 

too. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to, Mr. Speaker, through 

you to all members of the Assembly, welcome the very many 

trade unionists who are sitting in all three galleries today.  

These people are watching the proceedings of the legislature, 

as they've been doing for the last while.  I'm sure they'll find it 

interesting.  And I'd ask all members of the Assembly to 

welcome this group of people here, and I'd specifically like to 

welcome a constituent of mind, Carter Chafe, who is one of the 

locked-out Westfair workers. 

 

So I'd ask all members of the Assembly to welcome these 

people here today. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Co-op Upgrader Legislation 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, this 

afternoon my question will be to the Premier.  Mr. Speaker, we 

have seen many instances where the Premier and his 

government seem to take delight in using the heavy hand of the 

majority when people in this province oppose them.  We've 

seen the Minister of Economic Development and the Premier 

say that the business groups in the province who oppose Bills 

55 and 56 don't speak to the business community. 

 

We've had cabinet ministers speaking out against their home 

communities because they take issue, Mr. Speaker, with the 

government's direction.  And we see co-op members around the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, trying to defend the 

system that they and their forebears built to have a strong co-op 

movement in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

My question is to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, will you not admit 

today, given some information that I'm sure your government is 

aware of, that you can put the very jeopardy of the co-op 

movement in this province at risk if you carry forward with the 

information, if you carry forward with this Bill in this 

legislature.  Would you answer that, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I think the 

member opposite has a tendency to use gross exaggeration 

when he makes his statements in his introductory remarks, and 

is fairly typical of the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

The co-op movement is in no jeopardy if a bad deal is fixed.  In 

fact the opposite may be true, Mr. Speaker, that the co-op 

movement may be in jeopardy if a bad deal isn't fixed.  And 

what we're saying in our legislation and in our efforts to 

negotiate a new deal, Mr. Speaker, is that we will make sure 

that the NewGrade project is viable and that the people of 

Saskatchewan are protected from having a huge liability of 

$360 million. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Premier.  Mr. Premier, your government doesn't listen to 

farmers.  You don't listen to seniors.  Your ministers don't 

listen to communities when they tell you that your economic 

strategy doesn't work. 

 

Perhaps you will listen to a source that you, sir, have put a lot 

of personal stock in.  The firm of Deloitte & Touche recently 

completed an in-depth analysis of the consequences of your 

Draconian legislation 



2300 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1993 

vis-a-vis the Co-op upgrader and the NewGrade project and the 

province of Saskatchewan.  And I will quote.  This is Deloitte 

Touche, the firm of Mr. Don Gass speaking: 

 

 We are concerned that if Federated Co-op Ltd. accepts the 

current proposal of the province of Saskatchewan, it could 

jeopardize the long-term validity of the organization. 

 

Mr. Premier, you can ridicule a lot of people.  Will you now 

stand in the legislature and ridicule Deloitte & Touche, the firm 

of Don Gass, who say that your legislation, sir, your lack of a 

will to negotiate, puts the very existence of the co-op 

movement in this province at risk?  Will you do that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: --  Mr. Speaker, the answer to the Acting 

Leader of the Opposition is a straightforward and simple 

answer.  We seek a negotiated settlement based on the 

principles of the Estey report.  We think the Estey report sets 

out the way out of this, and the Estey report came after five or 

six months of an examination of all the financial aspects of this 

deal and possible consequences both to the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan and to the members of FCL (Federated 

Co-operatives Ltd.).  From our point of view, that still remains 

the basis, the best help for coming up with a negotiated 

settlement. 

 

But I repeat again, that in the absence of a negotiated 

settlement, the alternative approach in policy would be to do 

nothing.  And as I've said to the House before, I repeat again, 

that would be an irresponsible approach.  To do nothing in 

effect is courting with babysitting a project which is a 

megaproject on the very edge -- living on the very edge, 

endangering the situation everywhere. 

 

This is a bad deal.  Even the co-op movement, FCL people, 

recognize that it's got to be renegotiated.  The question is, on 

what?  And we think that Estey is the way to do it.  And we 

still want to negotiate rather than legislate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, the 

problem is that you always ignore the third choice.  It's always 

do nothing or do it my way.  What is wrong with negotiation, 

Mr. Premier?  Why doesn't that word seem to exist in your 

vocabulary?  It is my way or do nothing. 

 

Mr. Premier, I want to quote again from the firm of Don Gass.  

The report goes on so far as to say that under your proposal, 

and I quote: 

 

 To limit your financial exposure and not risk the earnings 

generated from other areas of their operations, Federated 

would seriously have to look at the alternative of abandoning 

the refinery assets. 

In a nutshell, Mr. Premier, what you are giving the Co-op is the 

choice of either do it my way or abandon the refinery built by 

co-op members in this province over the last 60 years, because 

you refuse to use the word negotiate. 

 

Mr. Premier, before you would take that action, the action that 

Mr. Don Gass's firm is advising Federated Co-op that they may 

have to abandon their refinery, would you not now commit to 

some process of negotiation that doesn't have your friend, Mr. 

Ching, and your political friends driving the agenda?  Would 

you do that, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to see that 

the hon. member has finally gotten around to at least quoting 

something with approval that Mr. Gass has written.  And since 

he's in the mood of quoting what Mr. Gass has written, I would 

remind him what Mr. Gass wrote in spring of 1992 about the 

NewGrade upgrader.  He said: 

 

 . . . the Province has an investment that is not performing up 

to its original expectations and which could hold future 

financial risk. 

 

He went on to say: 

 

 The Province's ability to monitor the performance of this 

project and to work with its joint-venture partner . . . to 

reduce its financial exposure is severely restricted under the 

agreement. 

 

And various other references. 

 

Of course at that time, when we cited that aspect of the Gass 

report, the Leader of the Opposition had denied the existence of 

it -- and for that matter, I think, he even denied the existence of 

Mr. Gass.  Well we don't deny the existence of Mr. Gass then 

and we don't deny his existence now. 

 

You asked me is "negotiate" not a part of my vocabulary?  The 

answer is, it is a part of my vocabulary.  I want to negotiate.  I 

repeat:  I want to negotiate; I look to negotiations; I've offered 

to negotiate. 

 

I've said I will meet with the FCL people any time, anywhere.  

They have not taken this up.  I have said that all we want is an 

agreement on the principles of Estey as the basis for 

negotiation.  Subject to that, the negotiations can proceed. 

 

Why the principles of Estey?  Because it is the only 

identifiable, reasonable way out of a very, very, very bad deal 

that you, sir, were a part of when, in your reckless abandon, 

you threw away the concerns of the taxpayers.  We're not going 

to throw away the concerns of the taxpayers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



June 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2301 

The Speaker: -- Before I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition, I want to ask the member from Wilkie that the 

constant interruptions, when either his own person is asking a 

question or when the Premier is answering a question, is simply 

unacceptable, and I ask him to please quit interrupting. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, you 

refused to answer the question.  Mr. Gass's firm is saying that 

the entire refinery process may have to be abandoned if you 

proceed with your agenda.  If you don't want to listen to Mr. 

Gass, Mr. Premier, perhaps you would listen to the Battleford's 

& District Co-operative who issued a news release today, and I 

quote: 

 

 The Saskatchewan government's use of legislation to 

unilaterally change the NewGrade upgrader agreement could 

have a dramatic effect on the Battlefords Co-op in our 

community. 

 

They are saying that their operation, built in North Battleford 

and Battleford over the last 60 years, has been a good 

community citizen, a consistent returner of dividends to the 

community.  They, Mr. Premier, believe that you are putting 

their movement, their refinery, their members at risk because 

you refuse to negotiate, that you are so narrow in your 

approach to this thing, so political that they now have to issue a 

news release and come out against your government. 

 

What do you say to the people in the North Battlefords Co-op, 

Mr. Premier, who have the same fears as Mr. Don Gass?  How 

do you do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, what do you say to the 

people of North Battlefords because you have put them and the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan in this precarious hole?  What do 

you tell the taxpayers when you meet them about the fact that 

you wracked up a $16 billion deficit, the fact that you have 

$600 million of taxpayers' money on the hook on this project -- 

$600 million that isn't available elsewhere on a project which 

everybody admits has got to be renegotiated? 

 

What do you tell the people of the North Battlefords area?  

Because I tell you, what I tell them is precisely that.  I tell them 

that Estey's investigated it.  He said this was a deal which has 

run financially aground.  He says that it's got to be 

renegotiated.  And I say to the Battlefords people, they should 

speak to the FCL management and tell the FCL management to 

accept the principles of Estey; we'll meet right now this 

afternoon to negotiate a deal based on Estey.  That's what I say 

to them.. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Premier, I agree with what the North 

Battleford people are saying, and I quote: 

 

 With this legislation the government is 

unilaterally imposing conditions.  It is an unfair and 

undemocratic abuse of power. 

 

That's what they say to you, Mr. Premier, and I agree with them 

wholeheartedly.  That's what the people in North Battleford in 

the co-op movement are saying to you and your government.  

It's undemocratic; it's an abuse of power. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, you and your Minister of Economic 

Development should get your story straight.  In his estimates 

last night he said it was only 9.6 billion; you say it's 15.  It's 

like when we go to New York and we talk about Cargill and 

Weyerhaeuser and all these great corporate citizens we have, 

and then when you get back here you throw mud at them, Mr. 

Premier, just as you have done to co-op members all over the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Premier, they feel their refinery is at risk, they feel that you 

are being undemocratic with your legislation in here, and they 

are simply asking you to pull the Bill, take your political 

friends and your political agenda out of the equation, and do 

some honest negotiation.  That's all they're asking, Mr. 

Premier.  Surely you've got that much cooperation from a New 

Democratic Party government for the co-op members of this 

province. Don't you agree? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I agree.  I want to 

negotiate a deal.  I want to get out from under this horrendous 

mess that you stuck the taxpayers of Saskatchewan with, this 

$600 million FCL deal -- a horrendous mess. 

 

I want to get the taxpayers out of the statements made by Mr. 

Philip Gordon -- the hon. member opposite claims he doesn't 

know who he was -- appointed by the hon. member opposite 

when he was in the front benches, an expert in the oil industry 

area who at that time sat as a monitor and still sits as a monitor 

in the project, and wrote a letter to the premier of the day 

virtually begging him not to sign that deal.  And you still went 

ahead.  You still went ahead. 

 

I want to negotiate.  I want to negotiate a deal which is fair to 

the co-op people and to FCL.  But I will tell you one thing . . . 

and the taxpayers.  What I will not do is I will not allow the 

taxpayers to continue to suffer under a deal which is so bad and 

so negligently negotiated by you when you were sitting on the 

treasury benches that them and their children and their 

grandchildren are going to have this around their necks for 

years to come.  We are going to fix the roof now.  And we ask 

your support and FCL to do it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Premier, if you are so ready to 

negotiate, perhaps the report done by Deloitte & Touche should 

go to your ministers, whichever one you think can put aside his 

politics long enough to do a decent job instead of botching it.  

Perhaps they'll read the report of Deloitte & Touche 



2302 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1993 

and the other correspondence that have come across from 

Federated Co-op and others, and then you will do an honest job 

of it. 

 

Will you give the commitment, Mr. Premier, that at least, 

whichever one of your ministers you designate will take the 

time to read the Deloitte & Touche report prepared by Don 

Gass's firm?  Would you make that commitment at least? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, with the greatest respect 

for the Leader of the Opposition, I can hardly believe that that's 

a serious question, but I'll treat it as such.  If the answer he 

wants is yes, I will give him the answer yes. 

 

I don't even know what report he's talking about.  I'm 

presuming that it's a Deloitte & Touche accountant's report of 

either FCL's holdings or some internal report carried out for 

FCL.  It certainly . . . it does not seem to be a report carried out 

for the government or for NewGrade.  So whatever he's got to 

offer to forward to us, we'll take a look at.  I'll make that 

commitment. 

 

But I want him to make a commitment to me.  I want him to 

make a commitment to me and the taxpayers.  And what I 

would like you to do, sir, is to leave question period and go 

outside there, and tell the press and the public and the co-op 

movement that you and your party understand that the deal has 

to be renegotiated and you support the basic principles of the 

settlement as set out by Estey. 

 

I'll do this with Deloitte & Touche.  Will you do that on behalf 

of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, yes or no?  Will you do it, 

yes or no?  Or will you run -- or will you run? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Drought Assistance 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Minister of Agriculture.  Mr. Minister, many areas in the 

north-east, north-west, and the south-west parts of the province 

are suffering from serious moisture shortfalls.  If they aren't 

fortunate enough to get some rain in the next two weeks, this 

year's crop in a lot of areas may be a total write-off. 

 

In fact, Mr. Minister, some of the mustard and canola is not 

even coming up.  Mr. Minister, what contingency plans do you 

have in place to deal with the possibility of a crop failure this 

year, and no water in community pastures and no grass?  What 

will you do for these farmers in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, there is indeed some 

drought areas in the province.  I think it's a little premature to 

call for a crop failure at this time of the year yet.  Certainly 

there are some concerns, and immediate concerns are more to 

do with livestock and water and pasture, which is a much more 

immediate concern than crops, which we don't know until fall. 

But we do have a drought committee which has been struck, 

which is looking at possible solutions. 

 

The obvious solution would be to make it rain.  I haven't quite 

mastered that power yet, but certainly we are observing these 

areas and we'll do what we can with our resources to protect 

farmers in the drought areas. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Agriculture.  I 

know that you and your bureaucrats like to travel around the 

province promoting your agriculture discussion paper.  The 

problem is, Mr. Minister, while you talk and have these 

discussions, fields get drier, pastures get drier, water holes dry 

up.  And farm incomes, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, are also 

drying up. 

 

You just talk, talk, talk.  Yesterday you admitted sending 

mixed messages to the livestock producers by raising pasture 

fees, breeder fees, registration fees, brand fees and, by the way, 

taking away livestock cash advance.  Mr. Minister, you 

admitted yourself that your words don't match your actions. 

 

When are you going to start taking actions that do actually have 

a positive impact on livestock production in this province, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I think that we don't 

necessarily stop long-term planning because we have a 

drought.  We will continue to talk with our strategy people.  

We will continue to talk to livestock producers.  We do have a 

commitment to livestock production in this province and with 

very limited resources.  Again Agriculture has the same 

budgetary problems that Health and Education and everybody 

else has, occasioned by the $16 billion deficit and the interest 

that's going out of this province. 

 

Also grain farmers are certainly very hard hit after a long time 

with low prices, but we are moving towards a strategy that we 

hope will increase livestock production in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, here's a list of 

things you've done to help the livestock industry: you raised 

pasture fees 31 per cent, brand fees 25 per cent, dealer 

registration for livestock 100 per cent, breeder fees 31 per cent; 

you eliminate the purchase of replacement bulls and 

community pastures; you eliminate livestock cash advance and 

add interest to the cost of doing business; you add telephone, 

power, SaskEnergy, SGI (Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance), Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister.  That's how you've 

helped the industry. 

 

When are you going to start taking some action that will make 

our livestock producers more competitive with those in other 

jurisdictions so that they can 



June 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2303 

compete on the same basis that others are?  When will you do 

that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, there is no question 

that we have made tough decisions in the agriculture area as we 

have elsewhere.  I think if you look at the livestock sector, they 

are faring somewhat better than the grain sector at this time. 

 

And I think I might ask the members opposite what they've 

done for the farm community, refusing to debate important 

issues to farmers like protecting the Canadian Wheat Board, 

like Crow rate, like interest-free cash advances and so on, have 

even refused to even debate or help us prevent the offloading 

that Ottawa is doing on our Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

And I think we are doing what we can.  I might ask what it is 

that the opposition is doing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, at the same time 

that you are increasing all these costs to cattle and livestock 

producers, they too are suffering from the dry conditions in 

many parts of the province.  At the same time you are 

increasing pasture fees, many of these pastures are running out 

of grass, Mr. Minister, and they're going to have to move their 

cattle out either early or some time during the summer. 

 

At the same time you're increasing the breeding fees, many 

cattle producers are having increased cost in feeding them.  

Why do you place all these added financial pressures on 

producers during a time when they can least afford it?  Why do 

you do that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, the answer to that is 

quite simple.  Because of a $16 billion debt and an $800 

million interest payment that's going out of this province, that's 

the reason for it.  And I hardly think that livestock producers 

are unfamiliar with droughts in this province.  They've had 

them . . . At all years we have droughts in some areas in the 

province, and these policies were decided in budget and not 

decided on the basis of whether or not there's good grass this 

year. 

 

Certainly we'll do what we can to help where the drought is.  If 

we can help with movement of livestock or feed or whatever is 

within our resources to do, we certainly will monitor the 

drought areas and help where we can.  But I don't think that's 

the . . . other than making it rain, there aren't a lot of easy 

solutions to those problems. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Last question to the member from 

Morse. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, you said in 

Moose Jaw yesterday, I guess we keep telling the livestock 

industry that we love you and we want you to expand and then 

we increase the grazing fees and who knows what else.  And I 

just gave you a list of who knows what else is, Mr. Minister. 

 

I can see you saying, we'd sure hate it if you didn't love us.  Mr. 

Minister, will you tell us what you're going to continue to do 

for the people in the province of Saskatchewan to increase the 

productivity; to increase the value of the value added products 

in grazing and in the grain industry. 

 

Would you show us where you can provide to the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan some hope in the type of conditions 

that exist in the north-east, north-west, and in the south-west, 

on the dry conditions that exist there? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, what I was trying to 

explain to the Stock Growers' Association is the difficult 

position we have with a $16 billion deficit, and obviously not 

hundreds of millions of dollars to pour into the livestock 

industry, nor do I think the livestock industry is asking for that. 

 

They're asking for what we can do to help them help 

themselves a bit, and they're not asking for hundreds of 

millions of dollars in hand-outs and they're not asking for us to 

make it rain.  They're much more realistic than the members 

opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SGI Contracts on Glass Repair 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to respond to a series 

of questions that were raised by the member from 

Souris-Cannington on Friday. 

 

The first question, Mr. Speaker, is: 

 

 . . . can you confirm, (Mr. Minister), that the criminal matters 

branch of Consumer and Corporate Affairs Canada has 

determined that the arrangement you made with the glass 

dealers association to be illegal price-fixing and can you 

confirm that the SGI adjusters who enforce this agreement 

may be subject to criminal prosecution? 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, we have contacted the criminal 

matters branch of Consumer and Corporate Affairs, but we are 

told that the letter from which the hon. member quotes is a 

letter that was sent to SGI adjusters from a Mr. U. Danielson.  

If the member opposite would have checked the Department of 

Consumer and Corporate Affairs, he would have found out that 

in no way does Mr. Danielson work for the department.  I 

would like to read into the record a letter SGI received from the 

chief of the criminal 



2304 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1993 

matters branch of Consumer and Corporate Affairs.  I quote: 

 

 I wish to advise you that Mr. Danielson has no authority to 

represent in any capacity the bureau of competition policy, 

Consumer and Corporate Affairs Canada.  Mr. Danielson is 

neither an employee of the department nor a . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  I would ask the 

member from Souris-Cannington to please be seated while 

another member has the floor.  I've recognized another 

member. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- So who is Mr. Danielson and who does he 

represent?  Maybe the member opposite can answer the 

question. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I'll ask the minister to make his 

answers brief and to the point, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- With respect to the question of illegal 

price fixing, Consumer and Corporate Affairs has not 

determined or at least notified SGI that it is price-fixing, but it 

is our legal opinion that auto glass dealers agreement does not 

constitute price fixing in any way, shape, or form.  The 

accusation of price fixing comes from Mr. Danielson, not from 

Consumer and Corporate Affairs. 

 

On the second question, Mr. Speaker, the opposite member, the 

member opposite accuses SGI of forcing glass dealers to sign 

this agreement.  Mr. Speaker . . . signed the agreement and that 

SGI adjusters are directing customers to only do business with 

glass shops that have signed the agreement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, nothing could be further from the truth, and the 

member opposite knows it; 111 of the 115 glass dealers in the 

province have voluntarily signed the agreement.  This means 

97 per cent of the auto dealers in the province agree with the 

arrangement. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, SGI does not direct business to and 

from any . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  I would not allow 

a minister that length to answer a question in oral question 

period, and I certainly won't allow him when he has the 

prepared text.  I recognize for a supplementary question the 

member from Souris-Cannington. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I 

in no way ever suggested that Mr. Danielson worked for SGI.  

On the contrary, he was working for some glass dealers.  Mr. 

Minister, you suggest that a certain number of dealers have 

signed on voluntarily into your program.  Mr. Minister . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member has a 

supplementary question -- no preamble -- supplementary 

question. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, what would be the result 

of not signing that agreement with SGI? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, the reason for the glass 

dealers signing with SGI is simply to make sure that we get the 

same . . . that the SGI customer gets the same price for glass 

repairs that are charged to anyone else.  And that's the basic 

reason why this agreement has been signed. 

 

The real question is: why should the SGI customers pay more 

for repairs because they have an insurance policy?  I'm sure the 

member opposite knows that answer.  And this is the basic 

reason why this has been done.  Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Question period has ended for 

the day. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I beg to ask leave.  I would like to 

introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: -- And while the members are granting leave to 

the Hon. House Leader, will the members also grant leave to 

the Speaker to introduce guests? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to 

introduce a group of businessmen to you and to the members of 

the Assembly.  Seated in the Speaker's gallery, I would like to 

introduce Giovanni Tomasello, the president of Tomasello Ltd. 

from Palermo, Italy.  If you just stand up and be recognized. 

 

Accompanying Mr. Tomasello is Giammarco Tomasello, head 

of merchandising; Vincenzo Piraino, head of production; Elio 

Brancaccio, financial consultant; and along with them, 

businessman from Toronto, Giorgio Piscitelli.  I want to 

welcome you here to the Assembly.  I know you're looking at 

business opportunities in Saskatchewan in the area of pasta.  

We welcome you here today and look forward to meeting you 

later. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1445) 

 

Hon. Mr. Rolfes: -- I want to take this opportunity to introduce 

to the Assembly a group of 22 grade 8 students from John Lake 

School in my constituency.  They are seated in the Speaker's 

gallery.  They are accompanied by their teacher, Grant 

Dougall; and chaperons, Amelia Moffatt and Darlene 

Vermette. 

 

I believe that this is the first school that I have had here during 

this session; I hope it's not the last.  And my understanding is 

that I will be able to meet with you later on.  I would be 

pleased to do that and share any experiences that you may have 

had in the Assembly with you later on this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



June 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2305 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

An Act to amend The Trade Union Act 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to move first reading of a 

Bill to amend The Trade Union Act. 

 

Motion negatived. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order in the galleries.  I think 

the member knows full well that there is to be order in the 

galleries, and please respect it. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave I move to 

government orders, Committee of Finance and Provincial 

Secretary estimates. 

 

The Speaker: -- If I have another outburst like that from the 

galleries I'll ask my security people to remove the people from 

the west gallery.  Could I have the Government House Leader 

please repeat. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave I move we 

move to government orders, Committee of Finance, Provincial 

Secretary estimates. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Provincial Secretary 

Vote 30 

 

The Chair: -- At this time I would ask the minister to please 

introduce the officials who have joined us here today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I 

welcome the opportunity to introduce the officials who are here 

to help us today.  I have the deputy provincial secretary, Mr. 

Howard Leeson, who is seated to my right; director of 

administration and finance, Mr. Bill Hoover, sitting behind me; 

and Catherine Dermody, executive assistant to the deputy 

provincial secretary.  And that is the officials who are here to 

provide us with the information that may be required. 

 

Item 1 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Welcome, Mr. 

Minister, and welcome to your officials today. 

 

Let's begin with item 1, administration, subvote PR01.  Can 

you tell me, Mr. Minister, what is your department's mission 

and mandate, and who is your client group? 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, the question asked 

by the member opposite is a good way to start.  And I want to 

respond by saying that the mandate of the Department of the 

Provincial Secretary is to coordinate and manage 

intergovernmental relations which is a very important and 

growing function in the government these days, particularly 

because of the significant actions being taken by the federal 

government in offloading, in what they're doing to major issues 

of importance to Saskatchewan such as the Crow rate, such as 

the removal of barley from under the jurisdiction of the 

Canadian Wheat Board, such as the negotiations on the free 

trade agreement, the negotiations on NAFTA (North American 

Free Trade Agreement), to name just some of the more 

significant ones. 

 

It is important if any province, and particularly Saskatchewan, 

is to effectively defend and protect the interests of the citizens 

of this province, that we are able to coordinate the various 

activities of different departments of government and different 

agencies who are doing the work on this so that we are better 

positioned to present our case on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan with the federal government. 

 

But there are other responsibilities in the mandate of the 

Provincial Secretary as well, Mr. Chairman.  This is the 

department that has the protocol services for the government; it 

has the communications, policy and French language services; 

and the department is responsible for the office of the 

Lieutenant Governor, the Legislative Building, and the 

Wascana Centre Authority. 

 

Many of these, particularly the major function of 

intergovernmental affairs, was transferred to the department 

when I was appointed as minister.  So some of these 

responsibilities that are listed here are responsibilities that have 

been added to the department since the time when that change 

was made. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

are you indicating then that your client group happens to be the 

citizens of the province of Saskatchewan?  I didn't quite 

understand from your response who your client group is.  I do 

understand from your comments what you have been primarily 

mandated to do.  Do you have a mission statement? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, obviously the client 

group of this department, as is of any department, is the 

citizens of Saskatchewan.  It may be that some departments 

have a specific identity with a particular field of service that 

that department maybe provided, or an area in which its policy 

may impact on.  But regardless of that, the client group of any 

department of government which is obviously funded by the 

taxpayers of this province are the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I outlined the functions of the department and its 

responsibilities.  The department, Mr. Chairman, is a relatively 

new department from the point of view of its expanded 

mandate so it does not have yet at this time 



2306 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1993 

what one would . . . as the member refers to, a mission 

statement.  But it has certainly some very direct and significant 

responsibilities from the point of view of coordinating 

activities in the government and certain policy evaluations in 

the government that have to be done, particularly during these 

times of the kind of financial circumstances in which we find 

ourself.  But it should be done even in good financial times. 

 

But if the member is saying, is there a mission statement that is 

written and published, at this point, it has not been because the 

department is so relatively new. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Your 

department has earned a nickname, and that nickname is: NDP 

(New Democratic Party) federal campaign central.  Can you 

confirm for me that no one in your department is performing 

partisan political functions during office hours while being paid 

by the taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, I can 

unequivocally confirm that.  That is not the role or the function 

of any department of government.  The people who are 

employed in the Department of Provincial Secretary are there 

because they have a specific role to play for whatever purpose 

their particular jobs are existing for.  But there is certainly no 

work that is being done in the Department of Provincial 

Secretary that's got anything to do with any kind of an election 

campaign. 

 

I know that that is the so-called nickname that the member 

opposite speaks of.  But in the world of politics I guess people 

who are in opposition have to pick something in which they 

want to say things, and that is their right.  But in this particular 

place, there is no validity to what is being said. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Let's move on to 

accommodation and central services, subvote 2.  There's a 50 

per cent increase in this subvote between 1992-93 and '93-94.  

And I'm wondering if you would explain that for me, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- That is -- sorry to have had to 

check with my officials; that's a pretty technical question -- but 

that is the amount that is there for the rental accommodation for 

the accommodation charges in this coming fiscal year which 

reflect a new pricing model used by the Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation. 

 

I don't know that the member, because she was not here prior to 

1991, will be familiar with this, but prior to 1993-94 

departments were given what was called a participation credit 

on their accommodation billings.  Now if the member were to 

ask me to explain all of that, I would find myself having some 

difficulty to do that because the former government couldn't 

quite explain all that when we used to ask them those 

questions. 

 

But nevertheless it gave an inaccurate reflection of the true cost 

of accommodation.  What this does is 

provide the true cost of the accommodation for the Department 

of Provincial Secretary, and they are reflected . . . what they do 

is reflect the fair market value. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Can you tell me, Mr. Minister, what capital 

expenditures are planned for the Legislative Building this year? 

 

(1500) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- There are no specific plans that we 

know of at this particular time. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

how much of this particular subvote is used to upgrade 

ministerial offices or suites? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm informed that there's a very 

small portion of the budget that is allocated if it is needed.  And 

the amount is about $80,000 . . . it is $80,000.  But it is not 

designated for any particular project at this particular time; it is 

there in the event that it is needed.  If a request is made for 

some changes, it will have to be justified.  And if there are no 

such expenditures, then that money will . . . if there are no such 

requirements that are requested, then that money will not be 

expended. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Mr. Minister, would you 

itemize the expenditures that have been made under this 

subvote and detail the similar expenditures that you have 

planned for this year?  Perhaps what you could do is provide 

that in written response for both myself and the official 

opposition. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- It's no problem.  And I appreciate 

the member's being prepared to wait for us to provide it 

because that's so much detailed information we wouldn't have 

that, but it's public information.  And in order to assist the 

members of the House and particularly the member who asked 

the question, my staff will prepare it and we will get it to you 

fairly quickly. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Mr. Minister, what is the cost 

of moving ministers around the building following a cabinet 

shuffle?  For instance, when you resigned as minister of 

Finance, I'm interested in knowing what the cost was of setting 

you up in a new ministerial office.  And similarly -- I will 

continue and ask a series of questions on this -- were those 

offices already in existence or did there have to be some 

constructive changes made?  And I'm wondering what the costs 

incurred were at the same time, for instance, of moving the 

former minister of Social Services into the Minister of Finance 

office. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- That's not an item that would be in 

the budget of the Department of Provincial Secretary.  That 

would be in the Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation and one would have to get the answers for those 

questions from the Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation. 



June 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2307 

I'm sure that if the member did not ask the question when 

SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) was 

in the House in committee, if she would contact the minister, 

that information once again is available. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Let's move on to item 3 then, 

communications policy and planning, which is subvote 3.  

Your department performs all of the central polling to the 

government in power and I'm interested what your department's 

policy is regarding polling.  I'm particularly interested in what 

types of questions you ask, with the regularity . . . with what 

regularity are your polls conducted? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Maybe we'll get some more details 

on the question as I give you the general answer. 

 

Mr. Chairman, there is no regularity for the vast proportion of 

the polling that may be done from time to time.  Because the 

way the system works, one, it is, all the polling of the 

government, is now coordinated through the Department of 

Provincial Secretary. 

 

There's good reason for that.  One, we have very scrupulously 

attempted as a government to save expenditures and money 

everywhere we can.  And by coordinating this polling, we're 

able to keep closer track of the polling requirements that 

Crown corporations, the various departments may have from 

time to time. 

 

Most of them do not poll regularly.  They will make a request 

because they have a need for some market research or polling 

and then that request comes to this unit in the Department of 

Provincial Secretary and then the process will be done. 

 

The firm that now does the polling won that particular contract 

through an open competition.  There's a tendering process.  So 

we have saved considerable money in that area as well.  So the 

taxpayer benefits and also we get better results. 

 

There is one system of polling that's called the omnibus polling 

which is intended to be done on a monthly basis, although I 

don't think that's always been the case.  There's some months in 

which the polling has not been done.  I don't have the questions 

with me that are asked, but once again, because we release all 

of the polling that is done and all of the analyses and all of the 

questions every three months and they're published, you can 

see . . . the questions are there.  They're available because 

they've been made public. 

 

And in July, first week of July, early in July we will table once 

again all of the polling that was done by various departments, 

agencies of government, or on behalf of them, and those 

questions and the answers and all of the analyses will be 

available to the public. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I have a 

question regarding the contract that you do have with CanWest.  

I'm wondering if you would be able to 

provide us, the official opposition and myself, with a copy of 

that contract and indicate how CanWest Opinion research is 

paid.  And what I'm trying to determine is if your department 

contracts for omnibus polling and then portions off the bills to 

various departments to pay.  Is this practice used for paying for 

polls?  I'm curious about that. 

 

And I do have an associated question which perhaps you can 

respond to at the same time.  Why are departments not 

responsible for reporting their own expenditures on polling? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- First of all, let me answer the 

member's first question.  The contract that the member asked, 

we will be able to provide that.  We don't have it here.  Once 

again, that's a public document.  As we do with all contracts 

unless there is some commercial reasons or other reasons 

which, as is a provision under the freedom of information, that 

we cannot or should not release, I'm informed there's no 

problem with this and we'll make that available. 

 

I understand, and I may be corrected here, but I understand that 

indeed polling costs by SaskTel, for example, are disclosed and 

the polling costs of various departments and the expenditures 

that the departments make, because the departments pay for the 

polls.  Provincial Secretary doesn't; it just coordinates that.  

That information is also disclosed, so maybe I misunderstand 

the question that the member from Greystone has asked. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I'm not talking about . . . there are 

differences between the Crown corporations and the 

departments that I'm talking about.  I'm wondering about other 

departments of government and if in fact the polling is paid for 

by those particular departments, not the Crowns. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm told that the departments pay 

for it on a per-question basis.  If they have a certain number of 

questions, they will pay for those questions on a per-question 

basis.  Then there's some technical term that . . . I am told they 

do journal vouchering which then accommodates that. 

 

But they certainly have to do the paying for it and they will 

have to disclose it.  It's got to be part of their budget, and it also 

has to be part of what they show in Public Accounts or 

provide information under freedom of information, if it's 

requested, at whenever time that may be so. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I take it, Mr. Minister, from your 

comments earlier that the people of this legislature are then 

able to have access to all of the questions asked by anyone who 

has conducted polls under your department's instructions.  I 

understood that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes.  I'd just make sure that we're 

clear.  The answer to the question is yes, all polling -- and this 

is a new procedure that has never been followed before, 

certainly not in the 1980s.  But we have made it very clear that 

we're going to live up to the requirements of the freedom of 

information. 



2308 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1993 

But even if it were not for freedom of information, it is an 

expenditure that we make on behalf of the taxpaying public of 

Saskatchewan.  It is an obligation of the government, therefore, 

to disclose what we spent the money on, how much we paid for 

that expenditure, and what we got for it.  And so we will do 

that. 

 

Now I want to qualify that because I don't want anyone to be 

misled.  The government may from time to time do certain 

polling on behalf of . . . or in preparation of the budget.  I don't 

want a member to take it from me that I am saying here that 

prior to the budget, information of that polling will be made 

available.  Because I think there is good reason why, in some 

cases, it should not be; reasons which have to do with people 

taking advantage of what may or may not be coming in the 

budget.  And I think as a responsible government, as 

responsible legislators, we have to protect against that.  So 

that's the only qualification I put on there. 

 

Now this to the best of my understanding has not happened.  

But from time to time there may be some specific polling done 

on behalf of the Executive Council at which time, under the 

present freedom of information, that would not have to be 

released. 

 

But I do not believe that that has taken place and I don't know 

of any plans to do that, but that's always a possibility. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Your polling is supposedly 

done by the government and it's not partisan in nature.  Can 

you confirm for me that your pollsters have recently been 

asking, and I quote, "who would you vote for?" Questions in 

polls that are paid for by the taxpayers of the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No, I can't confirm that because the 

pollsters have contracts with a lot of people.  And pollsters, as 

the member well knows, will sometimes, at their expense, do 

polling for themselves which then they market and sell to other 

clients.  But the government certainly does not pay for any 

voter preference questions. 

 

Certainly it does not pay for it since I became responsible as 

the minister responsible, and does not have any intention of 

paying that because, once again, that is not polling done on 

behalf of the taxpayer; that's polling done on behalf of a 

political party or a politician.  That being the case, that political 

party or that politician or that organization should foot the bill 

for that kind of an expenditure. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, this is really an opinion 

question here.  Why does your government consider polling a 

necessity at all?  If you're trying to find out what the people of 

the province want of their government, why don't you simply 

rely on your 55 government MLAs (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) who are sent here to represent the interests of their 

constituents and to act as the eyes and the ears of their 

constituents? 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Let me assure the members of the 

House, Mr. Chairman, that we indeed do rely on the 

information that the members of our caucus bring to us.  In 

fact, they're our best source of information.  That's why in . . . 

that's why we have regular caucus meetings, so that there can 

be an exchange of information, so that there can be a 

considerable amount of input by those members who are 

elected in their constituencies. 

 

But I think in today's modern age that one has to use a variety 

of information gathering because things change so rapidly.  

And so it's important for the government to provide several 

avenues for public input.  Certainly elected MLAs are one of 

those avenues.  Public meetings and consultations as we do, for 

example, prior to the budget is another very important means.  

Regular meetings with various organizations, whether it's the 

School Trustees Association or the chamber of commerce or 

the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour or the Saskatchewan 

Teachers' Federation are another important means; having 

public meetings are other ways, and yes, market research and 

polling is important in that mix as well. 

 

When you have those sources of information, your chances of 

making a more intelligent decision . . . The members and others 

may sometimes disagree on whether it was an intelligent 

decision, but in order to make those kinds of decision in today's 

rapidly changing economy and changing world, one should use 

all of the available means to be able to get the information. 

 

(1515) 

 

Now there are other kinds of very specific polling that are 

necessary.  There's polling that is done by Crown corporations 

on testing and finding out what their clients, that who they 

service, the customer, feels about the service that they're 

providing.  That's important too.  Some agencies may need 

market research because of the kind of work that they do. 

 

One that comes to mind again is SaskTel.  SaskTel today is in 

competition with other telecommunication industries and it has 

to be one step ahead of the competition, otherwise it's going to 

lose business.  So there are various reasons why you have to 

have polling. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  We are talking 

about $476,000 in a 15-month period, so that is a substantial 

amount of monies especially when it's likely that Crown 

corporations and some departments do do their own polling. 

 

Let's move on to item 4 which is the protocol office, or subvote 

4.  There is a zero per cent increase in salaries in the protocol 

office and a 10 per cent decrease in operating expenses.  Can 

you explain why one has stayed the same and the other has 

decreased? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The decrease is basically 



June 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2309 

what is a good example of how we have, as a government, 

saved in everywhere we can, but it's a reduction in the 

advertising for the Order of Merit program.  There is some 

advertising that is done for the Order of Merit program.  The 

member will know what that's all about because I think she's 

actually recommended people for this.  We have reduced the 

amount of advertising that used to be done in that and that's 

where the bulk of the savings is. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  With item 5, the constitutional 

and intergovernmental affairs, subvote 5.  This subvote was in 

the Department of Executive Council last year, and you show 

the 1992-93 estimates as salaries being 651,000; operating 

expenses being 324,000, for a total of $975,000.  In the '92-93 

Estimates, Executive Council shows the following figures for 

this subvote: salaries, 680,000; other expenses, 184,000; for a 

total of $864,000.  Can you explain to me why there's an 

increase of $111,000 between the reporting of these estimates 

from Executive Council that then went over to your 

department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- If I don't answer the member 

because I may have missed some of her question, I'm sure she 

will ask the supplementary.  But there are two components 

here, and some of which maybe is not clear.  But one . . . there 

was funding transferred from Executive Council because of the 

responsibility that's been transferred, but also there was some 

portion transferred from the Department of Justice because the 

constitutional component which used to be in the Department 

of Justice has now become part of intergovernmental affairs. 

 

And you see what we're trying to do here.  We're trying to 

combine responsibilities which are somewhat similar in nature 

so that we can better coordinate them and be more efficient in 

the delivery of those services that that particular agency -- in 

this case, the intergovernment affairs branch -- provides. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Am I to 

understand then that the additional $111,000 is really related to 

the costs that would have been incurred for constitutional 

affairs being in the Department of Justice? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Basically yes, I'm told. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Executive Council showed 12 

person-years associated with this subvote last year, and I'm just 

wondering if that number has changed and how many people 

are paid under this subvote in your department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- In response to the member, in the 

constitutional and intergovernmental affairs branch, there are 

10 full-time equivalent positions for '93-94; three of them are 

for the re-establishment of the telecommunication and 

broadcasting services branch which was formerly in the 

Department of Telephones. 

 

The member will, I'm sure, appreciate the fact that 

there are many things happening in telecommunications 

including the recent legislation in the House of Commons to 

which I'm quite happy to say we were able to have an 

amendment introduced so that SaskTel is not being affected for 

at least another five years.  And that's very important for 

Saskatchewan and for SaskTel. 

 

But the whole area of telecommunications, in our view, is 

growing in importance and we need to be geared up in order to 

be able to address the policy issues that come with that.  So 

that's why we have the three full-time equivalents in that area 

which is part of this branch. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, just for some clarification 

then.  What you're saying is that the number has changed, but 

indeed it's not . . . I was asking of 12 person-years. I'm just 

wondering how that's converted.  Are you talking about the fact 

that you have 10 positions, 3 of which are associated with 

communications? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I guess I wasn't clear.  It's 10 

positions. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  So the individuals actually 

paid under this subvote in your department would equal 10? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Okay.  I note with item 6, and I just wish it 

for the record, that the expenses of the Lieutenant Governor 

have not changed.  So since the expenditures are the same, I 

shan't ask any questions about that. 

 

Item 7 is the office of French-language coordination, subvote 7.  

Salaries increased by 16 per cent and operating expenses 

decreased by 32 per cent, and I'm wondering again if you will 

explain please the opposite movement of these two categories 

of expenditure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The answer to the question of why 

there is reduction is because once again one of the cost-saving 

measures, because of more efficiency. 

 

In the past translation services were provided under a contract, 

which we had to live up to the obligations of.  What's happened 

now is that we provide translation services on a personal 

services basis.  So we are able to reduce the expenditures 

through that kind of a new arrangement. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I understand then that the operating 

expenses could be decreased in that way, but could you provide 

a comment regarding the increase in salary by 16 per cent?  

Have you increased the number of individuals, or is this 

directly related to salaries for the people who were there 

before? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm informed that what's happened 

here is that the translator on contract was paid under operating 

expenses in the past.  What we 



2310 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1993 

have done is appropriately moved this individual . . . 

identification of the expenditures under the area of salaries 

because that's where it should be.  It was simply a transfer of 

where the expenditure vote is recorded. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Having required 

translating services when my executive assistant is unavailable, 

I know how much money it costs.  So I quite understand that 

there would be a 16 per cent increase. 

 

What portion of these expenses are paid by the federal 

government?  And I have an accompanying question which I 

will pose as well: has that cost sharing been affected by the 

recent federal budget, and if so, how? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- This is paid entirely by the federal 

government.  It's a transfer of money specifically for this 

particular thing, for this particular enterprise, and I am told that 

there has been in fact a 10 per cent cut in the amount that's 

budgeted here. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'm sure that you 

are anticipating, as most of us, that that will likely decrease 

again after the next federal budget. 

 

Let's move on to item 8, the Wascana Centre Authority 

maintenance subvote 8.  Could you please detail for me what 

types of expenditures are under this subvote. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- It's simply a grant funding to the 

Wascana Authority for the maintenance and grounds upkeep.  

And then the Wascana Authority will determine where those 

and how those expenditures are allocated.  But it's a block grant 

that we make to the Wascana Centre Authority, and then the 

board of the Wascana Centre Authority makes those 

determinations on the advice of their staff. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, is the weekly provision of 

fresh flowers and plants to ministers' offices provided for under 

this subvote?  And I am wondering, while you're considering 

this, how much does this particular service cost? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm not sure if we have that.  But 

we can find that out from the Wascana Authority.  The answer 

to the question: yes it is a service that is provided, has been for 

some time.  But that is under review at the present time. 

 

The member will know that I am now on the board of the 

Wascana Authority which doesn't mean much other than I'm 

just another member of that board because it's a partnership 

between the city, the University of Regina, and the 

Government of Saskatchewan, on an equal basis.  But that kind 

of an expenditure . . . because there has been a reduction in the 

amount of funding to the Wascana Authority.  But that's 

certainly an area in which the Wascana Authority will be 

looking and is reviewing as to whether it is something that 

should continue. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I am 

under the understanding that when this subvote was under 

another department, that in fact the expenditure was 

somewhere around $250,000.  So I am interested in receiving 

the number from you.  And when you're answering that 

question I'd asked previously in writing, perhaps you could 

provide that for me as well. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I can assure the 

member of that, that that's . . . Once again I don't think there's 

anything confidential there.  I will request of, through my staff, 

of the Wascana Authority to provide that information, and I 

will make it available to the member from Greystone. 

 

(1530) 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I do have a 

comment.  I am glad that this is under review.  And as much as 

I enjoy as much as anyone how beautiful many of the 

arrangements are in people's offices, a lot of people I do think 

would question priorities when we consider how many budgets 

have been cut to so many important things like prescription 

drugs or the health care and other ways.  So I'm very pleased 

that you're going to be reviewing this. 

 

I will end with item 9, the Canadian intergovernmental 

conference secretariat, subvote 9.  Can you tell me what 

conferences of premiers, ministers, or senior officials are 

planned in Saskatchewan this year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, once again there just 

recently was a major conference, ministers of Environment, 

which took place in Regina, and I am not familiar with other 

such events that are scheduled for Saskatchewan.  We know of 

none.  My staff tells me we know of none, but we will check 

again in the event that some department knows some of this 

information.  We'll do the scan in order that we can gather it all 

together and we'll make that available. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  What I'm really 

curious about are the efforts that are being made by the 

province to ensure that interprovincial meetings take place in 

our province.  I know that there should be some view as to 

whether or not there's some rotation of conferences held across 

the country, and it would be interesting to note if that's done on 

an equitable basis. 

 

I actually believe that there's a disproportionate number of 

conferences that are held in locations like Victoria, even 

Whitehorse, to the exclusion of other provinces like 

Saskatchewan, so I would appreciate you looking into this and 

seeing if there's a way that we can have this come to our 

province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Once again, the member is correct; 

most of these interprovincial meetings are done on a rotational 

basis.  For example, the western first ministers, or the western 

premiers' meeting was to be held in Canmore, Alberta last 

month, but was delayed because of the election that's taking 

place in Alberta. 



June 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2311 

We hope that that meeting will be again put into place before 

this year, because we think those are very important occasions 

to get together and talk about western Canadian concerns so 

that once again we in western Canada . . . where we can 

develop common positions when we go to meet at a first 

ministers' meeting or ministers' meetings on a national basis. 

 

I can assure the member that it is in our interest to make sure 

that when it is Saskatchewan's turn that those events take place 

in Saskatchewan.  And we will certainly be not walking away 

from the opportunities when they present themselves.  As a 

matter of fact we will be promoting Saskatchewan as we are 

doing through the Minister of Economic Development and 

Trade and other ministries in every way that we can.  This area 

that the member raises is not going to be less important than 

any other. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  You raise 

something, of course, that's been near and dear to my heart and 

I've on several occasions made arrangements for Mr. Axworthy 

to meet with both the Premier as well as the Minister of 

Economic Development to talk about the things that can be 

done to coordinate and to integrate various things on the 

Prairies so that we do come from a Prairie perspective and we 

should be doing that in agriculture; we should be doing it in 

economic development. 

 

In fact we can be even looking at some areas like 

telecommunications that you mentioned earlier.  With the 

federal government's change as far as their own policy is 

concerned, we in fact are going to be placed in a very difficult 

position in five years time.  It would be quite different if we 

had an Alberta-Saskatchewan-Manitoba telecommunications 

system that could be an economy of scale and compete with 

anywhere in the entire world.  So I do hope that you will 

explore that much more intimately than has been done in the 

past. 

 

At this time I just wish to thank you very much, Mr. Minister, 

for your answers and to thank your officials for their assistance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you.  I want to just briefly 

respond to the member opposite and repeat, I guess, in a 

different way what I said earlier, that we believe that it is 

important where we can, to work towards coordination of 

services that can be coordinated.  There are some arrangements 

that exist now between Saskatchewan and other provinces 

where we buy training spaces for some particular training areas 

at the University of Manitoba and they do the same thing in the 

University of Saskatchewan, and I think we should continue to 

pursue that.  So coordination is important. 

 

If the member is talking about some form of political union -- I 

don't think she is, but there are those who talk about some form 

of political union -- that's a different question altogether.  In the 

interests of the Saskatchewan taxpaying public, both from the 

point of view of how we spend the money and also from the 

point of view how we can deliver needed service to 

them most effectively and most efficiently, yes, we are 

interested in exploring and working with other provinces on 

coordination. 

 

In fact, one of the first things that I did when I was able to take 

on my responsibilities as minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

is to begin to meet with Intergovernmental Affairs ministers.  

And I've been to Alberta and I've been to British Columbia, and 

I have met, prior to that, with the Minister of Finance from 

Manitoba to talk about these things.  And we will continue to 

work on this, and it no doubt will be one of the major items on 

the agenda of the western premiers' meetings, whenever that 

meeting takes place. 

 

I thank the member for her appreciation for the assistants we've 

got here, and I appreciate the constructive questions that she 

has asked of the different expenditure areas of the Department 

of Provincial Secretary. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, 

just one word before I start.  First I'd like to welcome the 

officials of the minister, Mr. Chairman.  I'd just like to say this, 

Mr. Chairman, that we're the official opposition and I'm the 

critic for the Provincial Secretary, and I was standing on my 

feet and I thought you would recognize me before the member.  

And I understand that maybe you can't see, but I . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  The member has been around a long time 

and should know better than to question the Chair when the 

Chair makes a ruling. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I'm not questioning the Chair, Mr. 

Chairman.  All I was saying, I know it's difficult for you to see 

me when I'm standing here for the . . . that's all I was saying, 

Mr. Chairman.  I don't see anything wrong with that. 

 

Mr. Minister, first question I'd like to ask you is: would you 

provide the names of your ministerial staff, provide the names, 

job descriptions, qualifications, and salaries of your staff. 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the member for Yorkton on his feet? 

 

Mr. Serby: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm begging leave of the 

Assembly to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Serby: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wish this afternoon 

to introduce to you and members of the Assembly, seated in the 

Speaker's gallery, a group of seniors from the constituency of 

Yorkton. 

 

And I think very appropriate, Mr. Chairman, that to echo the 

words of the Minister of Social Services yesterday, being that 

it's Seniors' Week, who indicated that the appropriate 

recognition needs to be provided to acknowledge the wisdom 

and the 



2312 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1993 

contribution that seniors have made to the betterment of our 

province. 

 

And certainly when I look into the gallery this afternoon, Mr. 

Chairman, I see a number of people who I know personally and 

appreciate very much the work and the contribution that they 

have made for the betterment of my community and the district 

of Yorkton. 

 

So I want to ask all members of the Assembly to join with me 

in welcoming the seniors from the constituency of Yorkton and 

area.  I'll be meeting with them in the next little while.  I expect 

that they've brought some refreshments for me, Mr. Chairman, 

and we might enjoy some of that.  So I ask the Assembly to 

join with me in welcoming seniors from Yorkton. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Provincial Secretary 

Vote 30 

 

Item 1 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, may I extend my 

welcome to the people in the gallery as well. 

 

In response to the member's question, yes, I can provide that 

information.  I want to point out that although under the policy 

where we have now a consistent policy in the government 

where each minister can only have a certain number of staff 

and there's categories of what their salary categories should be, 

and each minister's office is allocated a staff of six, three of 

whom can be secretarial responsibility people and three of 

whom can be what one would call, as I used to be accustomed 

to in the 1970s, as executive assistants.  But they're now all 

called ministerial assistants. 

 

So in my office there are only four, rather than the six.  And 

they are the following: there is Donna Fincati, who is paid 

$2,893 a month; Lisa MacMurchy, who is my senior secretary, 

minister's secretary, who gets paid at $3,092 a month; Joanne 

Strand, who is a junior secretary, at $2,141 a month; and my 

chief of staff, Lois Thacyk, who is paid $4,221 a month.  And I 

have on a temporary basis as a summer student, Mr. Carlo 

Binda, who gets paid $1,806 a month. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, that's your 

entire staff that runs the Provincial Secretary, plus your other 

new additions?  Could you clarify that, Mr. Minister, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Sorry.  Because there is, as the 

member is correctly pointing out, there was a recent change in 

responsibilities, now I have also the responsibility for the 

Department of Education.  The minister's staff who were in the 

Department of 

Education with the former minister are still in that office and 

serve me until at least this legislative session is completed, 

because there's an expertise and a knowledge there which is 

important to me.  I'm busy running to catch up on all I need to 

know in the Department of Education because I have not been 

there for some time. So that staff is still there, but they're staff 

who are under the Department of Education and not part of the 

Provincial Secretary. 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  I'd like the group of government 

members in the back to find their own seats and to break up the 

meeting.  The purpose for which we are here is to consider the 

estimates for the Provincial Secretary.  I cannot tolerate any 

other proceedings in this room to implicate those proceedings. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Yes, I 

understand that, Mr. Minister.  I just wanted to clarify that; I 

figured you should have more staff than just that amount.  And 

that's quite understandable that you've taken over the new 

position of Department of Education, and there would have to 

be more staff, and I accept that. 

 

Mr. Minister, when you took over Provincial Secretary, when 

you retired from being minister of Finance and you . . . I don't 

know whether you moved to a new office or not.  I presume 

you did, but it doesn't make any difference.  Did you inherit 

any staff from the previous minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The answer is no, not in the 

minister's . . . not ministerial staff, no. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, so you're 

saying that the staff that you outlined for me a few minutes 

ago, that was all new staff that was hired by you when you took 

over your new position? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No, the staff who is with me now 

have by and large been with me for some time, and they were 

the same staff who were with me when I was the minister of 

Finance.  When I moved to a different office with my new 

responsibilities, my staff came with me.  So there was no new 

staff that were employed because of the change that took place, 

other than the addition of Mr. Binda, who is there as a summer 

student, assisting us for a short period of time. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Minister, are all your staff 

working in the legislature?  Do you have any staff located 

anywhere else, outside the legislature? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- They're all located in the legislature 

in my office in room 204 and not anywhere else. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Have any of your 

staff received salary increases since initially hired? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes, there have been two changes.  

Ms. Fincati was hired originally as the lowest-level ministerial 

assistant.  She has . . . when I lost my intermediate assistant, 

she was then 



June 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2313 

transferred to that position with the responsibilities that come 

with that and therefore is being paid at the salary level of an 

intermediate assistant.  So because she moved to a different 

position, she gets paid a different amount of money which is 

more than she did when she was paid as a junior. 

 

Also, Ms. Lois Thacyk, who has been in an acting position as 

my chief of staff for some time but being paid at her previous 

level which was an intermediate position, has now been 

appointed as my chief of staff officially and therefore gets paid 

at the salary level of a chief of staff or the senior ministerial 

assistant. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- So, Mr. Minister, it looks the same as other 

departments that I've had involvement with in estimates -- if 

you want an increase in wages, the best is to move around a 

little bit. 

 

We had this happen here last week, as you'll know, Mr. 

Minister, where . . . I'm not saying that it wasn't an okay raise 

in salary that you had here because I don't understand the 

circumstances, but we had some cases where a worker from 

Environment goes over to Municipal or Rural Development 

and then the other one goes back and then they get into a new 

wage level. 

 

I think when we're talking about cut-backs, Mr. Minister, and 

we're talking about . . . you're trying to tell the world out there 

you're cutting back, and then doing these things, I don't 

understand why anybody's getting increases. 

 

Just one question.  This Lisa MacMurchy that works for you, is 

that any relation to Gordon MacMurchy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No.  Before I answer that, let me 

correct an error that I made in my previous answer.  The 

change was not for Ms. Donna Fincati; it was Lisa 

MacMurchy, who the member opposite was speaking about, 

who did have an increase because she moved to the senior 

position, and not Ms. Fincati as I said earlier.  And I apologize 

for that error. 

 

But let me point out to the member opposite -- because the 

question of cost-saving is very important and I'm sure that he 

agrees with me on that and I'm sure most people in 

Saskatchewan do -- we have made significant savings in the 

cost of ministerial assistants in ministers' offices. 

 

Now for the interest and the information of the member, I'll 

point out how.  I'll compare April to April, 1991 to 1993.  In 

1991 there were 115 ministerial assistants; in the present 

administration there are 93.  The total annual salary dollars 

spent for ministerial assistants in April of 1991 was 4 million; 

the amount of dollars that is spent on ministerial assistants 

April '93 is 3.4 million.  So in total terms there has been a 

saving. 

 

And I don't say that in any kind of a critical or argumentative 

way.  I just want to make sure because 

people read Hansard, that the facts are on record here.  So we 

have made those savings. 

 

What has happened, Mr. Chairman, is that prior to us repairing 

the system, there was no regularized system under which 

ministerial assistants were appointed. 

 

Under the former administration there was an ad hoc system.  

And the minister might hire somebody in his office and pay 

one kind of salary.  Another minister may hire somebody else 

and pay another kind of salary.  Several ministers hired people 

who were not paid through their departments or worked in their 

offices but were paid by Crown corporations. 

 

What we said, partly because it's more open, but partly because 

it's important to regularize, we have now classifications.  And a 

minister may hire an assistant in any one of those 

classifications.  And he can hire one person in that particular 

classification so that it is clear what the salary should be. 

 

Although it is not required, we also make those agreements 

public and we publish them.  And that's no doubt why the 

member leads to the question, because that information is 

public and so it should be.  So that the public can know what 

the salaries are; who the people are that are being paid.  And if 

there is a movement from one particular job to another, that 

should also be disclosed, as it is. 

 

Just because I think this is important, Lisa MacMurchy is not in 

any way a relative of Mr. Gordon MacMurchy.  I think the 

member probably knows that.  I think the little story that came 

out in the press one time because of some comments made 

were really quite unfortunate, and people should check their 

information before they say that.  Because it did cause some 

concern to Ms. MacMurchy who's a hard-working individual, 

who's making a living by doing important work in my office.  

She could be doing it somewhere else.  There's no relationship 

whatsoever, I want the member to know. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- That's fine, Mr. Minister.  And that's what I 

was doing, was checking to make sure. 

 

Well anyway while we're talking about her, when did she first 

begin working for government?  When did she first work for 

government?  When was her first-time employed by 

government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- She was appointed when I was yet 

the minister of Finance in July of 1992. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well that's fine.  Nothing wrong with that.  

It's just that whether she's Gordon MacMurchy's daughter or 

not, she's still a political appointment anyway. 

 

Anybody that was appointed to your government that wasn't 

working for government prior, don't tell us they aren't a 

political appointment because they all are.  If they didn't have 

an NDP card, you know they couldn't get into your office, and 

let's face that.  So don't let's say they're not political 

appointment. 



2314 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1993 

I would have been quite happy if she had of been related to 

Gord MacMurchy because I had great respect for Gordon 

MacMurchy.  I just wanted to know and make sure that you're 

doing what you said you wouldn't do -- there'd be no political 

appointments. 

 

Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, we'll move off those now.  We 

want to move along here. 

 

Do any of your assistants travel in conducting their work, from 

your department?  Do they travel outside of Regina, like? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- When required, yes, my assistants 

will travel.  I don't think that there has been a lot of travel by 

any of my assistants. But if it was required for an assistant to 

accompany me to a health meeting, some of which I attended 

on behalf of the government, I would have taken an assistant 

with me because it is important to have somebody who will 

keep notes and make sure that if there is the need to get back 

with information, that we can get back to it, because I think 

that that's an obligation that we all should live up to.  So yes, 

there will be some travelling. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, just for the 

sake of time, what I would do here, Mr. Minister, I have 

several requests along this line of questioning.  I'm not 

expecting you to answer the questions I'm going to ask today.  

It would take too long.  So I'm just going to read them out and 

your staff can look in Hansard tomorrow or whatever, if you 

can't keep up with me, and I will be satisfied just to get the 

answer at a later time. 

 

Please provide me with the total your department has spent on 

ministerial assistant travel expenses.  I would like full details of 

this travel, including the assistant's name, total cost per trip, the 

purpose of the travel, mode of travel, who they accompanied, 

departmental officials, and destination.  I'd be quite satisfied 

just to get those.  Mr. Minister, will you agree to that, just to 

give me that at a later date? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes, I will provide all the 

information that is relevant with respect to travel and we will 

accompany it with a nice letter from me to the member from 

Arm River. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  And the next one 

is ministerial travel. And I'd be satisfied with the same thing 

here too because I realize that there's a lot of work to this and 

we'd be here a long time if we have to have your official look 

all these up.  Please provide total spent on ministerial travel.  

Provide full details of travel including purpose, who 

accompanied you, mode of travel, destination, what was 

accomplished by the trip, how many trips did you make to 

Ottawa or otherwise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes, that will be made available. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Now the next 

one, why did the operating expenses increase for 

accommodation and central services, increased over $500,000? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I 

wanted the staff to give me the exact response here so that I 

don't mislead the member in any way.  I responded to this when 

the member from Greystone addressed this in part.  But the 

accommodation charges in 1993-1994 reflect a new pricing 

model used by the Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation.  The pricing system prior to 1993-94 was such 

that departments were given what was called a participation 

credit on their accommodation billings, and in 1992-93 the 

credit given to the Provincial Secretary was approximately 47 

per cent. 

 

What we do now is that the new charges now reflect fair 

market value which is an accurate way of displaying what the 

real costs are.  And therefore that's why there is this change in 

that particular subvote. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, how many staff are employed 

in this area?  How many total staff? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well there are no staff in the 

Provincial Secretary; the staff here would be employed by the 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation. 

 

But since I'm on my feet, let me also conclude something else 

in response to the member's previous question.  And I think it's 

important to point out that even though there is a change in the 

amounts that are displayed because of the new fair market 

value process that is being applied here, it should be important 

-- and I want to put on the record -- that there is no overall 

increase in expenditures within the government because of the 

change to the new pricing model, because in previous years the 

participation credit was simply absorbed by the Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation. 

 

Rather than simply being absorbed it is now displayed up front 

in each of the departments so that the public can know what the 

cost really is. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Can you get me that answer?  If you did 

give it to me, I didn't pick it up, Mr. Minister.  How many staff 

are employed in that area? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, no staff are 

employed in the Provincial Secretary.  All of the services that 

are provided there would be staff employed in the Property 

Management Corporation.  So there is no staff involved here on 

our part. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, then in the Department of 

Provincial Secretary, do you or do you not have a deputy 

minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes, indeed I have.  I introduced 

Mr. Leeson at the beginning.  He's seated at my right, Dr. 

Howard Leeson, who is here as the deputy minister of 

Provincial Secretary on leave from the University of Regina. 



June 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2315 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I'm sorry, there was talk in the background 

when you introduced him and I didn't pick up what their 

positions were.  And I'm sorry about that.  It just dawned on 

me, did you have a deputy minister here with you today or do 

you have one. 

 

Mr. Minister, I'll go back here and ask some questions.  In the 

entire department, in all government departments you're talking 

about increases . . . or decreases in the percentage -- 3 to 8 per 

cent reductions in their budgets pretty well through the whole 

budget book.  It's actually fairly consistent.  Most departments 

decreased, all except this Provincial Secretary department.  

Why was there such a large, massive increase in funding? 

 

And I know that the member from Greystone did ask some 

questions on that but I didn't pick it up.  I was gone part of the 

time.  So perhaps you could give me an overrun on why the 

massive increase in the Provincial Secretary department. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, let me respond to 

the member's question.  And here we face a problem of the way 

expenditures are displayed.  And unless you look at all of the 

information that's available, sometimes it could lead you to 

come to a wrong conclusion. 

 

I have here the estimates for the Department of Provincial 

Secretary which, if you look at only the estimates of the 

Provincial Secretary for 1993-1994, you could come to the 

conclusion that there is a major increase in expenditures of 

some $800,000 which is alleged by some people. 

 

But that is insufficient information.  Because you also have to 

consider the supplementary estimates for 1992-1993 where 

there was provided to the Department of the Provincial 

Secretary a number of expenditures totalling, under 

administration, $513,900 which one has to take into 

consideration.  And that was done before the new 

responsibilities of the department were established when I 

became the minister and we reorganized the government so that 

intergovernmental affairs and other responsibilities became 

part of the Provincial Secretary. 

 

So in fact the increase in the funding, when you look at all of 

the previous expenditures, is only $300,000 . . . $345,000, 

sorry; I just wanted to be correct here.  And those increases for 

1993-94 is because they include such areas as the expenditure 

for a minister's office, the deputy's office, the policy evaluation 

and coordinating unit, and systems support and operating 

expenses for the entire department.  Those are generally the 

areas in which those increased expenditures are going, but 

they're not really $800 as one could quite correctly, although in 

error, reach by looking only at the Estimates.  If you look at the 

Supplementary Estimates, you will see that that increase is only 

$300,000 because of the new functions that the department is 

responsible for. 

 

(1600) 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, I'm not just sure that I 

understand what you're saying there.  Could you point out to 

me . . . I've got the Supplementary Estimates in my . . . and I 

didn't look at that, and I apologize.  I didn't look at it.  Because 

naturally when I look at it, Mr. Minister, when anybody looks 

at the Provincial Secretary, you see estimated 1993-94, 1.145 

million compared to 311,000; it does give you the approximate 

. . . And the end vote, the subvote for the Provincial Secretary, 

it's just about a million dollars more. 

 

You go to the last page, on page 104, it's talking about six eight 

to five eight.  It's a million dollars more.  So naturally it would . 

. . So I think there's a million dollars that we have to account 

for here some place.  So can you show me in this here, in the 

Provincial Secretary supplementary estimates, where a million 

dollars comes in here.  There has to be a million show up here, 

not 800,000 -- $1 million.  If you could just explain it, I'll 

follow you through there, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I want to make sure that we're 

talking about the same thing.  I thought that the member's 

previous question dealt with the administration subvote.  And 

the answer that I gave to the member on the administration 

subvote is correct. 

 

Now I think the member from Arm River is asking about the 

overall increase in the department expenditures, which is based 

on 1992-93 as opposed to 1993-94, an expenditure of close to 

more than . . . an increase of more than a million dollars.  But 

you've got to remember that is not necessarily an increase in 

the overall increased expenditure of the government because 

what's happened here is that we've taken responsibilities that 

used to exist in other departments and moved them to the 

Department of the Provincial Secretary, and therefore the 

expenditure in the Provincial Secretary will increase but there 

will be a similar decrease in expenditures in places where those 

responsibilities used to exist. 

 

And I'll give the House some examples: constitutional and 

intergovernmental affairs transferred from Executive Council 

to Provincial Secretary and protocol office transferred from 

Executive Council to Provincial Secretary; the addition of 

telecommunications and broadcasting. 

 

Now there is some new responsibilities; policy evaluation and 

coordination is new.  That will involve three person-years. 

 

And then of course there is something which we addressed 

earlier, and that is the Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation pricing change, where we put a more accurate 

price on accommodation, which will also increase the 

expenditure here.  And that basically, I think, explains why 

there is that kind of a difference between 1992 and 1993. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- All right, Mr. Minister.  You can say you've 

transferred some other parts of government to the . . . some 

came from the Executive Council.  And 



2316 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1993 

you said how many . . . What transferred from the Executive 

Council to Provincial Secretary?  Could you repeat that again?  

What was the Executive Council and what was the dollars and 

cents there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The transfers from Executive 

Council were: the Canadian intergovernmental affairs 

conference secretariat transfers from Executive Council to the 

Provincial Secretary; intergovernmental affairs transferred 

from Executive Council to Provincial Secretary; protocol 

office, the same kind of transfer, and the communications, 

policy, and planning transferred from Executive Council to the 

Provincial Secretary. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, it's so easy for you to stand 

here.  We're talking a million dollars and you're asking for a 

million dollars more in funds for the Provincial Secretary's 

department.  You stand up and you read off some different 

departments that is transferred here, and then some of their 

estimates, I suppose, are even gone.  But we have the 

Executive Council estimates coming up. 

 

Now if we ask in Executive Council estimates, will they be 

able to tell us the dollars and cents saving that's been saved by 

transferring this?  And I wanted to know what . . . we'll just 

worry about right now Executive Council.  How many dollars 

is Executive Council? What's been transferred from there to 

your department?  How many dollars and cents is that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, the answer to the 

question is that I cannot say precisely to the member opposite 

that a particular responsibility was in Executive Council and 

transferred to Provincial Secretary and the full component of 

that expenditure was transferred over, because in some cases it 

actually reduced the expenditures from what used to be there 

before. 

 

For example, in intergovernmental affairs we used to have an 

Ottawa office with two personnel who we found . . . that 

particular operation was not very functional or very helpful to 

us.  That's been eliminated so there's actually been some cost 

savings. 

 

But if the member wants us to break that down and as best we 

can show what we have saved in each particular area, I'll 

undertake to provide that to him.  It's not very complicated, but 

we will have to do some work on that. 

 

But where there has been a responsibility taken from Executive 

Council and moved to Provincial Secretary, that will be a 

saving in Executive Council, but not necessarily the full 

amount because some of the support services that are there may 

still be there.  But the Executive Council should be able to 

provide you that when their estimates are here. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, it's so easy for you to stand 

up.  You have said, you've said to the member from Greystone, 

you've said to me, oh we've had a cut-back and we're trimming 

government, and you're trying to tell us you've trimmed the 

Provincial 

Secretary department.  Still you're asking for a million dollars 

more, then you can't tell us exactly what it costs by transferring 

these other departments . . . or rather, parts of departments to 

the Provincial Secretary's department. 

 

Now there should . . . If you're saying that you've got to cut 

back and you're saving the taxpayers' money, for goodness' 

sake, you should know exactly.  You knew that this was around 

Saskatchewan about the $800,000 that was put into your 

budget for campaigning right across Canada probably.  You're 

probably . . . We think until you can tell us otherwise that 

probably some of this $800,000 or a million dollars is using for 

funds some place for the federal campaign for all we know.  

Until you can give us some figures that are absolutely concise 

here, Mr. Minister, what else are we going to believe? 

 

You say you're cut back, you show us that you've trimmed, and 

you said other departments have trimmed, and still you're going 

to move A to B and B back to A.  And when we get to 

Executive Council, I want them to be able to say exactly the 

same figure that they've saved by transferring some 

departments to your department.  And I want you to give the 

same figure now that'll work out when we go to Executive 

Council. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I draw the member's 

attention to the Estimates on page 102.  And let's take these 

one at a time. 

 

In the communications policy and planning, the member will 

see that in 1992-1993 the expenditure was $532,000 and we're 

budgeting this year for $542,000.  Last year this responsibility 

was in Executive Council.  It is now transferred to the 

Provincial Secretary, so those numbers are pretty clear and 

straightforward. 

 

I now draw the member's attention to the protocol office where 

last year the expenditure was $392,000; it is this year budgeted 

for $372,000.  That's one other transfer that's been made from 

Executive Council to Provincial Secretary. 

 

Then to item number 5, constitutional and intergovernmental 

affairs.  Last year there was an expenditure of $975,000; this 

year it's $819,000.  Now this one may not be totally accurate 

because some of this might have been out of Justice, so we'd 

have to break that down. 

 

But intergovernmental affairs was a transfer from Executive 

Council to Provincial Secretary.  The constitutional part was a 

transfer from the Department of Justice to Provincial Secretary, 

but in global dollars, it's pretty straightforward. 

 

So the information is already in the book that the member asks 

for and I don't know what more I could say to be of assistance 

in providing an answer to his questions. 

 

I think there is one other one, on page 104.  Canadian 



June 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2317 

intergovernmental conference secretariat was in Executive 

Council; and it was $63,000 in last year's fiscal year and it's 

$64,000 in this fiscal year. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, I understand what you're 

doing here, and you're leading me back and forth.  And maybe 

you're explaining it right, but maybe not.  Maybe you're fooling 

the public; I don't know that.  And I don't know how we're 

going to get to the bottom of it in your department.  All I can 

say is maybe we should have a commitment from you that . . . I 

need to know the exact . . . of all the different parts of 

departments that have moved into your department. 

 

That's why it's kind of hard for us to follow through here, for us 

not to know, Mr. Minister, which other . . . I didn't know it till 

today that Executive Council moved some part into here, and 

that's explaining some of the things we needed to know.  And I 

appreciate what you've told us here, Mr. Minister. 

 

But for us to know exactly where this million dollar increase is, 

whether it's increase in salaries or less salaries or whatever, I 

want the commitment from you so that we have it when we go 

to the Executive Council.  Because I don't want to have to leave 

it and then we got no one else to go to because we can't come 

back to you. 

 

That every department or parts of department that has moved 

into the Provincial Secretary's department, if I could have it 

sent to my office, that's all I ask, of the complete breakdown of 

what the additions that you are . . . is costing this department, 

and what it should be saving some other department. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Be more than happy to do that.  

We'll provide what has been transferred from any other part of 

government to the Department of Provincial Secretary.  We 

will indicate to the member any increase in the budget that may 

have been there, but we will also indicate where there has been 

a decrease.  So that we make it very clear for not only the 

member, but for the House.  And we will make sure we do that 

so that the information is there, and we make sure that the 

Executive Council is ready to provide that information when 

their estimates are here as well. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  If I have your 

word on that, that's good enough, and then we can have 

something to go to Executive Council with, or some other 

departments with. 

 

Mr. Minister, these aren't just . . . maybe this isn't applicable to 

asking you here.  But I will ask you this: previous to being 

moved to your responsibility as Provincial Secretary, what 

minister was responsible for accommodation and central 

service? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- It was previously in the department 

of what used to be the department of Community Services, now 

Municipal Government, and I believe the transfer was made in 

October of 1992. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Also, Mr. Minister, 

communications policy and planning.  Just so we can speed it 

up, I have several so I'll maybe give you about three and then 

your staff can help you put it together: communications policy 

and planning, protocol office, constitutional and 

intergovernmental affairs.  I have several, but I'll give you three 

and then you can answer three at once.  It will speed things up . 

. . (inaudible interjection) . . . what minister was responsible for 

those prior to you coming to this office? 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, communications 

policy and planning was in Executive Council so it was under 

the responsibility of the Premier.  Protocol office, the same 

answer.  Intergovernmental affairs was the same.  

Constitutional was under Justice, Minister of Justice. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I have four more, Mr. Minister, asking the 

same question:  Lieutenant Governor, office of French 

language coordination, Wascana Centre Authority 

maintenance, and the Canadian intergovernmental conference 

secretariat. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The last one on the conference 

centre was in Executive Council, therefore it was under the 

responsibility of the Premier.  The Lieutenant Governor, the 

French languages unit, and the Wascana authority was in the 

department of Community Services. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- All right, thank you, Mr. Minister.  Okay, 

now those are the . . . that takes us back now to that request I 

gave you a few minutes ago, that we get all these transfers, we 

should be able . . . what's going to be additional million dollars 

or whatever approximately to your department, but we've got to 

be able to find that savings some place else in government.  

That's the question I'm getting at.  And so some of these 

estimates may be over; if not, but we can still get all those 

answers out of Executive Council. 

 

So if you will send that information I asked prior to my office, 

we can move on. 

 

Mr. Minister, I understand your department is still involved in 

several different advertising and what not.  Does your 

department have anything to do with advertising or for any 

work at all, do you have anything to do with Service Printers 

any more? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The answer is no, not that certainly 

we're aware of.  But I want to . . . in fact I don't even know of a 

Service Printers, but the answer to the question is no. 

 

I want to also, while I'm on my feet, correct an earlier answer 

which I gave.  I said that the office of the Lieutenant Governor 

was under Community Services; I was in error.  It was in the 

Department of Justice and the Minister of Justice would have 

been responsible. 

 

And I want to correct, just add and elaborate on my 



2318 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1993 

earlier answers on the increase in the budget of the Provincial 

Secretary.  Yes, a large part of that is because of transfers of 

responsibilities from other departments to the Provincial 

Secretary, so we can better coordinate some of these similar 

responsibilities.  But also some of that increase that you see 

there is because you have to take into consideration 

supplementary estimates for 1992-1993 which makes it less 

than a million dollars.  But also part of the reason is because of 

the new pricing system under the Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation.  I didn't want to let this go without 

clarifying that. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, you mean to tell me you 

forgot who Service Printers was, the big printing company that 

was the shareholder for all the NDP Party of Saskatchewan, 

and we used to talk about it back here in the '70s?  You mean 

your memory is not as good as mine, Mr. Minister?  And you're 

saying that . . . can anybody in your department know whether 

even Service Printers is still a printing company today or not?  

Maybe it's not involved in this department now, but maybe 

somebody knows something about it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- My department doesn't know about 

it and it's not my responsibility to answer on behalf of the New 

Democratic Party, nor should I.  But I think in the spirit of 

cooperation I can say to the member opposite, because I'm 

rather reasonably close to my political party, that Service 

Printers is no longer owned by the New Democratic Party.  The 

New Democratic Party does not own a printing company of 

any kind. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- That's all right.  It's been a long time since 

we talked about Service Printers, and I thought maybe we 

could just jog our memories a little bit.  The old Service 

Printers was the department that was owned by the NDP, and 

the government used to give a few hundreds of thousands of 

dollars worth of printing to every year.  But you're saying that 

that day has come and gone.  I'll take your word for it, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, I haven't got many more questions to ask.  I've 

got this one question.  I understand and I'd like to have you 

clarify:  is there polling from your department, polling from 

your government paid for out of your department?  Are you 

involved in polling?  There's nothing wrong if there is; I just 

want to clarify it, if your department pays for all of this. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- That one needs a little explanation, 

Mr. Chairman.  The polling that the government does, and the 

market research the government does, is now coordinated 

through one agency, and it happens to be in the Department of 

Provincial Secretary. 

 

Where there is polling done on behalf of the overall 

government, then that funding will be in the Provincial 

Secretary, and it will be paid through the Provincial Secretary. 

 

But where the polling is done, for example, on behalf of 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation, or on behalf of the 

Department of Health, or any other department, they will pay 

for the polling that is done on their behalf 

based on question-by-question pricing. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Could you give me an outline of what 

polling is paid for out of your department, and how much it 

costs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm told that there is $91,000 

budgeted for the omnibus polling in the Department of 

Provincial Secretary. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, what type of polling?  Polling 

for what? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I think, Mr. Chairman, if I were to 

sort of reply to all of the questions that are asked, it would take 

a considerable amount of time.  But I want to remind the 

member that all of the polling that was done was published two 

and a half months ago, and all the polling that's going to be 

done for -- let me go backwards -- June, May, and April will be 

released again in July, and all of that information is public 

information.  So the member can access that, or if he wishes we 

can provide it to him. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Now, Mr. Minister, I understand that, but if 

I just want you to put it on the record what type of polling, 

polling for what?  You're just saying that your polling was 

published.  I want you to put on the record what the polling 

was for. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to give the 

answer as I gave to the previous member who had asked the 

question, but the polling looks at a number of things.  It looks 

at what people view certain services that the government 

provides. 

 

For example, there have been questions on health care to 

determine whether people are reasonably satisfied or satisfied 

with the health services that are provided.  And the last poll 

that I remember, there was a question there on whether people 

were satisfied with health care in Regina and Saskatoon and 

generally province-wide.  And 74 per cent of the respondents 

said that they were. 

 

So there's an attempt made to find out public attitudes about 

various issues, and I only use that as an example so that the 

government, along with other information that we have, 

information that's provided by the department people, 

information that's provided by our caucus members, 

information that's provided by the opposition from time to 

time, information that we gather in public meetings and 

consultation processes, we want to know that what the 

government is doing is meeting the expectations of the 

population who pays the taxes. 

 

This is one way to do it.  There's a whole range of questions 

that they're asked in order to be able to determine that, but if 

the member wishes I can provide the entire package.  We don't 

have it here obviously.  It's available, but I can make sure that 

the member gets that. 



June 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2319 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well when you're asking questions on these 

pollings about how people view what you're doing in health 

care and what you're doing with the farm sector out there, we 

can go into . . . and perhaps the upgrader.  Perhaps we can go 

into anything.  How much of this is political polling, for your 

own political party? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- None. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well I expect you to say none from your 

seat, but I'd like you to stand up and put that on the record.  

And as minister I want you to say absolutely . . . well I want 

you to tell me how much political effects and helps you get 

from this polling to help the NDP Party of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, the way one pays 

for polling is you ask a pollster to do certain questions.  They 

will professionally develop the questions for you to make sure 

that you get a balanced answer.  We pay on a 

question-by-question basis. 

 

The member will see when we release the polling that's been 

done for the last three months, in July, there are no questions 

that one would call questions of a political nature. 

 

For example, there will be no questions that ask about how 

people's voting . . . may be leaning in their intentions to vote.  

That is not something that we will be paying from the 

provincial treasury out of taxpayers' dollars.  That's something 

that if the Liberal Party or the Conservative Party or the New 

Democratic Party, if they want that kind of information they're 

going to have to buy it from whoever they use as a pollster.  

But the taxpayer will not be the payee of that expense. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, I'd like your commitment that 

you would give me this entire package even though you say 

some of it's made public, or all or whatever.  I'd like that entire 

package sent to me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I can assure the member that I can 

give him that commitment, and my staff will prepare it for you.  

I am certain you will find it very good reading.  In most cases it 

will be good reading to put you to sleep because it's really quite 

that boring.  But yes, it's volumes, and we will get it for you. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, you're not trying to kid me, 

are you?  You wouldn't kid me that you'd have a poll come off 

about the Department of Health and it would say, you're doing 

this right and you're doing that wrong, that that doesn't end up 

in your caucus.  So don't try to kid me that it isn't going to be 

for political reasons because it's for sure that it's just automatic 

that if something came off, if the government did something in 

polling and the people are saying something is . . . we don't 

agree with what you're doing; we don't agree with closing 

hospitals; and we do agree with closing hospitals; we do agree 

that you're letting nurses go; we do agree with the wellness 

program; or we don't agree with the wellness 

program.  Or the polling may ask about the upgrader and what 

you're doing legislating instead of negotiating.  You'd be asking 

. . . maybe you could be asking questions.  And I don't know 

that, but whatever kind of questions you're asking. 

 

You might be asking questions in your polling about the GRIP 

(gross revenue insurance program) program from '91 to '92.  

You can't tell me that that doesn't end up in the political 

process, because it would have to, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm glad the member raised that, 

because I don't want to mislead anybody.  The caucus on the 

government side will have the same access to the polling as the 

member from Arm River, the same access as the media or the 

public of Saskatchewan because we are now publishing those 

polls.  No longer are polls, as used to be the case in the past, 

taken by the government never to be seen by anyone. 

 

We have undertaken as a matter of policy in response to the 

requirements of the freedom of information that when the 

government does polling, the polling will be made public.  So 

the member from Arm River will have the same access to it as 

everybody else, and I think that's the right approach and the 

right policy decision.  That makes it, I guess, from time to time 

any government uncomfortable.  Because when this kind of 

information is released, it's subject to debate. 

 

But I can speak for myself and my colleagues that we're not 

afraid of the debate, because sometimes that debate can be very 

helpful in helping the government decide what is the right 

decision on any one particular issue which is subject to a 

decision at any particular time. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, thank you for saying that and 

putting it that way because that's great if it's that way.  I just 

want to ask you this one question.  Will you commit to me that 

this government -- and I'm not talking about the NDP Party 

because naturally they got their right to do as the Progressive 

Conservatives have or the Liberal Party.  We can do all the 

polling we want and that's not the public's business.  But the 

Government of Saskatchewan, with taxpayers' money, will be 

publicizing every dollar spent in polling to the public of 

Saskatchewan.  Will you make that commitment, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Any dollar spent for polling 

purposes will be disclosed as it is being disclosed.  And I can 

assure the member of that. 

 

Now I want to qualify for the member from Arm River in the 

same way as I qualified for the member from Greystone, that 

there will be from time to time polling done for things like 

budget purposes.  I want to make it clear to the House and to 

the member opposite that when and if that is done, those kinds 

of polls will not be disclosed until after the budget is presented.  

It's a very narrow area in which I'm talking about. 



2320 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1993 

And I'm sure the member will agree that there is good reason 

for this.  It's the responsibility of any government, it's the 

responsibility of the Minister of Finance -- and I was once there 

and being accused by the Acting Leader of the Opposition for 

leading information out so that people could take advantage of 

it.  That's not the kind of thing that should happen. 

 

And polling geared for budgetary purposes may provide 

information to people who may take advantage of what may or 

may not be in the budget.  But although it may not be provided 

before the budget, that information will be made available 

after. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I appreciate that 

comment, and that's all the questions I have to ask at this time. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 30 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992-93 

Consolidated Fund 

Budgetary Expenditure 

Provincial Secretary 

Vote 30 

 

Vote 30 agreed to. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd just like to thank the 

minister and his officials for their answers and their quick 

response.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  And I 

want to express my appreciation to the member from Arm 

River for the questions that he asked and the comments that he 

has made, but I also want to express an appreciation to my staff 

who were here.  No minister can answer many of these 

questions unless he has staff or she has staff which are capable 

and do an awful lot of hard work to prepare, as this book here 

will indicate.  And I'm sure that all members would like to 

express their appreciation to our public servants for the 

diligence with which they perform their duties. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992-93 

Consolidated Fund 

Budgetary Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation 

Vote 46 

 

The Chair: -- I will ask the Minister of Agriculture to 

introduce his officials to the members of the committee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  To my 

right I have Dale Sigurdson, who is a deputy minister of 

Agriculture -- assistant deputy minister of Agriculture, pardon 

me.  I have Henry Schappert from Crop Insurance on my left 

and behind me Terry 

Tangjerd and Doug Matthies from Crop Insurance. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I guess there's a 

couple of questions I'd like to ask about.  To start with, Mr. 

Minister, do you have any of your staff paid for by Crop 

Insurance in the minister's office? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- There is no staff paid for in the 

minister's office from Crop Insurance at present. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Do you have an individual from your office 

who looks after the Crop Insurance responsibilities in your 

office? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We certainly have individuals; it's 

not always the same person.  Andy Prebushewski is the 

assistant who does most of it.  But also Tom Halpenny and 

other people in my office work with Crop Insurance, with case 

work and with Crop Insurance issues. 

 

Mr. Martens: --  Would you explain to us in the Assembly 

how the transfer from the board of directors of the old Crop 

Insurance format, where it was a part of a separate unit and 

now it is going to be through the department . . . who becomes 

the board of directors, who are the management?  Would you 

explain that to the Assembly and to us? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The corporate structure of the 

Crown corporation still remains.  The structure, as it is now the 

deputy and assistant deputy serve as board.  But the 

management remains basically with the people in Crop 

Insurance, the management out there. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Are you on the board as well, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No I'm not. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So the two people act as a board of directors 

in relation to the administration function of Crop Insurance? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, that is correct.  I would like to 

correct my earlier statement.  We have a board of six because 

that was what was required on the quorum.  The Act which we 

passed here in the House recently allows us to go to two and 

we will be moving very shortly to a deputy and assistant 

deputy.  Presently we now have six people who are employees 

of the government one way or another on the board. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Would you give me a list of those names of 

those individuals who are? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I can read you the list of the six 

that are currently serving: Hartley Furtan, Dale Sigurdson, 

Harvey Murchison from Agriculture, Louise Greenberg from 

Executive Council, Wil Olive who is the loan representative -- 

he's a lawyer who is not a government employee -- and Terry 

Tangjerd who is the CEO (chief executive officer) of Crop 



June 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2321 

Insurance.  That will be changed very shortly to be Mr. Furtan 

and Mr. Sigurdson. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Do you anticipate a change in the structure of 

the administration as it relates to Crop Insurance when I 

noticed the president is part of that?  Will he remain the 

president of Crop Insurance, and will you then be having these 

individuals as the board of directors?  How do you plan on 

working that out? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The president will remain.  He will 

now be called the chief executive officer of Crop Insurance, but 

the structure will be much as it was except it will answer more 

through the Department of Agriculture.  And there will not be 

an outside board at all. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Would you give the rationale for changing it 

from a group of producers who are a board of directors to a 

non-group of directors, board of directors who are non-farming 

people or not outside of government? Would you give us the 

rationale why you did that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well I think the rationale involved 

two things.  One was the cost-cutting measure.  As you 

probably know, in this budget we eliminated some 40 boards 

and commissions, I believe.  And we did that with many of the 

Treasury Board Crowns.  It's a cost saving; it's not a huge cost 

savings.  But it is, as the member knows when you have 

regional representation from across the province, a fairly 

expensive procedure to bring people to one point. 

 

The other rationale I think was to coordinate it more closely 

with the activities of the Department of Agriculture.  Although 

Crop Insurance is a Crown corporation, it's governed by a 

federal-provincial agreement and is governed much by 

provincial money.  It has no free-standing decision ability, I 

guess was our concern. 

 

Certainly the board performed a useful function and certainly 

some of that will be lost, particularly in an advisory capacity. 

But as many of the policy decisions that the board might have 

been involved in making were pre-empted by the fact that it's a 

federal-provincial agreement and is governed by that, and also 

governed very much by the province's ability to finance, so if 

anything involved monetary expenditure it had to go through 

the normal channels of minister and Treasury Board, caucus 

and cabinet, and so on. 

 

So we felt we could get better coordination through the 

Department of Agriculture, and it's also a bit of a cost saving 

with the board and also possibly with some duplication of 

services that we may be able to over time work with the 

Department of Agriculture.  We may be able to eliminate some 

duplication of services between those departments and gain 

some more efficiencies that way. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The auditor had something to say about how 

you paid your board of directors.  He stated 

that you lacked a proper authority for $89,862 that you paid the 

board of directors.  Would you tell us what the total volume . . . 

that's probably accurate.  What I need to know is what went to 

pay for per diems for the board, what went to pay for travel 

costs, and all of the other things related to that, dealing with the 

auditor's comment that it lacked the proper authority. 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I believe the auditor's report 

referred to '91-92 year.  Basically what happened with the lack 

of authority is it was an error in the OC (order in council) 

which didn't put in . . . we neglected to put in dollar amounts.  

And therefore the auditor brought it to our attention, and we 

later then passed an OC that corrected it. 

 

I have board expenses here broken down.  This would be for 

the year ending March 31, '93 which is not the year under 

review, but if this is of interest to you, we can pass this over. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- That is of interest.  Would you also have the 

information that dealt with the '92 year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- As the member may know, we also 

dealt with Crop Insurance in Crown Corporations, and I believe 

we passed that over to your member at Crown Corporations.  

But we don't have a copy here, but if you want another copy, 

we can get it.  But I believe that we passed that over during 

Crown Corporation review. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well I wouldn't mind having it, if you don't 

mind. 

 

Can you tell me what the total volume of dollar value that all of 

the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance is covering as an insurance 

policy, the whole value of it including the grains and oil-seeds 

and the livestock? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The total liability of Crop 

Insurance is about 2.5 billion. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Would you be able to give me a breakdown of 

the volume in the grains and the livestock, and would you be 

able to provide that to me? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We don't have that here; we can get 

it for you.  There's about 50 million that's related to livestock; 

the rest would be grains.  But we don't have the breakdown by 

grain here, but we can get you that information. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay, I wouldn't mind having that.  Also 

those that are involved in the crop insurance and those that are . 

. . the breakdown on the crop insurance side and those on the 

revenue insurance side.  Would you be able to do that for me? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We have the number of contract 

holders in each.  In livestock feed there are 5,176 contract 

holders; crop insurance, there are 46,839; and in revenue 

insurance there are 41,661 



2322 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1993 

contract holders. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- You wouldn't have a breakdown on the dollar 

. . . on the volume of dollars for the crop insurance and the 

volume of dollars on the revenue insurance.  Would you have 

that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Are you talking in terms of 

liability, or premiums and liability?  Again we don't have those 

numbers but we can get them for you. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- What's the volume of decline last year over 

this year, because it seems to me that as I've been talking to 

producers, that there's been a decline in the crop insurance 

portion.  Is there a significant decline in that area? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The decline in the number of 

contract holders is 2,105 or about 4 per cent. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Is that in the crop insurance or revenue 

insurance? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That's the crop insurance.  In 

revenue insurance there's 1,955 or again about 4 per cent. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- How much . . . or how many of those 

individuals who were of that thousand had to pay back to the 

corporation for overpayments that they had gotten because they 

maybe wanted to get out of the program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- There were approximately 1,000 

overpayments.  Whether or not they got out of the program had 

nothing to do with the overpayments.  The overpayments 

resulted mostly with durum producers because of us, the Crop 

Insurance, underestimating the value of durum, created 

overpayments.  And whether or not you got out of the program 

was not relevant to whether or not you had overpayments to 

repay. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Has the Crop Insurance Corporation received 

all of that money back from those thousands?  Because I have a 

significant durum-growing area in my part of the world, and I 

know some very significant paybacks that were required.  Did 

you give them a planned pay-out period, or was it just lump 

sum payment back?  How did you do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The majority of it has come back, 

although as you pointed out, there were quite a number that had 

very significant overpayments, and some of those are 

negotiating or have negotiated terms of from one to five years 

in order to repay it. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- And how many of those thousand?  And can 

you give me the dollar value of those people that are taking the 

time to pay it back? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- There is approximately $4 million 

which is still outstanding. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Divided by how many people? 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Approximately a thousand people. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- No, that isn't quite right.  You had a thousand 

people who received overpayments, then you said that quite a 

few of them had paid back.  Now you had 4 million 

outstanding in payments that were given . . . or the individual 

was given time to pay that out.  Would you provide that, that 

how many individuals there were under that thousand that you 

came to terms with? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I may have misinformed you on 

the answer to the question.  The thousand is what's still 

outstanding.  There were originally something like 2,500 and 

it's a thousand with 4 million which is still outstanding.  The 

original amount was something over 6 million that was 

outstanding. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you.  I've had some people call my 

office regarding the wildlife, changes to the wildlife fund and 

how it's being paid out.  When did that decision take place and 

would the minister be able to rationalize that out. 

 

For example, what traditionally I believe happened is that an 

individual had a claim under wildlife or waterfowl depredation, 

that was in addition to his crop insurance claim.  And now it 

seems as if -- and individuals have called me -- and what 

you've done is you have included that in the volume of dollars 

that this individual gets.  For example, if he had a $10,000 

claim through crop insurance, and he had a $1,500 claim 

through wildlife, it would be included in the $10,000 now 

whereas before and up till this year it was $10,000 payment 

plus $1,500 claim through wildlife depredation. 

 

Would you explain to me when that happened and what your 

rationale for doing that was. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That was done, not with the 

waterfowl damage.  This year there was still the traditional way 

of actually double coverage in a way on the waterfowl.  On the 

wildlife we did do that.  I guess it eliminates double coverage is 

the reasoning for it.  I think it comes to something like 

$270,000 that . . . less that paid out because of the way we 

changed it and the change took place this year, as I said. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Give me the rationale why, why you did that.  

I don't know whether I understand, nor do the farmers 

understand, who have on occasion received compensation from 

this wildlife . . . well wildlife, geese and antelope and deer 

being on their land and they've received compensation in other 

years and this year they're not.  I'm not sure that the 

explanation you've given them is satisfactory, nor do I think 

they know what the answer is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- To begin with, there are two 

separate programs, one for waterfowl which is cost-shared with 

the federal government, and one for wildlife which a provincial 

program. 

 

I guess the logic is, as you pointed out, if somebody 



June 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2323 

had a crop that was below their coverage, they would be 

receiving crop insurance up to that coverage.  And if you add 

on top of that wildlife damage, it actually amounts to double 

coverage.  And with the very limited dollars we had, that was a 

decision that was made that we would deduct from the 

coverage the amount that the wildlife claim came to, only in 

cases where people obviously were in crop insurance claims in 

that crop on their total farm. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- What the problem is, Mr. Minister, it isn't fair.  

The person who has in excess of his crop insurance yield can 

make a claim for damage and get a compensation for it.  And 

the individual who has his crop insurance losses, he has to pay 

for that out of the losses that he incurs right from within the 

framework because he's under his average.  And so because 

he's under his average, he gets a specific cost against his; 

whereas the guy that had a 40-bushel crop and has a loss of 

$1,500, he gets paid. 

 

And there's no fairness there, Mr. Minister.  That's what the 

problem is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well I guess that's open to 

interpretation.  If two people have a 15-bushel to the acre yield 

and one guy has wildlife damage, he would collect more than 

the guy who had a 15-bushel yield and didn't have wildlife 

damage.  I guess when you buy crop insurance it's a guarantee 

up to the 30 bushels or 25 or whatever his coverage is.  And I 

guess that's the reasoning. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 


