




















































Hansard: March 09, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 205 

 March 9, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

Standing Committee on Constitutional Affairs 

 

Deputy Clerk: -- Ms. Lorje, chair of the Standing Committee 

on Constitutional Affairs, presents the first report of the 

committee which is hereby tabled and filed as sessional paper 

no. 53. 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you.  As members of this Assembly are 

aware, the Committee on Constitutional Affairs was 

established on May 21, 1992 as a standing committee of this 

legislature to deal with constitutional process as is detailed in 

the terms of reference in the attached report. 

 

The committee was established in the context of various federal 

and provincial and other bodies negotiating for constitutional 

renewal.  The committee met eight times before the 

constitutional referendum, and we opted to suspend public 

hearings in view of the federal government's decision to 

conduct a national referendum. 

 

We decided that we would continue an informal monitoring 

process during the referendum.  On October 26, 1992, 55.2 per 

cent of the Saskatchewan electorate who cast ballots for the 

referendum rejected the proposals for constitutional renewal. 

 

As a result of that referendum vote, the Government of 

Saskatchewan, and indeed other governments, have said that 

they do not wish to pursue the issue of constitutional renewal at 

this time.  Consequently we feel there is currently no 

productive role for the committee to play. 

 

When constitutional issues though once again are a priority 

with the various governments in this country, this committee as 

a standing committee will be an important vehicle for 

providing advice to governments and to the Legislative 

Assembly, for transmitting information to the public and for 

engaging in consultation on constitutional matters. 

 

Based on the results of the referendum, the committee has 

decided that further meetings will be suspended at the call of 

the chair. 

 

At this time I would like to thank the first chair of the 

Constitutional Committee, the member for Cumberland, the 

Minister of Justice and the Attorney General, and the Premier 

of the province for the advice and input that they gave to the 

committee.  I would also like to thank the various staff and 

contract employees, and in particular the Legislative Library 

for the services that they provided. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

 That the first report of the Standing Committee on 

Constitutional Affairs be concurred in. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Could I ask the member from Saskatoon 

Wildwood who your seconder is. 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- The member from Kinistino. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I couldn't 

suggest that a member of the opposition second that, if it were 

agreeable to the member who moved the motion. 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- My problem, Mr. Speaker, was I couldn't 

remember the name of his constituency and I know I'm not 

supposed to say . . . utter his name in this august chambers.  I 

believe the seconder is the member from Moosomin. 

 

The Speaker: -- Is this agreed to by the member from 

Moosomin?  All right.  Then it's moved by the member from 

Saskatoon Wildwood, seconded by the member from 

Moosomin: 

 

 That the first report of the Standing Committee on 

Constitutional Affairs be concurred in. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Special Committee on Regulations 

 

Deputy Clerk: -- Mr. Toth, chair of the Special Committee on 

Regulations, presents the first report of the committee, which is 

hereby tabled and filed as sessional paper no. 54. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it is my 

privilege as chairman of the Special Committee on Regulations 

to present a report to the House. 

 

As you will see, Mr. Speaker, from the report, your committee 

has diligently reviewed a number of regulations and by-laws, 

some dating back as far as 1984.  However one must be fair in 

acknowledging that the process of review requires constant 

monitoring of files to see if committee recommendations have 

been adhered to or not; and if not, why not. 

 

I would like to take a moment to thank Mr. Robert Vaive for 

his able assistance in organizing our meetings and having 

correspondence available.  Also a special thanks to Mr. Bob 

Cosman for acting as legal counsel to the committee and for his 

assistance in providing information on the legality of the 

regulations and the by-laws.  And to all committee members 

for their diligence and activeness on the committee. 

 

I therefore move, seconded by the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton: 

 

 That the first report of the Standing Committee on 

Regulations be now concurred in. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 



206 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 1993 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that 

I shall on Thursday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

 Regarding the Department of Agriculture's Farm Support 

Review Committee:  (1) whose advice or recommendation 

did the minister follow in appointing each of the committee 

members; (2) how much has the department paid to each 

member for an indemnity, travel, lodging, meals, and 

communications for their participation on the committee; (3) 

how much has the department allocated to pay for the public 

meetings to be held by the committee in Melfort, Wadena, 

Spiritwood, Biggar, Swift Current, and Grenfell; and (4) how 

much of that proposed expenditure will be allocated to travel, 

lodging, meals, and communications for members of the 

committee? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It is 

indeed my privilege to introduce to the Assembly through you, 

Mr. Floyd Glass, who is sitting in your gallery.  If you would 

rise, Mr. Glass. 

 

He managed Government Airways from 1945 to 1951; created 

Athabasca Airways in 1954 and it is still operating today.  He 

really is attributed with opening up the North by air travel and 

has employed hundreds of Saskatchewan citizens over the 

years. 

 

Please join with me in welcoming Mr. Glass. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'd 

like to introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

legislature, three individuals sitting in the Speaker's gallery 

from the community of Buffalo Narrows. 

 

They are Ross McLeod who is the town manager of the 

community; Thomas Chartier and Thorvald "Skipper" Pedersen 

who are councillors in the community of Buffalo Narrows. 

 

They're down here today to meet with SaskPower and their 

officials regarding non-utility generation facilities.  And I'd like 

all members to welcome the three individuals from Buffalo 

Narrows. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

also take this opportunity to welcome the gentlemen from 

Buffalo Narrows and thank Mr. McLeod for driving us around 

when the Environment Committee visited his community.  I'd 

like to welcome him to the legislature.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Speaker, I too would like to add my voice of 

welcome to Mr. Glass, Floyd Glass from Prince 

Albert.  As a former employee of Mr. Glass in Buffalo 

Narrows, I want to wish him all the best down here in the far 

south of Saskatchewan.  I know it's nice to see him looking so 

hale and hearty and probably at the controls of his airplane.  

So, Floyd, it's nice to see you again, and thanks for coming 

down. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce 

to you and through you to the members of the Assembly, in 

your east gallery, a constituent, Carmel Smyth, and thank her 

for bringing with her her guest visiting from Tokyo, 

Ko-Gee-Ma Ta-cow who is visiting Regina and Saskatchewan 

to learn more about the province and to learn English.  Thank 

you very much for coming to our legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

legislature a constituent of mine, Mr. Paul Harmon, in your 

Speaker's gallery, Mr. Speaker.  And Paul is in town for a few 

days.  I ask all members to wish him welcome while he's here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would 

also like to welcome some guests of the legislature situated in 

your gallery, Mr. Speaker: Jody and Chris Nebb and her son, 

Colton; Gail Neisik from Rama; and Donna Sawchuk, who is a 

respite care-giver.  And these folks attended a very important 

meeting in their lives last night at the Wascana Rehabilitation 

Centre, Mr. Speaker.  I'm sure all members would want to join 

me in welcoming them to the session this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Funding Cuts to Wascana Rehabilitation Centre 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

direct my first question to the Minister of Health.  Madam 

Minister, last night there was a meeting in the Wascana 

Rehabilitation Centre -- a meeting, Madam Minister, that you 

were invited to attend.  But once again you refused; you 

refused to talk to people, people who are being shut out of your 

government.  Madam Minister, the parents at the meeting said 

that they have written you letters, that they have made calls to 

you on the phone, they have phoned your office asking for 

help.  And, Madam Minister, they tell me that you would not 

even reply. 

 

Why haven't you answered the letters and the phone calls, 

Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well perhaps the member could clarify 

for me what meeting he's talking about at Wascana Rehab, and 

then we could look into it. 



March 9, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 207 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, the very same meeting that 

those parents wrote you letters to and phone calls were made 

inviting you to attend that meeting, Madam Minister.  Are you 

not aware of that?  Does your department not keep you 

informed as to what is going on?  The meeting was held in the 

Wascana Rehabilitation Centre last night, Madam Minister.  

Are you implying now that you know nothing about that? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I wish the member . . . First of all, Mr. 

Speaker, I get asked to many, many, many meetings, and I have 

attended many meetings throughout this province and have 

done a lot of consultation.  Now obviously there was a letter 

sent; obviously there were calls made because the member says 

so.  I am asking him now to give me the information, what the 

specific meeting was about so that I can deal with it and find 

out where this fell between the cracks.  And I think it's just 

being very silly of the minister to . . . with his . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  I want to warn the 

Minister of Health that words like silly are simply unacceptable 

in this House.  It's not for her to determine whether the question 

is silly.  The member will ask the question, and it's the 

minister's duty either to answer it or not to answer the question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to the House 

that it does not matter what the minister thinks; it does not 

matter what I think.  I think what matters is what the parents 

think.  That I think is what is the matter here, Madam Minister.  

And please don't get on a high horse here to try to snuff it off as 

not being relevant and as not being important.  To the parents 

this is the important thing in their lives.  They were called in to 

the Wascana Rehabilitation Centre, and they were given some 

information, Madam Minister.  The information that they were 

given is that the Wascana Rehabilitation Centre is going to be 

facing a 4 per cent reduction in their funding.  Can you confirm 

that, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I will have to wait for the 

budget before I respond to any specific numbers.  However, I 

can indicate that last year we announced, with respect to large 

urban hospitals, reduction in funding of approximately 3 or 3.5 

per cent. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister . . . thank you, Mr. Speaker.  

It's obvious now that you are not aware of the pain that that 

announcement is creating.  Now it is coming to fruition and 

these people are going to be facing the brunt of it, Madam 

Minister. 

 

This information given yesterday was that these cuts will force 

their rehabilitation centre, Wascana, to close a wing.  Madam 

Minister, it is because of your choices, because of your 

offloading, that the Wascana Rehabilitation Centre is being 

forced, as I speak, to close an entire wing of their facility.  

Thirty beds, Madam Minister, thirty beds in wing 3-1, in 3-1.  

An entire wing, Madam Minister, that treats 800 children, 800 

handicapped children from across the province, Madam 

Minister.  Sixty per cent of them are outside of Regina. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Does the member have a question? 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker.  This is what I want to ask 

Madam Minister.  In view of the tragedy that is being 

perpetrated on the children of this province and their parents, 

Madam Minister, with this information, what do you say to 

those parents?  What do you say to those children? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, first of all, I can't comment 

on the particular meeting he's talking about because I wasn't 

there and I don't know what took place and I don't know what 

was said.  So I won't comment on that. 

 

But I will make this comment:  there will be budgetary 

reductions in Health.  There is no question about that, and it's a 

result of their legacy.  And the pain that Saskatchewan people 

are suffering today as a result of the need to control the deficit 

is as a result of . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I want the members please to 

give the minister a chance to answer the question and not to 

interrupt. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The pain that 

Saskatchewan people are feeling, Mr. Speaker, as a result of 

budgetary reductions is to try and get a handle on the mess that 

they created.  It's a result of their legacy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Again we have the 

situation where the blame throwing starts.  I want to remind 

you, Madam Minister, that on January 31, 1991, in the Prince 

Albert Herald the Premier said he doesn't believe that health 

care costs are sky-rocketing, the cost of medicare is well within 

the budget.  And yet what we're hearing now is that 4 per cent 

cuts seem to be the general across the board. 

 

One parent said that you were really more interested in 

pressing the government for more occupational therapists at 

Wascana.  That's what one parent said.  I'll repeat that.  That 

you were interested in pressing the government for more 

occupational therapists at Wascana.  But, Madam Minister, that 

was when you were in opposition.  In fact you talked to her 

yourself.  That when you won the by-election . . . or you won 

the election, you now form government, what do we find, 

Madam Minister?  A complete flip-flop, a complete 

turnaround. 

 

How can you possibly justify betraying the parents and the 

families that you made promises to?  How can you justify, 

Madam Minister, to continue to ignore the needs of the people? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, when we won the election, 

what did we find?  We found a $15 billion debt.  That's what 

we found, Mr. Speaker.  And a deficit that runs us interest at 

somewhere between 700 to $750 million a year -- half of the 

Health budget, Mr. Speaker. The deficit, the interest on the 

deficit that the people of Saskatchewan pay every year, is about 

half of the health care budget. 



208 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 1993 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I want to ask the members again, 

please, not to interrupt. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- If we had that 750 million in interest, Mr. 

Speaker, we could set up an occupational therapy school in . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I was just on my feet asking members 

not to interrupt and the member from Souris-Cannington is 

interrupting again. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you.  If we had the 750 million 

that they drummed up in interest on a public debt, Mr. Speaker, 

we could afford to do a lot more of the things that we would 

like to do in this province. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The member from Wilkie.  I've asked 

the people . . . the opposition not to interrupt; he's interrupting 

again.  I'll ask the member from Wilkie not to interrupt while 

the minister is answering her question. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is, is 

the legacy that the members opposite have left us with have 

made it very difficult for the government in dealing with the 

deficit. 

 

The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that we have to make decisions 

constantly, budgetary decisions that we would rather not make.  

But we're left with no alternative because of the mess that they 

left this province in and the 750 million a year we pay in . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, 

the blame thrower is at work.  This seems to be the resort that 

you come to at every time when you do not have a question . . . 

or an answer to our questions. 

 

Madam Minister, I thought I was being quite reasonable in 

presenting to you a problem that is experienced in the real 

world, the real life, the life of these parents and the lives of 

these children that are now being put in jeopardy.  And you 

have no answer for me, Madam Minister.  You have no answer 

for me because you don't know what is going on.  That's the 

simple truth of it. 

 

You are not aware of the devastation that is being created by 

your government's actions here.  That's the problem, Madam 

Minister.  And I ask you to get up now and tell these people 

what you can and what you are willing as a government to do 

to assist them in their problems.  Madam Minister, what do you 

say to these people that are in desperate need of your help? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, as a result of the question 

from the member I will consult with the department to see what 

he's referring to in terms of closure of wards.  We will look into 

the situation to make sure that people have adequate health care 

services, so the matter will be looked into from that point of 

view. 

The fact of the matter is the members opposite should have 

thought about the consequences of their action when they were 

in office and they left this province with a $750 million interest 

payment every year -- half the health care budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, your Premier said in the 

Moose Jaw Herald that the former government caused 

considerable harm to the health care system by not providing 

hospitals with adequate funds.  That is what we were accused 

of, Madam Minister, during the period of time when we were 

increasing this rate on health spending by 4 per cent.  Now you 

are gouging and you are cutting, and you have the audacity, 

Madam Minister, to get up in this House and say, I will come 

back with the answer, Mr. Speaker, when I know what I'm 

doing. 

 

Madam Minister, there are 30 beds being closed, 800 children 

that need this facility, and you get up in the House and you 

have the audacity to say, I don't know what's going on; I'll get 

back to you.  Is that what you're asking us to believe, Madam 

Minister?  Or are you pass-bucking now and saying, it's not my 

fault; it's the board of the Wascana Rehab Centre that made the 

decision; it's the Regina Health Board that made . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, first of all I don't accept the 

facts that the member opposite presents.  I will look into the 

situation.  We'll look into the situation and I will determine 

what is happening there and we'll make sure that people are 

properly looked after.  But I won't accept your facts. 

 

Now the fact of the matter is, is what we were saying during 

the election is that the members opposite were wasting their 

money on things like GigaText for example, blowing money in 

the wind, creating an enormous problem for the province.  And 

they sit back there, the member from Souris-Cannington I think 

it is, and he sits there and laughs at what's going on, Mr. 

Speaker, which is an indication of their attitude about the 

situation that they've created in this province.  They're like little 

children . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I guess if we're little children, Madam 

Minister, I guess we can expect no further sympathy or 

understanding or compassion from you as the real children of 

this province can, as is being evident in this question period 

right now. 

 

So, Madam Minister, am I to understand that you are accusing 

the former government of wasting taxpayers' money in paying 

for the Wascana Rehab Centre?  Is that what you're saying, 

Madam Minister? 



March 9, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 209 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I want the people of this province, Mr. 

Speaker, to be aware of the flippant attitude of the Premier who 

started his cohorts in their clapping. 

 

But I don't take this flippantly, Mr. Premier, I'm telling you.  

To me this is a serious . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  Does the member have a 

question?  We're almost a minute and he hasn't even asked his 

question yet. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I will start again.  

Mr. Premier, I take this seriously when parents come to me and 

ask for help, ask for help.  And he says we did nothing.  I ask, 

Mr. Speaker, if I could just have their attention, and if the 

Premier could quit interrupting . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the member from Regina, the Minister of 

Health:  you say we wasted our money when we built Wascana 

Rehab Centre.  Is that why you're closing it?  Is this your 

ulterior motive?  Is this the end that you are coming to, Madam 

Minister?  What do you see in store for the Wascana Rehab 

Centre, Madam Minister?  What hope can you hold out for the 

people that depend on that centre? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, for the last nine years the 

members opposite, who now in their phoney, self-righteous 

indignation pretend to be concerned about the people, 

drummed up a debt that as far as I'm concerned is completely 

reprehensible and, in my opinion, was totally irresponsible -- 

and in the opinion of the Saskatchewan electorate. 

 

They threw money on things like Joytec and GigaText and 

NewGrade and Supercart, and the list goes on and on . . . Dome 

Advertising, and the list goes on and on.  They created a 

situation in this province that makes it extremely difficult for 

any government to be able to manage the deficit and pay down 

the debt.  But this government is attempting to deal with the 

problem they left in order to preserve our social programs, in 

order to preserve the programs at Wascana Rehab and other 

centres for future generations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, 

for the edification of those people who are watching, could you 

explain to us how this concept of closing Wascana Rehab 

Centre fits into your wellness plan.  How does this fit into the 

wellness plan when these children now, they're not going to be 

accepted by Home Care, the respite care is going to be down 

the drain.  All of these issues that these folks depend on are in 

jeopardy.  How does that fit into your wellness plan?  Could 

you explain that to us? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- This is an example of the member's 

exaggeration opposite, Mr. Speaker.  Wascana Rehab Centre is 

not being closed.  There may be a ward being closed.  I have 

indicated I will check into what's 

happening.  I'll determine and make sure that the situation is 

being handled properly and people will have adequate care.  

We will look into the situation because the care of people is a 

concern of ours. 

 

In fact, I had a letter sent in to me here in question period 

where someone is asking to meet with me by March 15.  I will 

undertake to have that meeting by March 15.  The members 

opposite, however, through their scare tactics and their political 

posturing, are grossly misrepresenting the situation by saying 

Wascana Rehab is closing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, if you are saying that I am 

misrepresenting or over-exaggerating, this is the information 

that has been given to me by the parents who attended that 

meeting.  Why do you think they are coming to the opposition? 

 

Madam Minister, you still have an opportunity to save the 

situation.  You can still show that your government does have 

some compassion.  And you can do that by today committing 

to supplying the adequate funds so that the Wascana Rehab 

Centre can continue to present those services for which it was 

intended, that it can legitimately give those services to the 

children, to the parents, who are depending upon that. 

 

Will you make that commitment to this House, Madam 

Minister, then?  And then I will be the first one to apologize 

and say that it was over-exaggerated by me.  But will you make 

that commitment that that wing, that children's wing in 

Wascana Rehab Centre, will remain open?  Would you make 

that commitment? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I will make a commitment 

to look into the situation and to talk to the Regina Health Board 

about their plans in this regard and why they are doing this.  

The Wascana Rehab is under the Regina Health Board, so I 

will look into it. 

 

Now when the member opposite talks about he would be the 

first person to apologize, I suggest he should stand in his place 

and apologize to the people today because of the mess you've 

left everyone with in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

CP Customer Service Centre 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I direct my 

question to the Minister of Economic Development.  Mr. 

Minister, in the next few days, Canadian Pacific Railway is 

expected to announce where it intends to locate its customer 

service centre.  This centre will create up to 300 jobs and a $10 

million payroll.  Saskatchewan is competing with other 

provinces and other communities across the country for this 

project.  I'd like to know what your government has done to 

make sure that this centre ends up in Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to welcome the 

Leader of the Liberal Party back from a 



210 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 1993 

successful nominating convention last night -- memorable.  

And I want to say that the issue she raises is a very important 

one to the people of Saskatchewan, particularly the cities of 

Moose Jaw, Regina, and Saskatoon who are very interested in 

seeing that centre come to their city. 

 

We have had numerous meetings with Mr. Ed Dodge, the 

person responsible for making the decision, both here in 

Regina as well as in Vancouver.  It's my understanding that a 

decision will be made in the very near future and we're hopeful 

that it will come to Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To the same 

minister.  Mr. Minister, if the service centre comes here we get 

300 jobs and a $10 million payroll.  If it doesn't, we lose 61 

jobs and a $2 million payroll, as those jobs are going to go to 

the community that wins this project. 

 

Now I've spoken with a CP (Canadian Pacific) official who 

states, and I quote him:  if Saskatchewan does not adjust its bid 

it will not be awarded the customer service centre. 

 

Clearly you've put forward a bid that falls short, and well short 

of the mark.  What are you going to do to adjust it even if it is 

the 11th hour, to ensure that we don't miss this opportunity and 

ultimately have to lose jobs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to be very clear 

with the member who raises . . . the independent member who 

raises the issue of a bidding war that's going on.  I want to tell 

you that you're jeopardizing the deal by talking about bidding, 

because CP has been very clear with the community of 

Saskatoon, Regina, and Moose Jaw.  They do not want to get 

into a bidding war and they have made that very clear to us.  

We're not in a bidding war. 

 

We are putting forward a proposal that will meet the needs of 

our communities, that will meet the needs of Saskatchewan 

people, that will not be a deal like those struck by the previous 

government where hundreds of millions of taxpayers' dollars 

are used to lure projects to Saskatchewan. 

 

And I want to say to you that putting forward the idea of a 

bidding war between our cities to compete for a project is the 

worst form of economic development. It's old-style economic 

development from Tories and Liberals from previous years, 

and we're not involved in that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the same 

minister.  You've done such a great job -- 22,000 jobs have 

been lost in this province since you took power.  You say that 

the people of Saskatchewan have heard for 15 months from 

your government that its number one commitment is jobs. 

Here's an opportunity for your government to attract a business 

that, unlike Sears, offers full-time employment, well-paying 

jobs; and you're blowing it. 

What kind of a message do your promises of tax increases and 

your bungling of opportunities send to the 700 or so companies 

that you said you were stating were going to come and set up in 

our province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear 

to the member opposite that today's headline on the front page 

of the Leader-Post, it says: "Bank likes Sask.'s economic 

outlook", and refers to the economy of Saskatchewan expected 

to bounce back from the almost decade-long slump, this year.  

And continue to grow in 1994, according to the Royal Bank 

economic forecast.  The bank forecasts 3.7 per cent real growth 

in Saskatchewan's economy this year and 4.4 growth in 1994. 

 

Those are some of the highest growth rates in Canada.  Now 

you can stand here and be negative, and preach gloom and 

doom, and try to destroy business deals that are being put 

together, but I'll tell you that's old-style politics that we saw last 

night at the Centre of the Arts, and I'll tell you, it won't work in 

Saskatchewan in this day and age. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Economic 

Development. Your government doesn't have a prayer of 

enjoying that kind of growth if it quits . . . if it continues to 

bungle the kind of opportunities like the Canadian railways. 

 

Never are you going to enjoy that kind of growth if you 

continue to put forth your slate of taxation increases.  The 

locomotive fuel tax will be an important fact in determining if 

this centre is located here.  Manitoba, which has the 

second-highest fuel tax in Canada next to Saskatchewan, has 

already offered better concessions than your government in an 

attempt to get these jobs. 

 

Now are you going to . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  I want to ask the 

government members to please not interfere when the member 

is trying to ask her question. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Most interesting 

about old-style politics comments. 

 

Are you going to adjust your bid?  Are you going to sit back 

and add to the already 22,000 people who have lost their jobs 

in this province?  Are you willing to add another 61 to that 

number, the number that you have added to since you came 

into power?  What are you going to do to ensure that those 61 

people keep their jobs; the $2 million payroll; and that you add 

another $8 million to it; and another 240 people? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, first of all I want to 

straighten out the member on her dishonesty when it comes to 

dealing with numbers as it deals with unemployment. 

 

When you say there's 22,000 jobs lost in Saskatchewan, you're 

comparing July with January.  You know that.  You know 

you're not being honest with the people of 



March 9, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 211 

Saskatchewan when you say that.  You know that's old-style 

politics that misleads the public of Saskatchewan. 

 

We're tired of that.  That's why the people have rejected the 

Liberals for the past 15 years. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Will the government members 

please let the minister answer . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

But the rest of us do have. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say that the 

member, if she would care to read the newspapers, the gloom 

and doom that you preach is not being felt in most parts of 

Saskatchewan.  Your misleading numbers are not accurate.  

You know that.  You were corrected in the press the other day. 

 

In today's Leader-Post we have two stories: one, "Housing 

starts soar in Sask." which talks very positively about housing 

starts.  The other one, "Bank likes Sask.'s economic outlook", 

which shows by graph how the economy of Saskatchewan has 

grown from mid-'91 and continues to grow and is predicted to 

grow even faster. 

 

But I'll tell you, if the the gloom and doom that is being 

perpetuated by the Liberal Party of Saskatchewan at the present 

time predominates, we simply will not be able to continue that 

growth. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 11 -- An Act to amend The Wakamow Valley 

Authority Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Wakamow Valley Authority Act now be introduced and 

read for the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 12 -- An Act to amend The Wascana Centre Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading 

of a Bill to amend The Wascana Centre Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on her feet? 

 

POINT OF ORDER 
 

Ms. Haverstock: -- A point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 

The Speaker: -- What's the member's point of order? 
 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, I wish to have a ruling from 

you on rule 26, regarding when two or more members rise to 

speak, the Speaker calls upon the member who first rose in his 

place.  There has now been more than one occasion when I 

have risen in my place prior to other members during question 

period, and I 

would like your ruling on that, please, when you have not 

recognized me. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- To the point of order, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- . . . I will hear from the member from 

Rosthern. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, in support of the difficulty of 

being a presiding officer in this legislature, I think it is not well 

spoken of for any member to get up and question the Speaker's 

right-eyed or left-eyed ability.  And you must do what you 

must do, which is recognize the person that you see first, and I 

think you're doing that.  Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: -- I will take the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone's comments and will prepare a report back to you as 

soon as possible. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on a Point of Order 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Will the members please come 

to order? 

 

Yesterday the Government House Leader raised a point of 

order that Bill No. 10, An Act to Protect Municipal Property 

Taxpayers in the Province of Saskatchewan, proposed by the 

member for Rosthern, was out of order.  It was the minister's 

impression that because the Bill involved the repeal of a tax, it 

required a royal recommendation.  Not having seen the Bill, I 

reserved my ruling. 

 

Rule 33 of this Assembly outlines the constitutional 

requirement that in matters involving proposed charges upon 

the public revenue or charges upon the people, the Crown 

initiative must be expressed through a royal recommendation. 

 

 Any vote, resolution, address or Bill introduced in the 

Assembly for the appropriation of any part of the public 

revenue, or of any tax or impost to any purpose whatsoever, 

or to impose any new or additional charge upon the public 

revenue or upon the people, or to release or compound any 

sum of money due to the Crown, or to grant any property of 

the Crown, or to authorize any loan or any charge upon the 

credit of the Province, shall be recommended to the 

Assembly by Message of the Lieutenant Governor before it is 

considered by the Assembly.  The consideration and debate 

thereof may not be presently entered upon but shall be 

adjourned until such further day as the Assembly shall think 

fit to appoint. 

 

According to well-established practice, however, provisions 

involving the reduction of charges or the reduction of taxation 

do not require a royal recommendation.  I refer members to a 

ruling of the Chair dated May 26, 1978, which states in part: 

 

 . . . while a private member may not introduce a resolution or 

bill to increase a charge . . . any member may move to reduce 

a charge, 



212 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 1993 

expenditure or a tax. 

 

In addressing the rules of financial procedure, Erskine May 

specifies those matters which involve money but do not 

necessarily require an expression of the Crown initiative.  I 

point out that the principles outlined by May form the broad 

basis of financial practice in this Legislative Assembly. 

 

On page 805 of the 20th edition of Erskine May's 

Parliamentary Practice, it is specified that a Bill which seeks 

to abolish or reduce a charge authorized by existing law does 

not require a royal recommendation.  Similarly, May indicates 

on page 825 that provisions for the repeal or reduction of 

taxation are not subject to the rules of financial procedure. 

 

This of course is wholly consistent with the more generally 

known principle that allows members of this Assembly to 

move amendments in committee to reduce an estimate or 

monetary provisions in a Bill.  I refer members to Beauchesne's 

Parliamentary Rules and Forms, 6th edition, page 260 and 

page 267, which outlines those procedures. 

 

The purpose of the Bill introduced yesterday by the member 

from Rosthern is to abolish an existing tax through the repeal 

of The Hospital Revenue Act.  The repeal of a tax, as I have 

indicated, is not subject to the requirements of rule 33.  For this 

reason I find the point of order not well taken and the Bill to be 

in order. 

 

(1445) 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Ms. Stanger, seconded by Mr. 

Renaud. 

 

Mr. Harper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As I rise today in 

support of the Speech from the Throne, I want to say that it's 

certainly a pleasure to represent the fine people of Pelly 

constituency. 

 

This last year and a half has been, for me personally, an 

interesting time, a challenging time, and quite frankly, Mr. 

Speaker, a sad time.  Sad because we find out what the true 

financial picture of this province really is.  And by that I mean 

the plain, unvarnished truth, not the whitewash job that we got 

from this former administration. 

 

Going into the 1991 election campaign, Mr. Speaker, we were 

led to believe we were looking at a debt of about four and a 

half billion dollars.  Now when we heard that number we 

thought perhaps the former administration had manipulated the 

number to cover the real debt.  We thought perhaps the debt 

would be more like six, six and a half, or possibly at the outside 

$7 billion. 

 

During the election campaign the number one promise 

 we made to the people of Saskatchewan was that the first thing 

we would do when we became the government was we'd open 

the books to a clear and concise independent audit so we'd all 

know what the true financial situation in this province really 

was. 

 

We took over government officially November 1, 1991, and 

early in November we struck the Financial Review 

Commission headed by Don Gass, a chartered accountant.  We 

suggested simply that the commission would be structured in 

such a manner that there could be no suggestions of 

manipulating the numbers for political purposes. 

 

On February 18, 1992, the Gass Commission released its final 

report.  And much to our dismay, Mr. Speaker, we found out 

that we did not have a four and a half billion dollar debt in this 

province; we did not even have a $6 billion debt in this 

province.  Mr. Speaker, what we found out is that we had a $15 

billion debt -- $15 billion, Mr. Speaker, that is costing you and 

I and the Saskatchewan taxpayers all across this great province 

just a shade over $2 million a day in interest charges; $2 

million dollars a day that leaves this province and goes to New 

York, to Zürich, to Hong Kong, to Tokyo, doesn't stay here in 

Saskatchewan to work for the people of this province. 

 

Two million dollars a day, Mr. Speaker, really saddens me, 

when you look at the fact that in 1982 we had an operating 

surplus in this province of $139.6 million, and in 1992, a $15 

billion debt.  Yes indeed, Mr. Speaker, times change and we 

are in the '90s, but I am very hard pressed to find reasonable 

and rational explanation for the give-aways, the sell-offs 

engineered by the former members of the former government 

when they were in power in this province, the give-aways and 

the sell-offs that has brought us to where we are today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1982 one-third of the money collected by our 

provincial treasury came from our resource sector, came from 

the very Crown corporations we set up to manage our oil, our 

potash, our forests, our coal, to manage them on behalf of the 

people of Saskatchewan.  These, Mr. Speaker, between 1982 

and 1992, were given away by the former government.  And 

now, unfortunately, the only vehicle of revenue available to 

this government or any other government in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, is you and I, the taxpayer.  We're stuck with the bill.  

We're stuck with the legacy of 10 years of waste and 

mismanagement.  We're stuck with $15 billion worth of debt. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have personally a very hard time to 

imagine how big a pile a million loonies would make. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- How big? 

 

Mr. Harper: -- I'm not sure.  And I know it's a proven fact, 

Mr. Speaker, that the opposition has absolutely no idea of the 

difference between one million and one billion.  The record of 

their government certainly indicates that.  So, Mr. Speaker, I 

thought this afternoon I would try to help out the opposition by 

making some comparisons that they might be able to 

understand, comparison between a Saskatchewan debt and 

time. 



March 9, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 213 

We all know, Mr. Speaker, that doing this I'm making a large 

assumption that the opposition has the ability to tell time.  We 

all know that there are 60 seconds in a minute, 60 minutes in an 

hour.  So of course, immediately the question comes to hand, 

how long is a million seconds?  Well, Mr. Speaker, one million 

seconds is equal to 12 days.  The next question, of course, is 

how long is one billion seconds?  Mr. Speaker, one billion 

seconds is equal to 32 years -- 32 years, Mr. Speaker.  Now I 

think we can better understand what the debt in this province is 

when we talk about $15 billion worth of debt. 

 

If we are able, day after day after day in this fine province of 

ours, to scrape up the $2 million to service the interest on our 

$15 billion debt and pay one loonie per second on that debt, 

how long will it take to pay off $15 billion?  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, it will take all of my lifetime and that of my children 

and maybe my grandchildren.  I find that depressing and 

extremely saddening.  The former government's debt has 

shackled us and brought us almost to the brink of bankruptcy. 

 

I have with me today, Mr. Speaker, a report from a bond rating 

company called Nesbitt Thomson dated January 7, 1993.  I 

found this particular issue rather interesting because it made 

reference to the financial situation in Saskatchewan and in 

Canada.  And on page 7 I'd like to quote from an article there 

which states, and I quote: 

 

 The Canadian fiscal situation ranges from bad federally, to 

painful in Quebec, to ghastly in Ontario, to terrifying in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

My friends, we are the worst-off province per capita in Canada.  

We -- you and I and every man, woman, and child in this 

province -- today are carrying a provincial debt of $14,700 

each.  For a family of four, we're carrying a debt of about 

$60,000.  That, Mr. Speaker, is a legacy that has been left to us 

by the former government. 

 

We have inherited this debt, a debt that in all manner, shape, 

and form is worse than what Tommy Douglas inherited in 

1944.  Tommy inherited a debt of nearly $800,000 and yes, Mr. 

Speaker, it's hard to make that comparison between $800,000 

and $15 billion, but there is a dollar-value difference from that 

time to this. 

 

But the advantage Tommy had, Mr. Speaker, was that half of 

that debt was owed to the federal government because of 

payments for relief and seed grain payments made to this 

province in the 1930s.  And Tommy was able to go down to 

Ottawa and get the federal government of the day to write off 

half of that debt, leaving him the ability to bring in a balanced 

budget and to build into that budget a small cushion to start to 

pay down the debt. 

 

It took from 1944 to 1961 for him to pay that debt off. 

 

The difference today in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is that 

today 99.9 per cent of our debt is out to financiers outside of 

Saskatchewan and outside of Canada.  And furthermore, Mr. 

Speaker, so far Ottawa hasn't been in a frame of mind to write 

off anything except to write off Saskatchewan farmers with the 

help of their provincial cousins. 

And when all is said and done, Mr. Speaker, a banker is still a 

banker.  They want their interest, they want their payments, or 

they want their security.  So we have no other choice but to pay 

our bills and try to get on with our lives. 

 

We haven't even begun to talk about the debt.  The first thing 

we must do is get the deficit under control. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: -- The former government brought in 10 straight 

deficit budgets.  And make no mistake, a deficit and a debt are 

two different things.  A deficit is where a government spends 

more money in one year than it brings in.  The difference is 

then rolled over into the debt. 

 

The last year of the former administration, they were running a 

deficit of nearly $1 billion in one year -- nearly $1 billion in 

one year, Mr. Speaker.  They were spending more money than 

they were taking in in one year, of a tune of nearly $1 billion in 

a province with a population of less than a million.  Talk about 

leaving us all behind the eight-ball. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we have triumphed over waste and 

mismanagement.  We have in our last budget cut the deficit in 

half.  And this year we will cut the deficit in half again.  We 

must balance the budget as soon as possible in order to get into 

a position, Mr. Speaker, where we spend as much money in 

one year as we take in.  And then we will start to work on the 

debt. 

 

Of course, Mr. Speaker, mother nature didn't necessarily help 

us this year in our farmers harvesting the most disastrous crop 

in the history of this province, through no fault of their own.  

That disaster has cost this province a billion dollars in 

agricultural income because of the reduced quality of grain.  

And on top of that, we lost jobs as a result of our downturn in 

our quality of our grain. 

 

In spite of that, in the last six months we have created more 

jobs than we have lost in the first six months.  That's a 

turn-around.  Retail sales are showing a marginal increase.  

That's another indicator of the turn-around of our economy.  

Those things are all positive and I believe that through future 

economic development, that we are leading the way as 

government to the best of our financial ability. 

 

Leading the way through such projects as Norquay Alfalfa 

Processors, which is a community-based industry that works 

hand in hand with the existing industry -- farming.  A 

community-based industry that not only works with farmers 

but it has managed to create 40 jobs in the community, which 

as a result is putting a payroll of a million dollars a year into 

that community. 

 

(1500) 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is what progress is all about -- a light at the 

end of the tunnel.  A light that will show us in big and small 

ways we will succeed and take Saskatchewan into the next 

century.  We will succeed because we are Saskatchewan voices 

making Saskatchewan choices.  We will see bigger and better 

light at the end of the tunnel, Mr. 



214 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 1993 

Speaker.  And let me assure you that light is not a Tory freight 

train. 

 

There is hope simply because of our history.  We have the 

toughest people in the world here in this province.  We have 

faced some desperate, tough times in the past and overcome 

them.  We will overcome the present tough times we're facing 

here in this province today.  In the past we overcame the tough 

times and built a province to what it was.  And today we will 

rebuild this province to what we know it can be.  Now we will 

rebuild Saskatchewan into the province of prosperity and 

opportunity, not only for ourselves but for our children and our 

grandchildren. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am very proud to offer my voice in support of 

the throne speech. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Langford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a pleasure to 

take part in this debate and I am happy to speak in favour of the 

speech delivered by Her Honour.  It is a good speech promising 

hope and renewal, something we've been short of in this 

province for quite a while.  And it is a speech that has been 

more than admirably defended by the member from Cut 

Knife-Lloydminster and the member from Kelsey-Tisdale and 

my colleagues on the government side. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there has been a great deal of wind blowing 

against this speech from the opposite side.  But this is a 

government with a house built not of straw, not of wood, but of 

strong brick.  So the member from Thunder Creek and his 

ragged little band of wolves can huff and puff all they want. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Langford: -- This is a government with a strong vision, 

with a plan, and with a strong leader.  And all the windy 

rhetoric from the opposite side cannot change that one bit. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Langford: -- Mr. Speaker, I am also pleased to see you in 

the Chair for another season.  We operate with better rules and 

we know you know the rules. 

 

I want to thank the fine people from Shellbrook-Torch River 

again for giving me the privilege of representing them.  They 

are far away in distance from this Chamber, but they watch us, 

they know that government is working in their best interests.  

Distance does not mean blindness.  My constituents know the 

mess this province was left in by the previous government.  

They know that the federal Tories will rediscover them only 

when an election is called, if then.  They know the mess they're 

in and they know who put them in it. 

 

In my constituency there are foresters and there are farmers.  

The farmers know that it was the Liberals who killed the Crow 

and they know that the Tories are trying to kill the Crow 

benefit.  The old-line parties are working with the rail line to 

get it to the farmers one more time. 

My constituents know until 1986 the federal government paid 

100 per cent of disaster programs.  And now because of 

convenience between the Mulroney and Devine governments, 

farmers and Saskatchewan taxpayers pay 60 per cent -- 

offloading, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the recent farm rally in Saskatoon, speaker 

after speaker, farmer after farmer, stated what they needed to 

be done in our number one industry to be restored.  And their 

suggestions were directly opposed to what the federal 

government has done. 

 

I have a transcript of a speech by a farmer from Glaslyn that I 

would like to read to you because he says very particular what 

many farmers are feeling.  This farmer runs a family farm at 

Glaslyn: 

 

 For our farm to survive, we need the Canadian Wheat Board 

to market our wheat, barley and oats.  Therefore, we need 

oats reinstated . . . 

 

 Method of payment must be paid to the railways. It must not 

be changed for our farm to survive.  The majority of farmers 

across Canada at the Transportation meetings told . . . the 

(federal) "Government" (to) Leave the Crow alone.  (They) . . 

. are not listening to the majority of farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he says that the federal government: 

 

 . . . is catering to the multinationals and the minority groups.  

Some of these groups are not even linked to agriculture.  

Don't give us the line that under GATT it has to be changed. 

 

 The support system our farm needs to survive is one that pays 

us to produce.  Present support systems pay us to farm the 

program. 

 

 (The federal government) . . . changed our marketing system . 

. . oats (was) taken off the Wheat Board.  Now . . . (they) are 

trying to take barley off the Wheat Board.  You changed the 

Crow, now you're trying to change it again.  You changed 

how we depreciate machinery -- the list goes on.  You are 

trying to force us to . . . (make) our . . . (producers) like our 

forefathers did many years ago, before they had the Wheat 

Board.  They lost their shirts.  We don't want that to happen. 

 

  1. We want the Wheat Board with central desk selling. 

  2. We want the Crow left paid to the railways. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the recent farm rally in Saskatoon . . . Notice, 

Mr. Speaker, leave the Crow alone, leave the Wheat Board 

alone, strengthen our marketing system.  Listen to the majority. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Langford: -- A voice can't be much more clear than that, 

especially when it's prepared by farmers across the province, 

and the feds ignore the voice because they've been after the 

Wheat Board and orderly marketing for years.  Shame. 



March 9, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 215 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I once more again like to support this 

Speech from the Throne.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I rise 

to congratulate the mover and the seconder of the Speech from 

the Throne on furthering our commitment to the journey of 

renewal and rebuilding this fair province that we're all so very 

proud of.  Mr. Speaker, I would also like to add my support to 

the journey of renewal and rebuilding. 

 

I would also like to congratulate you, Mr. Speaker, on returning 

this Chamber to a Chamber of decorum.  I think back to a time 

when I was told by members who are present that the way that 

they would practise their speech in return to the throne speech 

was to stand near a television set, turn up the volume full blast, 

and that would be the noise level in this Assembly.  I know, 

Mr. Speaker, you have a strong desire to improve the respect 

and trust for this institution, and it's showing results. 

 

I would also like to join my colleagues in welcoming the pages, 

and I hope that their work provides them not only a furthering 

of their knowledge of the parliamentary process, but also some 

friendships and some fun. 

 

Mr. Speaker, election to public office is indeed an honour.  The 

people of the province have placed a tremendous trust in each 

of us.  I thank, once again, the members of Wascana Plains 

who have placed that trust in me.  It's indeed a privilege and an 

honour to serve them. 

 

It's also very sad and frustrating though to know that the trust 

was once abused and broken by the members opposite and by 

their colleagues at the federal level.  For trust is a very fragile 

thing, and it takes a long-term working relationship to establish 

it.  What have the people of Saskatchewan seen in its place has 

been the betrayal of far too many people that have only served 

in their own good and their own interest and not in the interests 

of the public and the people that they were chosen to serve. 

 

So we're all burdened with the consequence of that.  We're all 

burdened with the self-serving and irresponsible decisions that 

have been made by the former administration.  The damage has 

been done.  It will take a long and steady road to repair that 

damage. 

 

I liken it to someone who has an attitude or a mentality when 

they see an endangered species of flower who looks down and 

doesn't say: "Isn't that beautiful for all to appreciate," but 

instead plucks it and takes it for themselves -- the me-first 

attitude.  That's what has happened with the trust in the public 

service and serving the public in this province and it will take 

great patience and steady nurturing to bring it back to life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's been said that government is only as good as 

its opposition and it's with that in mind that I don't believe in 

shrinking from criticism, and in fact I welcome it.  For 

criticism and alternatives allow you to grow, to make 

improvements, to sharpen the mind, and also to become far 

more inclusive of all of the people in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I wasn't surprised to see that kind of opposition coming from 

the 10 members opposite.  They've buried themselves in the 

small political rhetoric and the petty fighting that we saw, of 

the past 10 years in Saskatchewan, and the politics of division. 

 

But I was very surprised as I listened to the member of the 

Liberal Party opposite.  I sat patiently waiting in her speech to 

see one drop of specific suggestion, one area of specific policy 

where she would agree with us or disagree on principle.  I was 

waiting for that, and I was expecting it because of her own 

words that she did not believe in pandering to partisan politics. 

 

Well if that's the case, I have to wonder daily about the type of 

questioning that she's asking, about the questions that could 

easily be answered by departments or a single phone call, that 

would not have the public eye on her to bring up some of the 

petty partisan politic that she says she despises so well. 

 

I looked for, from the members opposite, and in particular the 

member of the Liberal Party, some substantive comments on 

issues.  I was sadly disappointed.  And I say sad in every sense 

of the word. 

 

I had believed that when she claimed to be above partisan 

politics, and I thought, what a pleasant change for an 

opposition member, that the level of debate would elevate in 

this Chamber and we would have a House where ideas are 

debated solely on the basis of whether or not they were good 

ideas.  And to hear some constructive alternatives sometimes to 

let us know just once in a while a glimmer of where the Liberal 

Party really stands on the issues of today. 

 

I really held out a ray of hope for the Leader of the Liberals, 

and I was quickly disappointed as I listened to her return 

speech to the Speech from the Throne.  Disappointed in the 

gloom and doom that she portrayed, no matter what.  It wasn't 

the change of policy or the consequences of what's happening, 

but it was from her petty political criticisms that her opposition 

comments came and stemmed from.  Whatever happened, the 

government was wrong and all bad and that somehow the 

member from Greystone was going to put her ideas forward, 

and they just did not come before this Assembly. 

 

(1515) 

 

Her approach has been very simplistic, and as some of her 

party members might say, perhaps naïve.  She had a chance to 

improve the way things are done in this legislature and she 

chose not to.  She rather took the low road instead. 

 

Someone once said that Liberals are different from Tories 

because they have a conscience.  The only problem is that they 

choose not to follow it.  And we certainly saw that as a Liberal 

characteristic in the display and the spectacle of candidate 

selection last evening. 

 

Well I'm disappointed, Mr. Speaker, disappointed that the 

member from Greystone, as I say, could not put on 



216 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 1993 

record constructive comments, researched alternatives, and 

move past her negative attitude.  This does nothing to help our 

whole economic climate in this province. 

 

We expected it from the 10 Conservative members opposite 

because we saw it for the last 10 years, but we were waiting for 

something different from the member of the Liberal Party. 

 

We asked both parties to join with us, to join with us to restore 

people's trust, the trust that's like a fragile flower right now and 

needs help to grow.  It's one that moves past petty politics on 

agricultural issues and joins with us in a vote to ask for third 

line of defence.  It doesn't say speak out your political rhetoric 

and do nothing about it. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in the words from the Speech from the 

Throne, I would like to quote that my government accepts with 

enthusiasm its mandate to provide Saskatchewan people with 

honest, open, accessible, and truly accountable government 

and, I add, a government that wants to grow with the people of 

Saskatchewan in a respectful situation and a situation of trust, 

dialogue, and support. 

 

This will lead to a renewed public trust and a restored 

confidence in the traditional values of Saskatchewan 

community that are essential in my government's vision for the 

future. 

 

Part of restoring that trust will come this session with the code 

of ethical conduct and the conflict of interest legislation.  We 

are serious about setting high standards of behaviour for all 

elected representatives.  Elected representatives should seek to 

elevate the integrity of the position, rather than declaim the 

qualities of the me-first generation and the me-first approach 

we saw so evident in the past years here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, along with restoring the trust and the integrity of 

the political process and of the politician, we're also concerned 

about the restoring of a healthy economy.  The key to 

economic renewal is the increased employment opportunities.  

We know only too well the tragedy that befalls families when 

one or more of their breadwinners find themselves 

unemployed.  This situation of high unemployment has been 

causing great damage right across our country. 

 

Saskatchewan doesn't have some of the highest rates that we 

see elsewhere, but still the situation is unacceptable to us.  I 

commend the government for recognizing that more must be 

done in this area and for recognizing a model that was given to 

us by the Regina Economic Development Authority. 

 

It takes me back to a time on city council when we were 

working to develop the Authority and the bringing together of a 

broad cross-section of the community to pull together and to 

work together; business, labour, community leaders, elected 

officials, and the bureaucrats coming together in a positive 

way.  We drew the community together and we came to this 

building to present a future Regina document that we were very 

proud of, that had all the stakeholders involved, and that had 

community leaders with us to present it. 

And what did we get?  What did we get for our results from the 

previous government was a Fair Share Saskatchewan program 

that was announced the next day. 

 

People can tell you clearly across Saskatchewan what they felt 

of Fair Share Saskatchewan and what that would do for the 

economy of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm also very pleased to see what's happening in 

many of our rural communities with the community bonds 

program and the new expanding small businesses in rural areas.  

It shows us what can be done in a supportive government, a 

supportive atmosphere, and a working together with people 

across the province. 

 

People don't want government to be the solver of all their 

problems or to do things that people can do for themselves, but 

rather they want a government that has the responsibility to 

stage a positive economic environment and to provide the 

coordination needed to allow people to take initiative on their 

own. 

 

Saskatchewan people by their nature are problem solvers.  

What the government is doing is encouraging and fostering the 

opportunities for people to solve their own problems and 

implement their own ideas.  On a small economic scale this 

government is offering empowerment to many small businesses 

that we recognize are the backbone to the economy in this 

province. 

 

Another aspect of setting an appropriate stage or environment 

is the establishment of the cooperatives directorate.  Mr. 

Speaker, we believe the best solutions are the ones that come 

from local communities and the ones that come from 

communities that have control over their own environment.  

Cooperatives are an excellent example of this, of people 

coming together to organize themselves and to cooperate over 

particular problems. 

 

If this government can continue to nurture the hard-working 

and creative characteristics of Saskatchewan people, I am 

convinced that the economic problems will soon be turned 

around and be behind us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I was a member of Regina City Council I 

worked hard on a women's task force and worked and spent 

hours listening to people on the inquiry into hunger and 

poverty.  And what I heard from members opposite like Jack 

Klein and Grant Schmidt was there are no hungry people in 

Saskatchewan.  I am encouraged by this government who has a 

commitment to delivering on programs and services for 

children, and many children who live in poverty and hunger. 

 

For far too long our society has given empty lip-service to the 

importance to children in our communities and they are the 

future of our society.  Yet when push comes to shove, children 

have often been neglected by our society.  And I am glad that 

the members opposite bring up the food banks.  For when was 

there a need, a great need in this community, that was met by 

the food banks, was under the idea of the Conservative 

government who felt to feed people was a responsibility of the 

charity of a community and not a government to take collective 



March 9, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 217 

action with public dollars that were put into public trust.  A 

shame. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- And they should be remorseful, but instead 

they laugh and catcall from across the floor. 

 

So I say, neglected because often the needs of the children in 

our communities were not taken seriously by the members 

opposite.  It's gratifying to know that I'm now part of a 

government that is saying, enough is enough of the empty 

rhetoric.  We're taking action.  We're taking action to help our 

children. 

 

And last year without a lot of fanfare few pilot projects were 

under way in the children first: community action program.  

These programs focus on the total child.  They show 

understanding of children, and that children cannot learn if 

they're coming to school hungry, abused, or in emotional stress. 

 

Finally we have a government that is prepared to deal with the 

total problem.  The government is not walking in with 

heavy-handed ideas and into communities and saying, do this 

or do that or sicking welfare police on people with video 

cameras and trying to somehow skulk out the victims or the 

abusers in any situation. 

 

They're not leaving families with the idea that they have to live 

in fear if they're hungry, that they'll be somehow reported for 

the use of the food bank and perhaps undermine the strength of 

their family. 

 

No, this government is assisting with various facets of 

community support and bringing people together in 

compassion and in caring, communities taking ownership of 

those issues and developing the solutions and working together 

to solve those problems. 

 

Government has set the tone, provided a forum and a few 

suggestions on process and from there the communities are 

developing the solutions. 

 

Along the same model the government will initiate an action 

plan for children, a plan built on the belief that children have 

the right to adequate food, clothing, shelter, and a safe and 

nurturing environment.  I cannot stress how long overdue this 

initiative is, not only for this province, but for this country. 

 

Children however become the victims not only of hunger and 

poverty, but they're created by failed economic policies, the 

policies that lead to high unemployment, growing poverty 

among women.  They're two critical factors that mean more to 

our children who are growing up in poverty.  When parents are 

under too much stress or pressure from not being able to make 

ends meet or from having to work two or three jobs, the 

children suffer. 
 

So for all the hollow rhetoric, Mr. Speaker, the hollow rhetoric 

from the members opposite, they spouted off about family 

values and protecting the family, spending money conducting 

family forums.  When it comes to the consequences of their 

words, they're very hypocritical indeed.  I would argue that no 

one can claim to care about 

a family when it supports economic policies that have 

increased levels of poverty, that vie from the big for 

somewhere else, hoping that somehow the jobs or the wealth 

will trickle down for someone to pick up a few meagre crumbs. 

 

With the present economic and job pressures that many 

families are facing today, it becomes essential that as a society, 

we all take responsibility for protecting those who are most 

vulnerable and those who are the real hope for our future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm proud to be a government who takes that 

seriously and who is now beginning to put forward programs to 

support and nurture the future of this province. 

 

And I also stand very proud to be able to support the actions 

that we'll take in this session to introduce amendments to The 

Workers' Compensation Act and The Occupational Health and 

Safety Act. 

 

These changes will improve the work environment for adults, 

but they will also relieve some of the unfair and unnecessary 

pressures that are on the job.  And I know that helps the 

families who will also benefit from these two Acts.  These are 

both further examples of setting the proper environment or 

atmosphere for a society of caring and support. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am also very proud to be a part of a government 

who's now taking that journey of renewal that unfolds through 

the throne speech that's been presented to this session of the 

legislature.  We are continuing on a difficult journey, but we 

are making progress towards a brighter future. 

 

I see this government reinforcing our party's proud tradition of 

providing fiscal responsibility.  It's not that we value money for 

its own sake, but for what we can do with it collectively to put 

the public trust to work, and that we make sure every penny is 

spent wisely. 

 

We want to make sure that our money is spent efficiently and 

effectively to provide a bright economic future for the 

province.  But we also understand the meaning of freedom, Mr. 

Speaker, is to make sure that the debts that have been mounted 

up, the way they've been mounting, and as other members have 

talked about, the growing interest and the many years of 

responsibility that our province will bear for that debt. 

 

We want to take steps this session to make sure that the 

bankers, the people who are holding our credit rating and the 

bonds from other countries and other provinces, are not the 

ones who call the shots in this province. 

 

This is true for individuals when they see their debts mounting 

in their home and they take action to correct it.  But it should 

also be true for businesses and for government. 

 

In the same way debt in itself is not necessarily a bad thing.  It 

can be very useful at times -- in emergency times in the 

province.  When it becomes unmanageable and uncontrollable 

however, then it becomes a ball and 



218 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 1993 

chain.  And it also becomes a way to hold people captive 

because you must then cut further and further into the areas of 

social justice and social programing in our communities. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this government is acting responsibly and also 

consistently with our CCF (Cooperative Commonwealth 

Federation) background and our NDP (New Democratic Party) 

governments that have gone before us. 

 

The CCF Party grew up out of the conviction that we should 

not be controlled by eastern bankers.  Well, that principle holds 

today as it did then.  And I'm pleased to be a part of a 

government that is working hard to regain its financial 

freedom.  In this area as well there has been much progress. 

 

Perhaps the members opposite don't understand the progressive 

ways to look at new accounting principles since they didn't go 

forward in that way, or understand about strengthening an 

auditing process so we can clearly understand where the books 

are in this province.  But we all understand clearly our 

commitment to be accountable and responsible to the people 

we serve. 

 

(1530) 

 

The rough and rocky part of this journey is almost behind us, 

and very soon we'll be turning the corner to a brighter future 

that's well within our view and within our grasp.  It's thanks to 

the hard-working commitment of this government in 

cooperation and community and in compassion and caring, that 

the sun will soon shine once more on the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We're going through a difficult time and no one will tell you 

differently.  Most often people come up to me and say, Ms. 

Hamilton, as the member from Wascana Plains is it 

congratulations I should bestow upon you or condolences?  

We're looking at what the alternatives are before you and we're 

nervous, and we know it's going to be a difficult task but we're 

behind you.  We want to get together and we will all get 

together to survive. 

 

And as the situation improves in this province, we will be 

stronger for having come from the great difficulties we face 

and come through them successfully.  Mr. Speaker, in 

Saskatchewan there will be a tomorrow for all of our children. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise today to 

respond to what might just be the biggest doom and gloom 

speech ever given, the NDP government's throne speech. 

 

Before I carry on I would like to comment and thank the people 

of Souris-Cannington for electing me to be their representative 

in this legislature.  Souris-Cannington is the constituency in the 

far south-east corner of this province.  We're bordered on the 

south by the U.S. (United States) and on the east by Manitoba.  

We're an area of agriculture, oil production, and tourism. 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Souris-Cannington have a knack of 

getting their name into the news.  Our area is the home of the 

Alameda dam, the dam that the government opposite doesn't 

talk about because, Mr. Speaker, we have water in the Alameda 

dam, we have fish in the Alameda dam. And I would invite the 

good people of this province to come to Souris-Cannington and 

visit us and enjoy the area. 

 

I would also like to offer my sympathy to the mover and 

seconder of the motion to accept the throne speech -- my 

sympathy, Mr. Speaker, because they had to put their names to 

such an empty document. 

 

This NDP government, Mr. Speaker, is the most negative, most 

fatalistic, pessimistic group of people I have ever come across, 

and I'm not alone in my thinking.  Hospital administrators, 

teachers, university students, parents, and literally thousands of 

people are disillusioned with the NDP members across the 

way. 

 

A government is supposed to do many things, is supposed to 

make things better.  A government is supposed to protect the 

people in the hard times. A government is supposed to lead the 

way to a better tomorrow.  And what do we see?  What do we 

find? 

 

We find a lack of responsibility and leadership.  We find 

ministers, the Minister of Education who yesterday refused to 

accept the responsibility for her actions.  In August last session 

she said that she was giving $438,000 to the Loreburn school, 

and lo and behold it ends up at 1.4 million, but she's not 

responsible. 

 

All the NDP government has to offer this province, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is a lack of vision, a lack of dreams, and a total lack of 

a plan.  If anything, this government only offers a 1960s man 

with a 1970 game plan.  They offer a return to ever higher 

taxes and utility rates, and that old one, the family of Crown 

corporations.  Mr. Speaker, the NDP administration lacks 

everything except new ideas on how to further tax the people of 

this province. 

 

The throne speech is just another example of the same doom 

and gloom from the same old people who said Saskatchewan 

should not develop the natural gas industry.  The same people 

who said the Saferco fertilizer plant was a white elephant.  But 

it seems kind of ironic that they were very pleased to take 

credit when they got to cut the ribbon at the grand opening. 

 

These are the same people who thought pulp and paper mills in 

Saskatchewan could not compete; the same people who 

opposed the Shand power plant, and the list goes on. 

 

This throne speech is about choices.  And I'm sorry to say that 

the NDP good choices are few and far between, yet the hurtful 

choices are very plentiful. 

 

Take harmonization as an example.  The former government 

said harmonization was needed to generate income, to provide 

a supplement to lower income families, to make the operations 

of small businesses, tradespeople, and farmers tax free, and pay 

for farm support programs.  This government chose to cut farm 



March 9, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 219 

support programs. 

 

I would like to add that coming from a constituency bordering 

on the U.S., that small businesses from Souris-Cannington 

constituency would have been especially benefited from 

harmonization because it would have helped to slow down 

cross-border shopping.  And what did the members opposite 

say?  Well they came out with a study entitled: "The Economic 

Impact of the Provincial GST on Saskatchewan", which stated 

that harmonization will, and I quote: 

 

 . . . will lead to increased inflation, reduced consumer 

spending and consumer confidence, thousands of lost jobs, 

and hundreds of millions of dollars lost in economic activity 

within the Saskatchewan economy. 

 

Thousands of jobs lost, Mr. Deputy Speaker, hundreds of 

millions of dollars lost in economic activity.  That's what it had 

to say. 

 

Just think for a moment.  If the guy from Riversdale and the 

guy from Regina Elphinstone and the member for Saskatoon 

Broadway and all of their colleagues really believed, Mr. 

Speaker . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- I want to just remind the member that 

when he's referring to other members that he should refer to 

them as members and not use any other words. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, if they really believed that 

harmonization was going to do all these things, what in the 

world are they doing to Saskatchewan people today? 

 

E&H (education and health) tax has gone up 16 per cent.  If 

that study was the truth, then we might as well all pack our 

bags and leave on what is left of our highways before they rip 

them up and turn them into gravel. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite were being truthful, how 

can they now justify raising income tax, sales tax, fuel tax, 

tobacco tax, environment taxes, utility taxes, creating new 

taxes and looking at harmonization as well.  And the mention 

of environment taxes, Mr. Speaker, will have a great effect in 

this province because it will again push people to shop outside 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

And what of this?  All of a sudden the NDP expect people to 

believe them when they say, well I guess we were completely 

off base with respect to harmonization.  We've changed our 

minds, and now it's just fine to harmonize but we'll call it 

something else.  And it's okay to raise every other tax too.  I 

don't think so, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Or in the vernacular of the 

youth today:  not. 

 

Why did the NDP ignore the facts?  That's an easy one.  They 

wanted to be government.  The NDP thought that scrapping 

harmonization would get them elected.  As one NDP strategist 

said, it makes good TV. 

 

They didn't care.  The members opposite chose only to care 

about getting elected.  The NDP used, as the editorialist put it, 

tortured logic -- that's from May 25 in the Leader-Post, 1991 -- 

to obtain their end goal. 

 Tortured logic.  I guess other words would fit the bill here like 

twisted facts or bamboozling the public. 

 

So we see today the party that used tortured logic to get elected 

try to convince people that their destructive decisions are based 

on some sort of facts, that they are sincere.  Give me a break. 

 

It is obvious that the NDP's goal was to get elected, and that's 

where it stopped.  Now they are desperately seeking a plan.  So 

far the only economic development initiative the NDP can 

cling to, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are the initiatives of the former 

government -- AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.), 

community bonds, Saferco, Weyerhaeuser, and the list goes on. 

 

Sears is the only economic development that the minister 

responsible can hang his hat on.  Even then, Sears was looking 

to come to Saskatchewan before he was the minister.  Only 

Sears, you say.  As the commercial says, what a pity. 

 

Instead of taking the responsibility to govern, the NDP across 

the way are going to study and review everything from A to Z, 

to give them an excuse to do nothing for the rest of their term 

and to allow the member from Riversdale to do nothing and 

hope the problems go away. 

 

This makes the member from Riversdale comfortable, because 

he does not have to make a decision.  That is his choice and the 

choice of his colleagues.  The choice the NDP made was to get 

elected at any cost and to make promises they would not keep 

to whomever would listen.  That is where NDP commitment to 

the people seems to end.  It is their choice. 

 

Everybody has choices.  Every government has choices, and 

the people aren't being fooled.  The Minister of Health just 

chose to cut funds to 800 children at the Wascana Rehab 

Centre.  The people aren't being fooled, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

by the NDP when they say they have no choice. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP are choosing each action they 

are taking.  The NDP are choosing to pit one community 

against another through their wellness plan for health care in 

this province.  Communities are scrapping for the remaining 

health dollars instead of working together. 

 

They are fighting over education dollars.  In education they are 

pitting community against community, neighbour against 

neighbour as the NDP government abandons their 

responsibility and their duty to provide leadership. 

 

I'm sure I will have ample time to debate this issue further with 

the ministers of Health and Education in the next few days.  

However, I sincerely regret that the ministers will not consult, 

visit, and talk to the people most affected by their decisions.  

This is not a caring government; this is not a compassionate 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am the official opposition member responsible 

for portfolios including Education, Environment, Sasktel, and 

SGI (Saskatchewan  



220 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 1993 

Government Insurance), as well as a number of legislative 

committees.  And I was very interested to hear the member 

from Greystone mention the legislative Environment 

Committee in her speech.  There are 10 members on the 

legislative Environment Committee, of which one is the 

member from Greystone. 

 

This committee originally started sitting last October and met 

the last time this past Friday.  We have held over 20 meetings 

across this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and in all that time, 

not once did the member from Greystone accept her 

responsibilities and sit with the committee.  She insisted on 

being on the committee, and perhaps she thought it would look 

good on her résumé when she was removed as Leader of the 

Liberal Party, but for the committee's work, she has been an 

albatross about the neck of the committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would recommend to the House that her name 

be deleted from being on this committee because of her 

dereliction to her duty to the committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hear every day how this government is callous, 

uncaring as it ties the hands of educators and educational 

facilities in this province.  In opposition, the NDP criticized an 

over 2 per cent increase by the former government.  Now they 

are cutting everything from capital expenditures to core 

curriculum.  The member from Saskatoon Riversdale, now the 

NDP Premier for one term, put it best when he said in an NDP 

news release: 

 

 . . . the government's chronic underfunding of post-secondary 

education, which has resulted in 10 percent increases in 

tuition this year, acute shortages of instructors and 

classrooms, and increased debt load for students seeking 

student loans. What we are talking about here is a 

government making the choice of how to spend taxpayer's 

money. 

 

(1545) 

 

At that time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member from Riversdale 

was talking about a 2.9 per cent increase, an increase in the 

operating grants to universities, tech schools, the K-12 school 

system.  And he was right.  The PC (Progressive Conservative) 

government of the day was making the choice to increase 

education funding.  The PCs were increasing money to 

education in tough times, and this government is making 

choices today. 

 

Now the member from Riversdale is sitting in the Premier's 

chair.  He is making the choice to force the closure of rural 

schools, increase tuition, and force Saskatchewan education 

facilities to cut back on essential programs and services.  This 

is the member from Riversdale's choice.  This is the NDP's 

choice.  In opposition, the same member was interviewed by 

the Moose Jaw Times Herald, and I quote: 

 

 Don't let any government tell you that they don't have enough 

funds for education.  The money is there. 

 

February 19, 1988.  That's what the member from Riversdale 

said, and today he is choosing to ignore that 

promise along with a litany of others.  That's not my choice, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that's not the public's choice, that's his 

choice. 

 

Choices, Mr. Speaker, is what this is all about.  And I'm sure 

the upcoming NDP budget will add many more NDP choices to 

the list.  Apparently the promises the member from Riversdale 

made and the promises his colleagues gave to the people of this 

province do not matter.  Because he is sitting where he wanted 

to sit -- in the Premier's chair -- and that is as far as his 

commitment goes. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I say that is not good enough.  It is not hard 

to figure out why the NDP preach doom and gloom and pass 

your wallet.  They do not want . . . They do not have a 

comprehensive plan of how to run this province.  And what is 

worse, they do not understand or care.  If they did, Mr. 

Speaker, I would be standing here congratulating the members 

opposite, not condemning them for their choices; I would not 

be receiving hundreds of phone calls and letters from people 

who feel they have been misled by the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish I could support the throne speech and what 

it could have contained.  But until the NDP rectify the hurt, the 

betrayal, and the grief the people of this province are 

experiencing, supporting the members opposite is an 

impossible request. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will not be voting in favour of this 

throne speech.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to join in the 

discussion on the throne speech here today, and I want to visit a 

number of issues that I believe are important for the people of 

Saskatchewan to consider. 

 

I have, I believe, been involved in quite a number of these 

throne speeches, Mr. Speaker.  And I have been involved with 

them in the context of government, and I have been involved 

with them in the context of opposition.  And I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, that this is the saddest throne speech that I've ever had 

the opportunity to listen to.  It deals with very little substance, 

has a whole lot of rhetoric, and really does not provide any 

vision, does not really provide any hope, does not provide any 

of the opportunities, the security that the people of the province 

of Saskatchewan I believe were looking for in a Speech from 

the Throne from Her Honour. 

 

I want to point out a number of areas that I think that there are 

serious omissions.  One of the things that occurred to me as I 

have listened through the debate period has been the almost 

irrelevance of the individuals who got up and spoke about the 

future of this province.  There was no vision for the future; 

there was no vision for what they expected it to be. 

 

And I think it's clearly expressed in the opinion of the text of 

the throne speech in a number of areas.  And I want to say that 

I have every respect for the involvement of Tommy Douglas, 

and you mention him two or three times in this throne speech.  

You mention Madam Sauvé.  But, Mr. Speaker, with all due 

respect to these people who have gone on before, there has to 

be a vision for the future. 



March 9, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 221 

And I will say to you and to the members of this Assembly that 

those people did have a vision for the future.  They did have a 

vision to look ahead and say: that is where I want to be, that's 

what I want to build for, that's what the future of Saskatchewan 

is, that's the hope that we have, the energy that we will go 

about and say we will deliver that to that point in time.  And 

they did, Mr. Speaker.  They did as members of parliament; 

they did it as a member of this Assembly.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is what formulated the beginnings of this provincial 

party that we see over here. 

 

But it has changed, Mr. Speaker.  It has changed dramatically.  

And now all they do is say grandpa did this and grandpa did 

that. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we have to go one step further than that and 

we have to say, what has the future got to hold for the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan?  What do the opportunities in 

this province present themselves as as we look at this throne 

speech and analyse it and think about the context of what's in 

it?  Is there hope for our young people?  Is there hope for the 

young people that are children of the members of this 

Assembly?  Is there a job for those people? 

 

Now I'm not saying that the government has to provide that 

job.  But I say that this government has to get out of the way of 

the people of Saskatchewan so that they can become involved 

in providing that opportunity for jobs and for opportunities that 

exist in this province. 

 

We have had this government stand in the way on a number of 

occasions, and I want to point some of them out to you as I go 

through the things that I have to say.  One of them is this:  the 

involvement that this government had in the agreement that 

they finally reached with the Atomic Energy Commission of 

Canada.  AECL was there for the taking from the very first day 

they were elected. 

 

They wanted to be in Saskatchewan and the people here just 

froze them out day after day after day after day, until this 

caucus and the people in Saskatoon, with overwhelming 

pressure, said to the people, look, maybe it's time for you to put 

pressure on that caucus.  You know them just as well as we do.  

You put the pressure on and make them change their mind, 

make their convention change their mind. 

 

And that is the reason why this government changed their 

mind.  They had pressure on them to make the decision from in 

the Assembly.  They had pressure on them from the city 

council in Saskatoon.  They had pressure on them from the 

people around the city of Saskatoon. 

 

And eventually the people from Regina who are members in 

this Assembly were told, that's going to happen because the 

people from Saskatoon said it's got to happen because it's going 

to provide an energy component for jobs, for research, and all 

of the kinds of things that need to happen in that kind of a field.  

And that, Mr. Speaker, is important for the people in the 

province to know. 

 

This government stood in the way, and stood in the way for 

months on end waiting for something to happen that they 

should have personally made the decision on at the 

beginning. 

 

We would be one year further ahead if they had've gone along 

and said, we have some reservations, however we know that it 

is an opportunity for this province to progress. 

 

What we have seen, Mr. Speaker, is a delay process in 

everything that they're doing.  And I want to point that out in a 

way that is relevant.  And I also want to say that it is made 

obvious by the members opposite over and over again.  And it's 

made obvious for this reason.  I believe there is a lack of 

leadership of the people in cabinet, the Premier, and all of the 

people that are sitting on that side of the House.  There is no 

leadership to make them say, I want to get to this place at such 

and such a time. 

 

The people that you refer to in your throne speech did have 

that.  Mr. Speaker, they had that in spades.  If you take Madam 

Sauvé and you say you want to use her as an example in your 

throne speech, she had a vision for what Canada should be.  

She had a vision for it.  Tommy Douglas had a vision for it.  

But what do these people have?  They just say, go back to 

Tommy Douglas.  And that's the beginning and that is also the 

end. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is what these people have as a problem.  

They have to carry their ideology along with them all the way 

through the system.  And when they get to 1993 it doesn't fit. 

 

And that's the problem they have in exercising leadership.  

There is no leadership on that side and that's the reason why the 

whole economy is floundering.  I want to point out some very 

interesting things.  I want to point out some very interesting 

things that were stated, and members opposite are saying that I 

didn't read the newspaper today. 

 

Well the Royal Bank said that there are certain things in that 

statement that have to exist and if you want to have a three and 

a half per cent growth in the economy, there are things that 

have to continue to exist, and one of those things is that wheat 

prices go up.  And if that doesn't happen, what's going to 

happen?  Nothing.  If the oil prices don't stay constant, what's 

going to happen?  Nothing.  And that is exactly what that Royal 

Bank statement has made and if you'd read it all you'd find out 

it was in there.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is absolutely the context 

of what the Royal Bank is basing it on.  If commodities stay 

constant and increase then they have that opportunity to have a 

rise in the price. 

 

What does the statement about building homes in the province 

of Saskatchewan reveal, Mr. Speaker?  It reveals for the first 

time that the people in the province of Saskatchewan are going 

to get the benefit from Crown Life coming into Saskatchewan 

and to Regina, and Farm Credit Corporation being involved in 

the city of Regina.  Those are the context of the kinds of things 

that are evident in the report in the paper. 

 

It has nothing to do with this government's vision, has 

absolutely nothing to do.  The member from Melfort went into 

her city and town and said, fine, there's so much gloom and 

doom we don't even know whether we have a 



222 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 1993 

credit rating at all.  And what does the mayor say?  He said if 

she had kept her mouth shut we may have had some 

investment.  What creates jobs?  What creates wealth in this 

province? 

 

It's clearly my opinion that the statements made by Isabel 

Anderson in her letter to the editor are absolutely accurate, Mr. 

Speaker.  She says it as well as anybody has said it, and what it 

does is, Mr. Speaker, you have to create wealth in order to have 

jobs.  You have to create jobs in order to have sustained growth 

in your economy, and if you want to sustain growth in your 

economy, you have to have the independent individuals in the 

province of Saskatchewan, who aren't overtaxed, have an 

opportunity to provide an investment, and therefore create jobs.  

And it's a circle that goes around, and it has to come around 

and it has to be the small, independent businesses that do it in 

the province of Saskatchewan.  That is a fact. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the second point to consider in all of this, is 

this: if you don't have the business people in the province of 

Saskatchewan, have security of risk, security of tenure without 

increased taxation, the people in the province of Saskatchewan 

who are left will not be able to support the infrastructure that 

we have and the social programs in this province.  That is a 

fact, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what do we have?  Tommy Douglas would be ashamed of 

this kind of a throne speech.  He would be.  He would say to 

you, get yourselves together and show some leadership in a 

defined way.  Clearly he would say that to you. 

 

And what have you done?  Absolutely nothing.  You have done 

absolutely nothing except stand in the way of progress.  And I 

want to point out some of the ways that you've stood in the way 

of progress today. 

 

Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, have played a major role in 

this province, and one of the first ones that were brought into 

place were brought into place by Mr. Tommy Douglas, and that 

was the SaskPower Corporation.  But, Mr. Speaker, today as 

we stand here, today as we stand here, the SaskPower 

Corporation has a debt/equity ratio of about 65:35.  Probably 

the best since the '60s.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is a fact. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- The best in Canada. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, the gentleman from Rosemont 

says it's the best in Canada.  Well yes sir, Mr. Speaker, it's the 

best in Canada because of very sound financial positions taken 

by the former government. 

 

The second reason, Mr. Speaker, is this, the second reason is 

that the people of the province of Saskatchewan could deliver 

on the payments for SaskPower because they were making 

some money. 

 

But what have we got today?  We have increased costs to 

business.  Some of the largest components of business are the 

largest users: Interprovincial Pipe; the potash mines in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  Rates go up.  Everybody across the 

province has to suffer those consequences, Mr. Speaker.  And 

every time they raise the taxes on the power 

rates, every time they raise those rates, the productivity goes 

down. 

 

(1600) 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the role today of government has been to 

provide the single-digit rate of inflation.  That's what it has 

done.  It has taxed this province so heavily in what it believes 

is the right way to go.  It has taxed the people in every direction 

so much so that the people in the province of Saskatchewan are 

leaving and the only thing that is evident in an inflation rate in 

this province is because of the taxes of the people opposite.  

That's what has caused inflation in this province.  It's the taxes, 

and at no time in the history of this province has that ever 

happened before. 

 

And I think it's time these people take and realize that they 

have a responsibility to the people who generate wealth.  

Government doesn't generate wealth, Mr. Speaker, government 

only transfers wealth from one group to another. 

 

And the businesses of this province need to have some 

recognition.  What did they do for small business, Mr. 

Speaker?  They increased the phone rates.  They increased the 

phone rates.  How do you do business in a province like 

Saskatchewan with miles and miles of travel that people have 

to do?  You do it by telephone, Mr. Speaker.  And what do they 

do?  They raise the rates.  How do you get to have business 

increase their capacity to be competitive?  How do you 

increase that?  Well, Mr. Speaker, you do that by lowering your 

costs.  And what has happened, Mr. Speaker?  People have had 

to lower their cost by laying off people and people and laying 

off more people. 

 

And when you go and look for work in this province today, it is 

extremely difficult.  As a matter of fact, it's almost impossible 

for any person to get a job in this province.  And I could go 

into patronage.  I could go into patronage and then say that 

there was one way and that is to buy an NDP membership.  

That's about the only way that's left. 

 

The third point I want to make is small business in this 

province has a lot of payments that they have to make in taxes 

as it relates to natural gas.  These people increase the price of 

inputs all the time.  It doesn't matter whether it's small 

business, big business, farmers, home-makers, they all get an 

increase in those kinds of taxes.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is why 

this government is in trouble with its tax problem.  They have a 

serious tax problem because they have taxed beyond the point 

of recovery for a lot of the people in this province. 

 

The other day, Mr. Speaker, we had another increase and that 

was in SGI.  Well, I'll be . . . SGI, who's been raising the rates.  

And then what they did on top of that, they had a . . . As the 

Minister of Highways said one day, it was between 4 and 11 

per cent; that's what they raised them. 

 

But then I'm not sure that he was visiting with the minister 

from SGI when he -- he should have probably been doing that 

-- but he should have asked him, what about the surcharge on 

some vehicles because there's more people driving them, or 

because they have more 



March 9, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 223 

accidents, or because the people who have vans have more 

accidents and are a little sloppy in driving.  I don't think it's 

that.  I think, Mr. Speaker, it's because it's the largest group, the 

largest single group he could put a surcharge on and raise the 

taxes for the people in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

When small business goes around this province in a van, it's in 

a van with his tools in it; it's an electrician; it's a plumber.  

Those are the people that I believe, Mr. Speaker, are the people 

who are impacted in this and going to cause them a problem. 

 

Who else has got a surcharge in this whole dimension of SGI?  

Who else got a surcharge?  Triple-axle truck units, power units 

. . . they're the ones that do business in this province.  They 

drive through.  Oh yes, they drive through.  I drive through 

Regina once a week to visit with people in my office here in 

Regina.  I meet those trucks going by, and they're going 

interprovincially.  I see them. 

 

But there's a whole lot of people in this province, Mr. Speaker, 

who have trucks hauling potash, hauling fertilizer out of the 

new plant here at Belle Plaine.  All over this province we have 

people who are going to pay extra for their vehicles to do 

delivery in this province on top of the tax that you pay for gas. 

 

I've noticed something interesting happening also, Mr. Speaker.  

We're going to have a budget come down here on March 18.  In 

that budget, my best guess is that gas prices are going up. 

 

And I'll tell you what's happening across the province.  I've 

been asking different people how much the gas is today.  

Downtown here it's 46 cents, I believe . . . 44.9.  In other places 

it's 49; other places it's 51, it's 53.  The price has gone down.  

Do you know why?  Everybody's getting prepared for the real 

increase that's going to happen on March 18. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why these people are 

overwhelmingly convinced that you don't know what you're 

doing.  The only thing that you know is that you have to tax to 

get the money.  You don't understand the real fundamentals of 

earning wealth in the province of Saskatchewan.  You have 

never learnt that.  You have never understood that. 

 

You should go back to Tommy Douglas.  Find out what he did 

in order to create wealth in the province of Saskatchewan.  He 

got the people working.  He got the people making decisions 

about the kind of economy that they wanted to have.  And that 

was a forward look. 

 

Why is John Diefenbaker's name on the Gardiner Dam?  Why 

is Tommy Douglas connected to that?  Why is Jimmy Garner 

connected to that?  It's because, Mr. Speaker, they had a vision 

for the future.  They had a vision for what they were supposed 

to do with the kinds of things that were available to the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

And that means, Mr. Speaker, we need to deal with processing 

in agriculture.  We need to deal with processing in minerals.  

We need to deal with processing in our 

oil.  We need to deal with processing in our uranium.  We need 

to do it here because we have the raw products here, and we 

need to do that. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we do not need, we do not need a 

government who gets in the way of this.  And we've seen that 

demonstrated over and over again.  We're going to have it 

demonstrated again, I believe, Mr. Speaker, by things that are 

in this throne speech. 

 

Getting in the way of business with your labour legislation.  

Getting in the way of business with your . . . all of the things 

that you're doing to curtail environment. 

 

You had a little committee going around the province talking 

about environment.  Well, Mr. Speaker, they were told what 

they should do with that Environment Committee.  They were 

told in spades over and over again.  And the fact of the matter 

is, Mr. Speaker, different people have told me across this 

province -- co-ops, small bulk dealers, independent fertilizer 

dealers, independent chemical dealers -- all across this 

province, told us in spades, if you put those rules in, we're 

gone. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is all the way from Glaslyn . . . that is all 

over from Glaslyn down to Swift Current to Carlyle to 

Nipawin.  And, Mr. Speaker, that's a fact, and that's a fact that 

these people here haven't learned a thing about.  If you put 

those hidden taxes, Mr. Speaker, on the people of the province 

of Saskatchewan, you will cause them very serious hurt. 

 

As a matter of fact, in my neighbouring constituency, which is 

Swift Current, the Pioneer Co-op built a brand-new bulk station 

according to the rules.  According to the rules, Mr. Speaker, 

they put up dikes around these tanks because it was according 

to the rules.  And that was less than five years ago.  Today 

they're going to have to replace them all -- replace them all, 

Mr. Speaker, at $130,000 extra cost to the people of 

Saskatchewan and who are a part of that cooperative.  And 

that's across the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now in Leader, Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, in Leader, 

Saskatchewan where the Highway No. 32 crosses over the 21, 

there's an empty lot.  And it used to be a service station, Mr. 

Speaker.  In that lot is . . . there's a reason why it's empty.  And 

the reason why it's empty is because of environment, Mr. 

Speaker.  Somebody's going to have to clean up some old tanks 

that are underground.  The Royal Bank doesn't want it.  

They've got a mortgage on that property; they don't want it.  

The RM (rural municipality) doesn't want it.  The town don't 

want it.  Who's going to clean it up? 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is what these people are aiming at 

doing.  So they say, clean it up.  What do they do?  Well I'll use 

another example from my neighbouring constituency, one I 

travel in often, and that's the city of Swift Current.  And the 

Co-op there again, Mr. Speaker, had to clean up an oil spill 

underneath the street.  They hauled out load after load after 

load after load of contaminated gas and gravel.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, what did they do with that?  They hauled it out into 

some farmer's field and said, there is where the contaminant is 

going to be. 



224 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 1993 

And that is all to do with environment and that is what is 

costing these people in the province of Saskatchewan over and 

over again.  The capacity for these people to lead with any kind 

of vision is stifled by their ideology.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

evident every day in the things that they say and do. 

 

I want to talk a little bit about the responsibilities that I have as 

lining up with agriculture in the province of Saskatchewan.  

There are probably no single group, Mr. Speaker, who 

contributes as much to the economy of Saskatchewan . . . well I 

know there's no single group that contributes as much to the 

economy in the province of Saskatchewan as agriculture does. 

 

In the city of Regina, 50 per cent of the people employed in the 

city are directly or indirectly paid for out of agriculture.  And 

that, Mr. Speaker, is going to be evident in the next three 

months.  In the next three months farmers in the province of 

Saskatchewan are going to invest $1 billion in the ground.  

They're going to put it in the ground and hope by fall that 

they'll have some way of paying that billion dollars back to 

their bulk fuel dealers, to their insurance agents, to all of the 

people that they come in contact to service the requirements 

they have in agriculture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are the people who work, not five hours a 

day or eight hours a day, but they work 16, 17, 18 hours a day.  

And I know, Mr. Speaker.  I was at a ranch in the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose's constituency just over the weekend.  And I 

met with him and he wants to sell his ranch.  Why, Mr. 

Speaker?  He wants to sell his ranch for this reason.  Because 

he cannot convince his family to stay there.  And so what he 

has to do is he and his wife both have to farm that place until 

they find somebody to buy it.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

happening over and over and over in this province. 

 

And we had an example of that with the people of Eston, in the 

area around the town of Eston.  They wanted to sell their land.  

If they would have found a buyer, they'd have sold it.  But, Mr. 

Speaker, we have people who believe that agriculture is living 

off the taxpayer. 

 

And I want to point out to the people of the province just this 

one comparison.  There is in the province of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, 50 million acres of cultivated land.  And if I was 

to take the amount of money that taxpayers put into agriculture 

and measure it against those 50 million acres, I would point out 

to you, Mr. Speaker, that it is less than $5 a cultivated acre that 

every farmer gets in the province of Saskatchewan -- $5 a 

cultivated acre. 

 

I want to point out one other thing.  If you were to take that 

same comparison and compare that to education, education in 

the province of Saskatchewan -- which I support and I 

wholeheartedly endorse -- they get about $20 a cultivated acre 

in the province of Saskatchewan from the taxpayer.  And every 

teacher and every student has the benefit of having not to pay a 

single dollar to have that investment capitalized so that they 

can go to school. And the second thing is for the individual to 

have a job.  They don't have to pay a single dollar to have that 

happen. 

Mr. Speaker, that's the kind of thing that is happening in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  The people are getting fed up with 

the high cost of taxes.  They're getting fed up with all of those 

sort of things. 

 

We have one other that I want to point out, Mr. Speaker.  In the 

province of Saskatchewan, on a comparative basis, the 

taxpayer spends $32 a cultivated acre in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  That, Mr. Speaker, are three items that I want 

to bring to the Assembly's attention, three items -- health care, 

education, and agriculture. 

 

How much is sponsored by the taxpayer?  And, Mr. Speaker, 

out of those three it comes to about $55.  And, Mr. Speaker, 

$50 of that goes to health and education, and $5 goes to 

agriculture. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, supplies an opportunity for economic 

development that far exceeds any of the health care, far 

exceeds any potential in the education.  And that, Mr. Speaker, 

is why I think it's important and why I think these people are 

missing the boat entirely when they're not going to the 

assistance of farmers across the province in a time, in a time, 

Mr. Speaker, when prices are depressed. 

 

All we have heard, all we have heard since these people got 

elected -- and I brought along the throne speech from 1991; I 

brought along the throne speech from 1992; and it's in the 

throne speech from 1993, Mr. Speaker -- and that is the federal 

government isn't doing their job.  That's all these people can 

talk about -- the federal government aren't doing their job. 

 

(1615) 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan, this government isn't doing their job 

either.  This government is not doing their job in any way, 

shape, or form when it comes to agriculture, when it comes to 

small business, when it comes to education.  And when I had to 

listen this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, to the questions on health 

care, they're not doing their job on health care either. 

 

And Mr. Douglas, for all of the respect that people pay him, 

which was well deserved, he would have cringed at what you're 

doing to children in the Wascana Rehab Centre today, as we 

have discovered.  He would cringe at disregarding children 

from across this province.  Respite care in a facility that is 

absolutely essential for people to be able to structure wellness 

in their own home, people who are taking and going the extra 

mile with their own children who have a very serious problem.  

They're going the extra mile in doing things in caring for their 

families, and they want one opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to say, I 

want a little bit of time off in a respite facility.  And Wascana 

Rehabilitation Centre provided that for 800 children across this 

province. 

 

And what's happening, Mr. Speaker?  As we discovered today, 

it's being taken away.  Mr. Speaker, that would make Tommy 

Douglas roll over.  That would irritate him.  He would stand in 

his place as a former premier of this province and he would 

chastise anybody that had ever 



March 9, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 225 

done that.  He would do that.  He would say you are wrong, 

you are wrong to do it.  You are wrong to have thought about 

it. And, Mr. Speaker, as we go about the various kinds of 

discussion in our estimates in the budget we're going to inquire 

where else is this whole entity of what they're going to do with 

health care.  Where are they wrong? 

 

Mr. Speaker, my family has been a participant in a community 

health program, a health program in the province of 

Saskatchewan since I was a very small boy.  And that started in 

health region no. 1 in the south-west part of this province, and, 

Mr. Speaker, it was organized with the assistance of the 

government at the time, but it was organized in a way that dealt 

with the municipalities in a way that was honest and forthright.  

It dealt with doctors in a way that was honest and forthright. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what we have today is a total disregard for 

any of the people in the community.  The Minister of Health 

doesn't go out and visit with people.  She doesn't go and say, 

what would you say that we should be doing?  She doesn't go 

and ask people in Eastend, should we have a health care facility 

here?  What should it be? 

 

And I can even go to my own constituency where the Minister 

of Health sent out, instead of going herself, sent out one of her 

employees through the department.  And, Mr. Speaker, it was 

brought to my attention that only after the individual was 

confronted with the facts that he retracted his statement that he 

had made that Vanguard had continually lost money through all 

the years that they were in existence as a hospital.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, it was the municipalities there that had to say to him, 

you're wrong.  And when he went back he finally had to 

realize, Mr. Speaker, it was not a drain on the economy.  In fact 

it was an asset to the economy. 

 

Across this province we have small hospitals who are 

delivering health care probably at a better cost-effective rate 

than anywhere else in the province of Saskatchewan.  And that, 

Mr. Speaker, is the reason why I won't be supporting this 

throne speech.  Because it doesn't address those issues.  It 

doesn't take and assess them in a direct and forthright way.  It 

doesn't do anything for them. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if this Premier would have some leadership 

and if he would have leadership ability, he would ask that 

Minister of Health to either change her ways and make it 

happen or he would ask someone else to do it.  And I know that 

there were people who are sitting and have discussed . . . I say 

there are people in this Assembly who are sitting here and 

cringing at the fact that they're going to have to do that to 

health care recipients in the province of Saskatchewan.  There 

are people here who say no, that shouldn't happen, and 

probably told her that. 

 

And what do they do when they get this whole thing put 

together, Mr. Speaker?  They decide that we can't afford it.  We 

can't afford it.  Why?  Because the debt is too high. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I pointed that out earlier.  If you don't have a real 

view of what the vision and the direction of the province of 

Saskatchewan should be, you are never going to have people in 

the province having a vision.  The 

leadership has to come from the government.  The leadership 

and opportunities have to come from this government.  And 

what have we got?  Absolutely nothing.  They are stymied in 

their attitudes; they're narrow in their thinking.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, I think the leadership is terrible. 

 

They dealt last time . . . I'm just going to go through some of 

the things that they also did last year.  And we're going to get a 

whole new batch of things to talk about in this budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we had optometric services cut.  What did the 

optometrists do?  They had a day when you could get services 

provided.  And I believe a thousand people went to see the 

optometrist for free of charge.  That, Mr. Speaker, is starting to 

be the in thing to do.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is happening over 

and over and over again. 

 

What about chiropractic care?  It's off.  It's out of schedule.  

And what happened?  These people said, well that isn't a part of 

wellness.  We need a part of wellness to make this thing go.  I 

think the only thing that they're talking about wellness is their 

budget, and I'm not sure that that isn't sicker than the other.  

That. Mr. Speaker, is the real problem these people have.  They 

haven't generated enough wealth from the economy to sponsor 

the kinds of things that people expect in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

People in the province of Saskatchewan want to work.  They 

want to deliver the best health care services in the province and 

in the country.  They want to deliver the best kind of education.  

They want to have the best social programs in the province and 

in Canada.  But what do they do?  They're stymied by the very 

growth factor that this government is always putting their 

thumb on.  They're curtailing any kind of ambition, curtailing 

any kind of energy and vision and future. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why these people have a 

very serious problem.  That's why they have a serious problem 

out in the country.  That's why members in this Assembly don't 

go back to their constituencies because they don't know what's . 

. . don't want to visit with those people.  That's why the 

Minister of Health didn't want to leave the Assembly here 

today.  That's why she stayed back, because she didn't want to 

talk to the media. 

 

Why?  Because she knew that there is a very serious problem at 

the Wascana Rehab Centre, and she knew that for a very 

specific reason.  And that, Mr. Speaker, was that she is cutting 

the program out.  And what is it going to do to 800 children in 

this province?  It is going to make a very serious problem for 

those children.  It is going to make a very serious problem for 

the care-givers in those homes.  It is going to create a very 

serious problem for everyone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it took a lot of work . . . I've met a lot of people 

who have been through the Rehab Centre -- adults, children, 

young people.  And that, Mr. Speaker, they have said to me 

over and over again, we should have another one of those in the 

province of Saskatchewan, where they treat people in a way 

that is not only compassionate but it rehabilitates them.  That's 

the kind of 



226 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 1993 

thing that we need to have in this province.  We don't need to 

cut it back.  We need to have some of the other hospitals in this 

province be recognized for the kinds of things that can be 

delivered.  And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that we have the 

courage in this province to do that. 

 

What did they do with other things that I want to point out in 

rural Saskatchewan?  Well they took the natural gas program 

away.  There were only about three areas or four areas in the 

province left to do but they said, oh no, we'll cancel that.  That 

doesn't create any economic growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about costs of production in this 

province.  When you talk about costs of production, you have 

to reduce those costs, and reducing those costs comes by 

delivering natural gas to the homes in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  It also, Mr. Speaker, does some other things.  It 

increases our productivity.  It increases the capacity we have to 

produce and that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why we need that 

in the province. 

 

I could go through a whole group of items that have been 

cancelled as it relates to the things that have been done in 

agriculture.  They cancelled the feed grain assistance program; 

they put it back in, called it something else.  But we're not even 

sure whether that's on because they haven't paid out yet, Mr. 

Speaker.  And that's another thing that is causing a problem.  

Pasture rentals went up.  Cash advances were gone for 

livestock producers. 

 

They cancelled the fee that went to pay for cancer patients who 

were rural people coming in to the cities.  They cancelled those 

items in the province.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is another thing 

they did.  All of these things are all things that dealt the rural 

part of the province -- and it isn't only the farming 

communities; it is the small urban centres in the province of 

Saskatchewan -- it's dealing them a crippling blow. 

 

Behind all of this is, in my opinion, Mr. Speaker, the 

fundamental belief, the fundamental belief that they want to 

have as few people in rural Saskatchewan as possible.  They 

want to have as few there for one simple reason, Mr. Speaker, 

and the reason is this: they want to change the electoral 

boundaries. 

 

And the other day when we were doing our voting, the 

members opposite when we were voting said: gone, gone, 

gone.  Each of the constituencies as they came across the roll 

here, they said: gone, gone.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly 

what they meant.  They're going to reduce the number of seats 

in this province so that rural people will have less 

representation in this province.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is the 

reason that they're lowering the population.  They're 

deliberately doing it across the province.  They're doing it 

systematically and they're going to say, I want to get rid of 

rural Saskatchewan so I don't want to have any voters there.  

That, Mr. Speaker, is why they're doing it.  And, Mr. Speaker, 

I'm going to say this:  I have never had my constituencies 

changed since the day that . . . 
 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I wonder if the member 

from Morse would permit his colleague and the Government 

House Leader to have finished their debate first.  But in this 

Chamber I think the member is on his feet 

and should be allowed to speak. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I believe, Mr. Speaker, that was the member 

from Moosomin or from Kindersley, but it wasn't the member 

from Morse.  I was doing the talking, thank you. 

 

I want to say to the Assembly here today that I believe that you 

are tracking on the wrong track.  I believe that as strongly as I 

believe in the fundamental principles that in health care and in 

social concerns that Tommy Douglas provided for the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan.  You're tracking wrong.  He 

wouldn't have done what you're doing today.  He wouldn't have 

done anything compared at all to what you're doing today. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is where you and your ideology are not 

going the right direction.  And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I will 

not be supporting this throne speech.  I hope that the people 

opposite have the courage to understand some of the things that 

are really going on in the province and vote no to the throne 

speech as they voted on today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 4:29 p.m. until 4:37 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

 

Romanow Murray 

Van Mulligen Hamilton 

Thompson Johnson 

Wiens Trew 

Simard Draper 

Tchorzewski Serby 

Lingenfelter Sonntag 

Shillington Flavel 

Koskie Roy 

Solomon Cline 

Goulet Scott 

Atkinson McPherson 

Kowalsky Wormsbecker 

Mitchell Crofford 

MacKinnon Stanger 

Cunningham Knezacek 

Bradley Harper 

Koenker Keeping 

Lorje Kluz 

Lyons Carlson 

Pringle Langford 

Calvert Jess 

-- 44 

Nays 

 

Swenson Toth 

Neudorf Britton 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd  

-- 7 

MOTIONS 

 

Address be Engrossed and Presented to Her Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor 



March 9, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 227 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for Regina Dewdney: 

 

The the said address be engrossed and presented to Her 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor by such members of the 

Assembly as are of the Executive Council. 

 

I so move. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Ways and Means 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for Regina Churchill Downs: 

 

 That this Assembly pursuant to rule 87 hereby appoint a 

Committee of Finance to consider the supply to be granted to 

Her Majesty and to consider ways and means of raising the 

supply. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:42 p.m. 

 

 


