




















































Hansard: March 01, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 33 

 March 1, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that 

I shall on Wednesday next move first reading of a Bill to 

recognize Jean Louis Legare for his heroic and compassionate 

efforts with respect to Chief Sitting Bull as his people during 

their years of refuge in what is now the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I give notice that I shall on Wednesday next ask the 

government the following question: 

 

 Regarding the Department of Economic Diversification and 

Trade and the minister's trade trips: what was (1) the total 

cost of the trade delegation's trip to Mexico including travel 

expenses, lodging, and communications; (2) the number of 

private individuals who accompanied the minister; (3) the 

number of staff who accompanied the minister; (4) the 

amount of the minister's own personal expenses including 

travel, lodging, communications, and entertainment; (5) does 

the government have a means of tracking how many sales, 

economic opportunities, or jobs are created as a result of 

these trips; and (6) what is the nature of the tracking 

mechanism referred to in the previous question? 

 

I will add to that, Mr. Speaker, the trip to Cuba. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to the Assembly, Mr. and 

Mrs. Ken Dear, residents of Langham area, in the RM (rural 

municipality) of Cormon Park near Saskatoon.  Mr. Dear was a 

member of the council of Cormon Park for a number of years 

when I was a reeve there, and I wish the Assembly to join me 

in welcoming them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

VON Contract Cancellation 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and good 

afternoon.  I rise, Mr. Speaker, to question the Minister of 

Health.  Madam Minister, you are well aware that your 

government's actions have forced the cancellation of a contract 

for home nursing services with the long-standing and the 

well-respected Victorian Order of Nurses. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, not only does this remove the essential 

services that they provide, it will put in jeopardy the other 

services, health-related services that they provide, such as 

seniors' health, counselling, sitter services for adults, foot care, 

friendly visitors, and so on 

-- all done, Madam Minister, I might add, with volunteer 

services totalling more than 14,000 hours. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister is:  would you not 

agree that in the name of integrating services you will have 

actually cost taxpayers anywhere from 150,000 to $175,000 

annually as was put forward in the letter from the VON 

(Victorian Order of Nurses) to you? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

let me say first of all that the decision that the Regina Health 

Board arrived at with respect to VON will save taxpayers a 

minimum of 80,000 to 90,000 per year by providing home care 

nursing services directly to their clients. 

 

The Regina Health Board is also having discussions, I 

understand, with the VON to carry on such services such as 

sitter service, foot care, seniors' health programs, and friendly 

visitors services.  So there are ongoing discussions with VON 

and the Regina Health Board to look at how some of the 

expanded services can be carried out within the community. 

 

There are a number of things that . . . number of benefits as a 

result of the Regina Health Board decision to move to the 

consolidation of home care nursing services within one unit.  

And the Regina Health Board has repeatedly stated these to the 

public. 

 

For example, they indicate that home care clients will benefit 

from this decision from improved coordination and scheduling 

of services.  The clients will have benefit from improved 

communication amongst the team providing their home care 

services and other services within the system.  The services 

provided by the team will include nursing, meals, 

home-making, assessment, and coordination. 

 

What has occurred in this process, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, Madam Minister, you have fired up your blame 

thrower.  Throughout the entire discourse all you were doing 

was blaming the Regina Board of Health.  You failed to 

acknowledge the fact, Madam Minister, that 14,000 hours of 

volunteer work are going down the drain.  You failed to 

recognize that $175,000 of volunteer money is now going 

down the drain. 

 

And, Madam Minister, let me remind you, it is the VON, it is 

the VON that is saying that you will not reduce the cost of 

health care by this process.  They say that it will cost more.  

They say, and I quote the brief quotation: with the creation of 

the Wascana home care bureaucracy to run the home nursing 

program, and the potential reduction or loss of other programs, 

will cost the health care of Saskatchewan taxpayer more and 

more. 



34 Saskatchewan Hansard March 1, 1993 

Madam Minister, you are the minister; it is your responsibility.  

The question: is your drive for health care reform so blind and 

poorly planned as to cancel contracts which so directly go 

against your highly publicized wellness plan as is clearly the 

case with the VON? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, for the member opposite to 

suggest that volunteers will not work with home care, is totally 

false.  There will still be ample and many, many volunteers 

working in the system. 

 

The fact of the matter is, is that the Regina Health Board is 

having ongoing discussions with VON to determine what other 

services can be provided and how it can be coordinated with 

the system overall.  It is not the doom and gloom that the 

member opposite represents: that all these volunteers are going 

to pack their bags and go home, because I don't believe that's 

the case. 

 

I believe that the people of Regina do want to volunteer their 

services and there will be continued volunteers in the system, 

in our health care system, throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

For the members opposite to suggest that all the volunteers are 

going to quit volunteering is simply not accurate and not 

realistic.  And, Mr. Speaker, the Regina Health Board is 

continuing, as I said earlier, to have discussions with VON and 

organizations throughout the city to provide a much more 

coordinated and comprehensive system of health care services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, you are correct in one thing: 

the volunteer system and spirit of Saskatchewan will survive in 

spite of you.  You are correct in that one. 

 

Madam Minister, I want to just remind you in case you have 

forgotten, that you refused to meet with the VON.  This was 

confirmed as little as 10 minutes ago.  You refused to meet 

with them.  They've requested a meeting with you to discuss 

this important issue.  You hide behind one of the many bunkers 

that this government is establishing for itself. 

 

And you hide behind the Regina Health Board.  You say, go 

talk to them; I have nothing more to do with this.  You blame 

them. 

 

Madam Minister, will you give the VON the opportunity to 

make direct application to you.  Will you come out from 

behind those walls you are building around your office long 

enough, Madam Minister, to take responsibility for your 

actions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my understanding that 

the Associate Minister of Health met with the VON.  So I want 

to make sure that the members opposite are aware of that. 

 

Now the other fact is this, is we have in our health care 

reform indicated that community boards will have more 

community control and input into the decision-making process 

with respect to health care.  I do not intend, when the Regina 

Health Board advises us that they are looking after this 

particular matter, to move in and cancel their decision and try 

to outguess their decision-making process.  I think that would 

be very unfair in view of the fact that we have indicated that 

community boards would have more control and input. 

 

However, the members opposite should be aware that the 

Associate Minister of Health has met with VON. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A new question to 

the minister.  Madam Minister, in the words of your Premier, 

we don't want to and they don't want to talk to your toy 

minister.  They want to talk to the real minister, Madam 

Minister, which is you.  The buck should stop in your position.  

You are the final authority, Madam Minister. 

 

And I say to you that the VON contract is one example of what 

is a very ill-conceived, ill-planned, confusing plan, if you can 

call it that, for the health care district exercise.  And we may 

well pay up paying more for our services as a result. 

 

Madam Minister, the deadline for your health care district is 

quickly approaching.  April is almost here.  In light of the short 

period of time and the seriousness of the issue, I trust that the 

minister's answers will be short, brief, and forthcoming. 

 

Madam Minister, very simply, can you tell us how much these 

changes that you are managing will save the Saskatchewan 

taxpayers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well I think, Mr. Speaker, that the 

member opposite should speak to the Regina Health Board, the 

Saskatoon Health Board, and the Prince Albert Health Board, 

where millions of dollars have already been saved by these 

health boards through the proper coordination and integration 

of services and the removal of duplication, at the same time 

expanding services in the social area such as public health 

services and more programs. 

 

So the member opposite should sit down and meet with these 

health boards just once to find out what is really happening 

there, rather than listening to rumours and innuendo and his 

political friends trying to slant the story with respect to health 

reform in these three cities. 

 

The fact of the matter is, it's already saved the taxpayer 

millions of dollars.  And there will be increased savings as a 

result of this kind of exercise throughout the province as we 

move through health reform. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  All I can say to you, 

Madam Minister, is that I hope that the VON in other 



March 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 35 

cities in Saskatchewan are not going to be meeting the same 

fate as the one in Regina have -- I sincerely hope, and I think I 

speak on behalf of all of the VONs throughout the province. 

 

Madam Minister, one would hope that the massive 

restructuring of health care such as this would necessitate the 

complete study of the issue and the complete diligence on the 

part of the NDP government.  Madam Minister, have you done 

any analysis which states very simply how much the new 

district boards will save Saskatchewan taxpayers?  I'm 

interested, Madam Minister, because you speak in glowing 

terms of millions -- millions.  Can you show us any study that 

you have done that will be specific, line-by-line analysis to 

show the people of Saskatchewan that indeed you do know 

what you're doing? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, first of all, the member 

opposite knows that we have not created districts throughout 

Saskatchewan at this point.  We do not know what the 

configuration of these particular districts will be.  When we 

have our districts established we will be able to determine more 

accurately what services will be needed within a district and 

what sort of savings will be generated and what sort of services 

will be provided within the district. 

 

When we have had an opportunity to establish our districts, we 

will be able to . . . and do a needs assessment within a district, 

we will be in a better position to give line-by-line indication to 

the member opposite of what we are intending to achieve in 

this area. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I believe maybe I 

would be having better luck if I did ask the Associate Minister 

of Health to bring forth the government's plan. 

 

But I'm going to give you something now, Madam Minister, 

one of the very few things that is still free in this province, and 

that is advice, if you would just care to listen now. 

 

People want to know where this process is taking them.  They 

want to know that indeed it will save them money while 

maintaining services, Madam Minister.  After all, Madam 

Minister, I'm sure everyone would be able to swallow the bitter 

medicine that you've given them if they knew that that fact was 

assured.  However, it would seem to me, Mr. Speaker, that the 

minister is experimenting with the patient. 

 

How about giving us a ballpark figure, Madam Minister?  Are 

we going to break even?  Are we going to be spending more 

money?  Will you give an indication, Madam Minister, that 

will show the people of Saskatchewan that indeed you do know 

what you're doing? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I think the members must 

be advised of a further thing.  Health reform is not solely for 

the sake of saving money.  Health reform is to 

deliver in the longer term a much higher quality of health care. 

 

Well the members opposite say oh.  Well that goes to show just 

how much they've been listening in the last six to seven 

months.  Obviously they do not want to understand what's 

taking place in the province because they would rather make a 

political issue out of it than attempting to participate in what 

has been a very positive process. 

 

Through the coordination and integration of services we are 

hoping that we will be able to provide more comprehensive 

health care services to people in Saskatchewan.  That means 

out in rural Saskatchewan, if we can create a critical mass of 

approximately 12,000 or maybe more, perhaps 20,000, critical 

mass of people, that we will be able to . . . 

 

And the members opposite obviously don't want to hear this, 

Mr. Speaker, because they're sitting there and chirping from 

their seats.  They don't want to hear what's really happening 

with health reform. 

 

The fact is is this, is that by creating a larger population that 

health care workers can service, we may be able to encourage 

the establishment of group medical practices and 

multi-disciplinary teams in our rural communities so that once 

and for all we can deliver . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for interrupting 

Madam Minister's soliloquy there. 

 

Madam Minister, you finally admit that it's not just for saving 

money.  Then why are you doing that, Madam Minister?  One 

of your other touted reasons I guess for this massive 

restructuring is because you are embarked upon a wellness 

model -- a wellness model, Madam Minister. 

 

Well could you please tell us, Madam Minister, how you are . . 

. how this idea of increasing community control over the health 

system is going to be an example of the wellness model? 

 

Can you tell this Assembly, Madam Minister, how wellness is 

served and how community control is exemplified when your 

government unilaterally ended support services for rural 

hospitals?  How does that fit your wellness plan, Madam 

Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, with respect to the health 

reform, as I've indicated on numerous times, through a district 

board structure we will be able to deliver more services and 

more comprehensive and coordinated services. 

 

Gone is the time when we look at one community and one 

institution or one program.  It's time for us to look at a broader 

community whereby we can share services within that 

community and hopefully attract more health 



36 Saskatchewan Hansard March 1, 1993 

professionals to a district that can service our rural 

communities. 

 

It's been a problem in this province for years and the members 

opposite chose to do nothing about it.  We have had trouble 

getting doctors to our smaller communities and there are a 

number of reasons for that. 

 

It has also been recommended on numerous occasions that we 

have group medical practices to try and get doctors to rural 

communities.  One of the best ways to achieve that is through a 

district structure, Mr. Speaker.  There will . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Next question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, 

I'm having somewhat of difficulty following your rationale and 

your reasoning here.  You talk of one problem about getting 

more professional services into rural Saskatchewan.  Yet on the 

same . . . my previous question asked you, how are you . . . 

why are you doing as far as the wellness model is concerned 

when we have front-line people like the care professionals 

giving the care to the folks -- dietitians, diabetic counsellors, 

social workers, pharmaceutical counsellors -- people who are 

directly responsible for preventive wellness, wellness model as 

you would have us believe.  What about responsibility?  What 

about accountability, community control? 

 

We have talked to regional administrators and they tell us that 

they had no idea this was coming.  The CEO (chief executive 

officer) and director of nursing for the Bengough Union 

Hospital said they were never consulted, never.  The 

administrator of the Wynyard hospital said that if wellness is 

the driving force behind health reform, then this has been done 

backwards -- not my words. 

 

Madam Minister, I agree though.  Wellness is not the driving 

force behind your regionalization; community control isn't 

either.  But, Madam Minister, why would you have imposed 

this decision without most of the boards in place?  This is 

neither consultative and certainly not cooperative. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- It's my understanding that there is going 

to be transition money, and this will be provided for under . . . 

through regional hospitals and eventually under the district 

boards once they're in place.  So the services, I am advised that 

the services will be provided on an interim basis and there 

shouldn't be any difficulty in that regard. 

 

I also want to indicate to the member opposite, who talked in 

terms of community control, for example, that by moving 

through . . . or by moving to more community control in 

delivering the health care system through district boards, we 

are going to be able to get more involvement over a broader, 

more comprehensive range of services in Saskatchewan than 

what we have now, as I indicated earlier.  It won't be one board 

in one institution.  It'll be one board in a whole range of 

services and these 

members will come from the community.  And it's hoped 

through the health reform that we can get more input from 

people within our communities. 

 

As to regional services, I am advised there is some transition 

funding and I am further advised that this service will be 

provided in the district context. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, 

I'm going to try to cut through all of the stuff that you've been 

saying this afternoon for the benefit of those who are listening 

and watching.  The motivation, the motivation is simply this:  

blame throwing and offloading.  Those are the two motivations 

that are the engines behind your so-called initiative here of the 

wellness program. 

 

The whole process is designed to create the illusion of 

community control and consultation when clearly the strings 

will still continue to be pulled by you, Madam Minister, and 

your cohort there, the Minister of Finance.  And whenever she 

yanks on the strings, she will say, well I'm not the one that's 

dancing to the tune.  And we have no indication from the 

minister, Mr. Speaker, how much taxpayers' money would be 

saved.  You have no program.  You have no plans.  You have 

no indication whatsoever that you precisely know where you're 

heading. 

 

Madam Minister, can you give the people of the province the 

assurance that when all is said and done, the people -- the 

people -- will have the last say in whatever is designed for their 

community?  Can you give them that assurance, Madam 

Minister, that the last say will be theirs? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The member is so inconsistent in his 

arguments, Mr. Speaker.  Just earlier this afternoon he said we 

should reverse the decision of the Regina Health Board and do 

what VON wants them to do, and he was complaining that we 

gave control to the Regina Health Board.  Now he's telling me 

that we're not giving community control and we should be 

giving community control.  I wish the member opposite would 

figure out what side of the fence he's sitting on. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- What the member opposite does not 

realize is that health reform on a district basis is taking place 

across this country, in some form or another, in virtually every 

province and territory in this country.  Because people across 

Canada realize that the way to move to an enhanced and 

improved health care system is to organize on a district basis -- 

or in other provinces the regions are much larger -- and to 

coordinate and integrate services and move to more 

community-based services.  They realize this across this 

country, and that's what we are attempting to do. 

 

Now he talked . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 



March 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 37 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you Mr. Speaker.  A supplementary 

to the Minister of Health.  You claim, Madam Minister, that 

millions of dollars can be saved by elimination of duplication 

of services in bulk purchasing, and you're likely correct.  But I 

have a question from the many, many people on health boards 

with whom I've met around the province.  And there's a great 

deal of uncertainty about what your government's health plan 

really is, and this is preventing some boards from moving 

toward amalgamation.  They don't know if the people who are 

on the present boards who have been appointed, and with 

whom they are having to make some monetary arrangements in 

their consolidation, are even going to be around next year or 

the year after.  And who is going to be then held accountable 

for those arrangements? 

 

When are the people of this province going to be given enough 

detail about your wellness plan to make any kind of sense out 

of much . . . whatsoever and remove the uncertainty? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

Well we will be tabling a piece of legislation within days in the 

legislature that will set out the format for organizing district 

boards.  The other aspect is I will be meeting with stakeholders 

in Regina and Saskatoon to deal with any questions or answers. 

 

And I should point out to the member that a lot of the questions 

that are raising as a result of out there in the communities are 

uncertainties because the legislation hasn't been tabled.  I'm 

hoping that the tabling of this legislation can resolve many of 

those issues. 

 

The Premier also chose to announce that a district board would 

not have taxing powers on the property tax base, which was 

one of the major issues out there.  So that decision has been 

made and announced to the public, which has resolved a lot of 

the concerns. 

 

There are other concerns, however.  I know that, and we are 

dealing with them.  In many cases they can only be dealt with 

on a case-by-case basis.  We have 20 to 30 planning groups 

working throughout the province with these people at the grass 

roots level, answering their questions and trying to help them 

resolve some of the concerns. 

 

So through a combination . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

De-insurance of Optometric Services 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Another question to 

the same minister.  I wonder, Madam Minister, if you are 

aware that today is vision awareness week, or this week will be 

vision awareness week.  And I wonder, Madam Minister, if you 

are aware of the devastation that your government and you in 

particular, Madam Minister, has caused many of the people of 

Saskatchewan with your de-insuring of chiropractors' services, 

your de-insuring of the diabetic services, your de-insuring of 

the very air that people breathe, when it comes to oxygen. 

I wonder, Madam Minister, if you are aware of the devastation 

that has been created by your de-insuring of optometric 

services.  All of these things are diametrically opposed to your 

concept of wellness. 

 

Madam Minister, I have one question for you.  It's vision 

awareness week.  The optometrists of Saskatoon in particular, 

that I'm aware of, have gone out and they have volunteered free 

services to those that are in need of eye services that you are no 

longer willing to pay for.  Free eye examinations, Madam 

Minister.  And I think that speaks very well for the generosity 

of the people of this province. 

 

My question to you, Madam Minister, is: in the wake of your 

devastation, will you at least recognize the services provided, 

the free services provided by these optometrists by recognizing 

them by sending them a letter of congratulations and 

thankfulness on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan and this 

legislature for doing the job that you as a Minister of Health 

and as a government should be doing but are failing 

dramatically in so doing? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The member opposite neglected to advise 

the public that poor people are covered for optometric services 

and so are children covered for optometric services by the 

province. 

 

The other thing that the member opposite failed to recognize is 

the fact that while they were in government they continued to 

whittle away at the public financing, to mismanage and to 

spend money in such a fashion that they have put the public of 

Saskatchewan into a position where there's a $15 billion debt, 

and we are having extreme difficulty in running the financial 

situation in Saskatchewan because of their mismanagement and 

the fact they have drummed up this absolutely incredible . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I was not cutting the Minister of 

Health off.  I was going to suggest to the members opposite I 

did not think there was any interference when the member 

asked his question, and they should have given the minister 

also the same opportunity.  However, I think she has had ample 

time to answer the question. 

 

TABLING OF COMMUNICATION 

 

The Speaker: -- Before orders of the day, I have a 

communication from Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 

 

 Pursuant to section 68.7 of The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Act, I hereby inform the Assembly of the 

membership of the Board of Internal Economy effective 

January 20, 1993: 

 

 The Honourable Herman Rolfes, Chairman; the Honourable 

Carol Carson; the Honourable Eldon Lautermilch; Mr. Glenn 

Hagel, MLA; Mr. Eric Upshall, MLA; Mr. William Neudorf, 

MLA; Mr. Rick Swenson, MLA. 

 

 Yours sincerely, Sylvia Fedoruk, Lieutenant 



38 Saskatchewan Hansard March 1, 1993 

Governor, Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I hereby table her communication. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Substitution of Members on Committees 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave I would like 

to move a couple of motions that deal with committee 

membership on some of our standing committees, and therefore 

I would move, seconded by the member for Saskatoon 

Westmount: 

 

 That the names of Ms. Crofford and Mr. McPherson be 

substituted for the names of Mr. Anguish and Lautermilch on 

the Standing Committee of Public Accounts. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for Regina Dewdney: 

 

 That by leave, the names of Mr. Kluz and Lyons be 

substituted for that of Mr. Calvert and Ms. Crofford on the 

Standing Committee on Crown Corporations. 

 

I so move. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for P.A.( Prince Albert) Northcote: 

 

 That by leave, the name of Mr. Upshall be substituted for that 

of Mr. Calvert on the list of members on the Special 

Committee on Rules and Procedures. 

 

I so move. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for Saskatoon River Heights: 

 

 That by leave, the name of Ms. Hamilton be substituted for 

that of Mr. Goulet on the Special Committee on Regulations. 

 

I so move. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for Moose Jaw Wakamow: 

That the name of Mr. Lyons be substituted for that of Mr. 

Goulet on the Standing Committee on Constitutional Affairs. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for Saskatoon Broadway: 

 

 That the name of Mr. Roy be substituted for that of Mr. 

Calvert on the list of members on the Standing Committee on 

Education. 

 

I so move. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for Saskatoon Fairview: 

 

 That the names of Mr. Thompson, Serby, and Whitmore be 

substituted for the names of Mr. Anguish, Calvert, and 

Lautermilch on the list of members on the Standing 

Committee on the Environment. 

 

I so move. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for Rosetown-Elrose: 

 

 That the name of Mr. Upshall be substituted for that of Mr. 

Lautermilch on the list of names on the Standing Committee 

on Estimates. 

 

I so move. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, finally I move, 

seconded by the member for Cumberland . . . no, the member 

from Rosetown: 

 

 That the name of Mr. Pringle be substituted for that of Ms. 

Atkinson on the list of members on the Standing Committee 

on Privileges and Elections. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

CONDOLENCES 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As is 

known to members of the House, since this House last 



March 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 39 

was in session we have had three members, or three former 

members, of this legislature who have passed away.  And as is 

the tradition of this legislature, I'm going to move three 

motions of condolence with regard to those three members.  

And I will therefore, Mr. Speaker, begin first of all with that of 

Mr. Clifford Honey Thurston. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is with sadness that I rise to note the passing of 

a distinguished former member of this Assembly, Clifford 

Honey Thurston.  Mr. Thurston's life was one of service.  He 

was a true public servant who devoted his life to making 

Saskatchewan a better place in which to live.  Clifford 

Thurston's life was one of service to his community and, Mr. 

Speaker, he will be missed. 

 

In his younger years, Mr. Thurston was active in a milk 

producers' association which secured better prices for milk, and 

was a member of the rural electrification committee.  And I use 

these two examples, Mr. Speaker, because they are examples of 

the kind of people that Mr. Thurston was, which is the kind of 

people that Saskatchewan people are, and that is people 

working together to improve things for themselves and their 

neighbours, often, Mr. Speaker, against great odds. 

 

His political contribution to this province was very significant.  

Mr. Thurston was a delegate at the founding convention of the 

CCF (Cooperative Commonwealth Federation) in 1933 and 

was active in organizing the founding convention of the New 

Democratic Party in Ottawa in 1961.  Within the CCF and the 

NDP (New Democratic Party) he served in a number of 

positions and his contribution to political life did much to 

inspire others. 

 

I recall, Mr. Speaker, that after my first election in 1971, one of 

the people who I saw very often in the lounge of the members, 

at that time the government lounge, and in the hallways when 

the session was in progress, was Mr. Thurston, who became a 

valued adviser and a man of great knowledge, because of his 

vast experience, to all of the members on our side of the House, 

and I suspect to others, but particularly to those like myself 

who were the first-time members in this Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to extend my own heartfelt sympathy and 

condolences to the family and friends of Mr. Thurston.  His 

contribution to Saskatchewan is appreciated and he will be 

missed. 

 

And accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I'm sure that all members will 

join me in supporting the following motion which I am about to 

move, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition, the member 

from Thunder Creek.  Mr. Speaker, I move, by leave of the 

Assembly: 

 

 That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and expresses 

its grateful appreciation of the contribution he made to his 

community, his constituency, and to the province. 

 

 Clifford Honey Thurston, who died in Regina on August 

26, 1992, was a member of this Legislative Assembly for the 

constituency of Lumsden from 1956 to 1964. 

 Mr. Thurston was born at Drinkwater on May 16, 1911.  But 

at the age of seven he and his family relocated to a farm four 

miles north-west of Regina.  He was educated at Greendyke 

School and at Scott Collegiate in Regina. 

 

 After graduation he continued to help operate the family 

farm.  And during the winter months in the years between 

1930 and 1939, Mr. Thurston also worked for the Department 

of Highways and for General Motors in Regina. 

 

 In 1938 Mr. Thurston took over the family farm, and on 

October 14 of that year he married Bernice Leer. 

 

 In the early 1930s Mr. Thurston began a very active career in 

provincial politics that spanned the whole of his working life.  

In 1933 he joined the CCF as a founding member and 

subsequently held many party executive posts until his 

election to the Legislative Assembly in 1956.  Mr. Thurston 

was re-elected to represent Lumsden for a second term in 

1960.  He ran again in other elections, but did not find the 

same success. 

 

 During his two terms as the member of the Legislative 

Assembly, Mr. Thurston served as the government members' 

whip. 

 

 Mr. Thurston served his community in many ways.  In 1933 

he began a 30-year term as the secretary treasurer of the 

Greendyke school board.  As well, Mr. Thurston had long 

tenures on the Sherwood Credit Union board of directors 

during the 1950s and again in the 1970s, and on the 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance board from 1947 until 

1955. 

 

 He was a member of the farmstart board from 1973 until 

1983, the rural electrification committee, and sat on the board 

of Guarantee and Fidelity. 

 

 As a farmer, Mr. Thurston had a great interest in agricultural 

issues and served his local milk producers' association and as 

the Wheat Pool committee member for Condie and Armour 

from 1938 until 1978. 

 

 Mr. Thurston was as well an active member of the 

Saskatchewan Farmers' Union.  He farmed until his 

retirement in 1983. 

 

 In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, this 

Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with members 

of the bereaved family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so move. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is a pleasure for 

me today to rise on behalf of the official opposition 



40 Saskatchewan Hansard March 1, 1993 

and second this motion brought forward by the Deputy Premier 

to eulogize a former member of this Assembly and to pass on 

to his family the condolences of the opposition. 

 

Certainly Mr. Thurston is one from his days in public life in 

this province that contributed a tremendous amount to the 

fabric of our province.  When one looks at involvement with 

things like school boards for 30-some years, with rural 

electrification, Mr. Thurston is a person that all rural people 

should respect regardless of their political beliefs, because he 

was obviously someone that had a very strong feeling for 

things that were uniquely rural issues. 

 

Certainly a very long involvement in politics in this province 

must have made him a tremendously interesting person to listen 

to in this Assembly, and I can appreciate probably that the 

Deputy Premier some days probably received more advice than 

he probably wanted from someone that had that breadth and 

range of political involvement in our province.  That, Mr. 

Speaker, is what makes this Assembly so terribly interesting.  It 

is that we do learn from those who have gone before us, and 

hopefully the mistakes that were made before, that older 

members impart to newer ones, that won't be made again. 

 

And certainly Mr. Thurston is to be commended for his lifelong 

involvement in the political process and being looked upon in 

his community as someone who could be held up as a good 

example for others to follow. 

 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, once again I'll just say on behalf of 

the official opposition, our condolences to Mr. Thurston's 

family. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Just a few short 

words.  I think this gentleman without doubt is most deserving 

of recognition by all who admire the efforts of those who love 

their families and their friends through their service to their 

communities, their province, and their country.  And on behalf 

of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party, I offer condolences to all 

who knew and loved Mr. Thurston. 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Cliff Thurston was 

the last CCF-New Democrat to represent what is now 

Qu'Appelle-Lumsden in this legislature, and I too offer my 

condolences to his family and friends.  On behalf of all those 

who knew him and worked with him, I would like to add a few 

words to what has already been said. 

 

I met Cliff several times and was impressed by his commitment 

to Saskatchewan and the people who live and work here.  He 

was full of wonderful stories about his farming and political 

life, and he was particularly proud of his contribution to the 

CCF in his early years and being privileged to work with 

people like J.S. Woodsworth and Tommy Douglas. 

 

The last time I visited him with his wife and daughter, he was 

full of good, sound advice on how to be a successful 

representative of the people.  It was during that visit that he 

impressed upon me that honesty in all public and personal 

dealings was always best, and that retaining 

a sense of humour was absolutely essential to retaining one's 

sanity. 

 

In my recollection of Cliff Thurston -- and this is borne out by 

all his friends -- he followed his own advice.  Honesty and 

humour worked for him, and they work for us all.  My 

condolences to his wife, Bernice, and his family. 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise to express my condolences 

to the Thurston family as well.  The Deputy Premier outlined in 

detail Cliff Thurston's political biography which reflects Cliff 

Thurston's solid contributions to Saskatchewan and to his 

community. 

 

Cliff was indeed a tireless worker for both the Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation and for the New Democratic Party, 

as well as for his constituents.  I'd like to share with you 

another side of Cliff, and that as friend of mine and as an 

adviser of mine over the many years we knew each other. 

 

I first met Cliff in the early 1970s, long after his elected career 

as an MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) had ended.  

I found Cliff to be a personable, hard-working, dedicated man.  

He was a true gentleman in every sense of the word.  He was 

sensitive to people's needs, to people's feelings, and to their 

concerns.  He respected people and he respected their views, 

whether they agreed with his or whether they were 

contradictory. 

 

I often spoke with him at the Co-op cafeteria, downtown 

Regina, and later at the Sherwood Co-op on Rochdale 

Boulevard, which was in my constituency.  Cliff and his wife, 

Bernice, and daughter, Marilyn, lived in my riding for a 

number of years.  I enjoyed and looked forward to visiting with 

them whenever I had the opportunity. 

 

Cliff's strengths were his ability to listen to people, to network 

with people, to gather and to give information which was 

helpful to you.  Cliff Thurston suffered from Parkinson's 

disease for many years.  It's a very debilitating disease, slowly 

reducing your ability to do normal, everyday things.  Cliff's 

wife, Bernice, was a solid rock of support for Cliff during these 

difficult times, and I wish to acknowledge that today. 

 

Cliff became quite distressed at losing his ability to go to 

meetings and at reducing his hectic schedule of visiting with 

people, and farming in his later years. 

 

During my visits, Cliff seldom criticized people.  If he didn't 

have a positive or a happy comment to make about somebody, 

or something that was constructive about somebody, he seldom 

made a comment about them.  It was always uplifting for me to 

visit with Cliff. 

 

Cliff was a member of the Co-operative Commonwealth 

Legislative Advisory Committee.  It was a committee of our 

provincial council, elected from our provincial council, and 

Cliff very strongly believed that this sort of a committee was a 

democratic committee which worked very effectively.  He 

often shared his experiences with me on this committee. 

 

For example, the time he would meet with Tommy Douglas, 

then the premier of Saskatchewan, and Tommy 



March 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 41 

would raise with him and his committee colleagues whether 

this person or that person should be appointed to a particular 

position in government, whether it was a cabinet post or in the 

upper echelons of the civil service.  And many times when the 

committee had an input it was very constructive, and on one 

occasion Cliff told me that one recommendation from Premier 

Douglas about a potential cabinet member was not widely 

accepted by the advisory committee and this person was never 

appointed to the cabinet that time. 

 

Ed Whelan, who was an MLA from Regina North West for 19 

years, sat with Cliff for four of those years from 1960 to '64, 

and Mr. Whelan wanted me to acknowledge Cliff's 

steadfastness during the medicare debate of 1961 and '62, and I 

do that today. 

 

Cliff was very keenly interested in politics after his elected 

career was over and always offered insights into history such as 

this committee. 

 

But I want to just share one final story with you about Cliff.  It 

was prior to the 1982 provincial election call.  It was about two 

or three weeks before the government of the day, Premier 

Blakeney, called the election.  Cliff came into my office in the 

legislature. 

 

He was quite distressed about hearing the rumours that we 

were going to call an election.  And he came into my office and 

he said, John, is this true that there is going to be an election 

called in the next few weeks?  And I said, well I really don't 

know, Cliff, but I think the sense is that there will be an 

election call in short order. 

 

And he said, well I'm very concerned about that because I don't 

think the premier has consulted with the Wheat Pool field men 

around the province.  And I said, well I don't know if he has or 

he hasn't. Why, Cliff?  He says, well before Tommy Douglas 

called elections in the 1944 to '60 era, he always consulted with 

not only his MLAs and his people in his inner circle, but he 

also consulted with a number of Wheat Pool field men around 

the province.  And they normally told him, and quite honestly 

told him prior to each election call, whether they could win or 

not. 

 

And Cliff had advised me to advise the premier at that time to 

at least undertake this very straightforward and comprehensive 

approach towards calling an election. 

 

I don't think the premier in '82 did that, and I'm not saying 

that's the reason why we lost, but I want to just underline the 

fact that Cliff Thurston's instincts, even in '82 when he was in 

his early 70's, were still pretty sharp. 

 

The last few days before the election took place in '91, Cliff 

called me to his home and he wanted to talk about the election 

campaign.  He was unable to get out and about very readily at 

that time.  And I think this illustrates Cliff's feeling towards 

people in general, but he said to me at that time that he knew 

that my riding was going to be different.  He would not be 

living in the riding after the election was over and he knew that 

there was a great demand on people's lives in politics. 

 

He was very much aware that elected officials spent little 

time with their family.  There was a great deal of cost to the 

MLA during the course of their careers.  And he understood 

this very well and he offered me some money which he didn't 

want to go to the campaign, but to go to my personal expenses 

just as an MLA.  And I took this as a very generous gesture on 

his part and, although I accepted it, I told him I would accept it 

on behalf of the organization and that we'd issue a receipt for 

him, which we did.  But this illustrated, I think, a very humane 

understanding and generous understanding of people in 

politics. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I wish to acknowledge the support and 

sacrifice of Cliff's family -- his wife Bernice; their daughter, 

Marilyn, who's been employed by Sherwood Credit Union for 

23 years; their son, Ken, who's a high school principal at 

Arborfield -- with your support and understanding, Cliff was 

able to be the hard-working, successful MLA that he was.  

Please accept our gratitude for sharing Cliff with us. 

 

Cliff Thurston was an MLA who was a representative who 

served Saskatchewan with distinction and will be remembered 

thus.  Please accept my deepest sympathies in his passing. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise with sorrow to 

note the passing of Hans Adolf Broten, a former member of 

this Legislative Assembly. 

 

It is fitting that we, in this Assembly, acknowledge the work 

and sacrifice of members who have gone before us.  Today our 

sympathy and condolences go out to the Broten family.  And 

those of us here who knew him, we too will miss Hans Broten. 

 

Between 1975 and 1982, if I may make a personal comment, I 

had the honour of representing a very large part of the area for 

which Mr. Broten had been a member of the Legislative 

Assembly.  And I can recall the many people who often spoke 

to me very highly of Mr. Broten and his dedication to his work 

and to his constituents. 

 

The example that he set as an MLA and the example that he set 

in church and community will be long remembered.  He was a 

tireless worker for universal medicare, a strong advocate for 

farmers, and a tireless worker on behalf of his constituents. 

 

Mr. Broten and his wife, Lovern Anita Nelson of Viscount, had 

five children, and today I want to extend my own personal, 

heartfelt sympathy and condolences to the Broten family.  His 

contribution to Saskatchewan is appreciated and will be 

missed. 

 

(1500) 

 

At this time, Mr. Speaker, I would, by leave of the House, want 

to move the following motion: 

 

 That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and expresses 

its grateful appreciation of the contribution he made to his 

community, his 



42 Saskatchewan Hansard March 1, 1993 

constituency, and to the province. 

 

 Hans Adolf Broten, who died in Saskatoon on October 19, 

1992, was a member of this Legislative Assembly for the 

constituency of Watrous from 1960 to 1967. 

 

 Mr. Broten was born at Viscount on August 12, 1916 and 

received his early education at the Viscount Consolidated 

School.  In 1937 he graduated from the University of 

Saskatchewan farm school.  On May 25, 1940, he married 

Lovern Nelson of Viscount.  The couple farmed near 

Viscount, where Mr. Broten took an active role in his 

community's affairs. 

 

 Mr. Broten's interest in his community is illustrated by the 

many organizations in which he served and held executive 

positions.  He was president of the local Wheat Pool 

committee and was a director of the Rutan and Colonsay 

cooperatives.  Mr. Broten also headed the Viscount Farmers' 

Union local for a number of years.  As well, Mr. Broten was 

chairman of the Lanigan and Viscount school boards and a 

board member of the local telephone company. 

 

 After many years of service on his constituency council, Mr. 

Broten was first elected in the general election of 1960.  He 

was re-elected in 1964 but ran unsuccessfully in the 1967 

general election.  Mr. Broten continued to take an active 

interest in his community's affairs as well as his church.  He 

served on the board of the Canadian Sunday School Mission.  

After he retired, Mr Broten moved to Saskatoon where he 

was active in the Circle Alliance Church. 

 

 In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, this 

Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with the 

members of the bereaved family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with leave, I so move this motion. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Once again it's a 

pleasure for me on behalf of the official opposition to join with 

the Deputy Premier today in his condolence motion to the 

family of Hans Adolf Broten and the service that he rendered to 

the province of Saskatchewan as an MLA for Watrous 

constituency over a period of seven years. 

 

As the Deputy Premier mentioned, that when we eulogize 

people like Mr. Broten, who obviously in the day and age in 

which they served gave up a tremendous amount to be a 

member of this Legislative Assembly, and so often I think we 

don't talk about the family probably as much as we should 

because they weren't actually sitting here amongst their peers. 

But as we all know, behind every successful person in life there 

is that spousal relationship, that relationship with your children 

that allow you to do the extra mile in performing your public 

duties. 

And certainly I wish to pass on to Mr. Broten's family the 

condolences of the official opposition.  He obviously was a 

person that had very intense religious feelings that served his 

church over a great period of time, and I'm sure that many 

people in the Saskatoon area also would be joining the 

Assembly today in wishing condolences to Mr. Broten's family. 

 

I think that the whole community of Watrous, as the Deputy 

Premier said, and area, is joining with us today in this 

condolence motion.  And I think that is right and proper when 

we think of people that have served the public as he probably 

did over those seven years.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too would like 

to join the Deputy Premier and the Leader of the Opposition in 

expressing my sympathy and condolences to the Broten family.  

For those of us who have lost loved ones, often there are 

certain things that have brought us solace.  And in the case of 

the Broten family, who are religious people and have spent 

their time not only serving through public life but through their 

church as well, I would like to quote to them from Isaiah: See, I 

shall not forget you.  I have carved you in the palm of my hand. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too would like to 

add my words to those of previous speakers.  And I guess I 

would start by saying that I feel I have missed something not 

knowing Hans Broten, although from the many stories that 

have been reiterated to me from constituents and people who 

sat with him in this Assembly, I do have a sense, I believe, of 

what he was about. 

 

And it has been relayed to me that, and my sense is that, Hans 

Broten was a man who cared deeply about life and people.  

Agriculture of course was his main love, along with medicare 

and health reforms.  And as other have stated, he worked 

tirelessly to achieve ends in those fields that would make life 

better for all involved. 

 

I also ran into Mr. Ed Whelan a couple of weekends ago and he 

talked to me as well, as he had sat with Mr. Broten, and relayed 

some stories that were fond to him and I am sure to Mr. Broten 

as well about their experiences and the fun they used to have 

sitting in the legislature.  And Mr. Whelan also expressed to me 

the desire that Mr. Broten had to make things better in this 

province. And I would just like to say to his family that the 

people from Watrous and area have very many fond memories 

of Mr. Broten and he will be remembered for a long time. 

 

So with that I would like to express my sincere sympathy to the 

Broten family.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is an honour 

for me to say a few words in remembrance of Hans Broten.  I 

was practising law in Saskatoon from the period from 1979 

until the 1991 election.  And in the early '80s, and I believe it 

was in early 1984, Mr. Speaker, I noticed on my schedule the 

name Hans Broten as an appointment that I had on the 

following day and I guessed correctly that it was the same 

person that we're talking about today.  I had never met him 

before, although 



March 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 43 

everyone in our party has heard the name and knows him to be 

one of the pioneers. 

 

He came in to my office and we did the particular piece of legal 

work that he came to do and then we began to talk.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, he returned to my office again and again over the 

years that I was in practice and carried on a conversation that 

consumed hours of valuable billing time but was just too good 

and too precious to let go of.  It was worthwhile from my point 

of view.  I'm the better for it. 

 

You heard the Deputy Premier refer to Hans Broten's 

background in his community.  And so typical of so many of 

the old-timers in our party -- I can't speak for the others, but for 

the New Democratic Party -- the Wheat Pool background, the 

co-ops, the church, the farmers' union, the telephone board, the 

school board, the rural municipality, all of that, the mark of a 

community leader and a person vitally interested in his 

community and the issues that bear upon that community and 

indeed upon his world. 

 

The conversation that I had with him ranged the whole gamut 

of those things and more, Mr. Speaker, including of course his 

religion.  And I will never forget for the rest of my life the 

conversations that I had with Hans Broten, an exceptionally, 

exceptionally interested and vital person with views that were 

rooted deeply into rural Saskatchewan, and he was a real credit 

to himself and his family and his province throughout his life. 

 

I would like to pass on my sympathies to the family, to Lovern, 

and to his children and grandchildren.  One of them I know 

well, Mr. Speaker, and that is his daughter, Donna Allen.  And 

I convey to her and, as I say, to the whole family, my sincerest 

sympathy on Hans's death. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today 

our condolences are also with the family of another former 

member of this Legislative Assembly, Robert Irvin Perkins.  

Mr. Perkins was the member of this Assembly for the 

constituency for Nipawin from 1960 to 1964.  As we note his 

passing, we also remember that he was a builder and 

Saskatchewan owes him a debt of gratitude. 

 

As is with the case with the previous two, Mr. Speaker, I also 

knew Mr. Perkins very well.  I recall in the 1970s, on many 

occasions when I visited the Nipawin area, Mr. Perkins coming 

to whatever the occasion might be, whether it was a political 

meeting or whether it was a meeting in my ministerial capacity. 

He was always there, very interested in the affairs of the 

province and always showed some exceptionally sound 

judgement and a grasp of all of the issues that were important 

to this province of Saskatchewan as well as his community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to extend my deepest sympathies and 

sincere condolences to the Perkins family.  The example 

Robert Perkins set, a life of service and dedication, will 

continue to serve as an inspiration to us all. 

 

And with those few words, Mr. Speaker, I want by leave of 

the Assembly to move this motion: 

 

 That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and expresses 

its grateful appreciation of the contribution he made to his 

community, his constituency, and to the province. 

 

 Robert Irvin Perkins, who died in Nipawin on October 29, 

1992, was a Member of the Legislative Assembly for the 

constituency of Nipawin from 1960 to 1964.  Mr. Perkins 

was born at Owen Sound, Ontario, on June 30, 1898.  At the 

age of nine, he and his family left Ontario for the Guernsey 

area of Saskatchewan where his parents established a 

homestead.  Mr. Perkins attended public school in Attica and 

received his high school education in Lanigan. 

 

 On February 5, 1925, Mr. Perkins married Gladys Burge who 

at the time taught school at Guernsey.  In 1930 the Perkinses 

moved to a farm near Codette.  At Guernsey and then at 

Codette, Mr. Perkins became increasingly active in 

community affairs.  He served as president of the Codette 

Consumers' Co-operative Association, as president of the 

Nipawin Rural Telephone Company, and on the board of 

stewards of his church. 

 

 Mr. Perkins was also involved in his district's agricultural 

affairs by serving for over a decade as a Wheat Pool delegate.  

He was a member of the Nipawin Agricultural Society and as 

a long-time member of the Saskatchewan Seed Growers 

Association. 

 

 As well, Mr. Perkins had an expressed interest in provincial 

affairs.  He is recognized as a founding member of the 

Co-operative Commonwealth Federation, the CCF.  In 1960 

Mr. Perkins was elected to serve as the member of this 

Legislative Assembly for the constituency of Nipawin.  He 

ran again in the 1964 general election but was not re-elected. 

 

 After leaving provincial politics, Mr. Perkins continued to 

participate in the affairs of his community.  In 1971 the 

Saskatchewan Seed Growers Association awarded him the 

Anderson Award.  He farmed until his retirement in 1975, at 

which time he moved into Codette.  In 1989, he moved to 

Nipawin. 

 

 In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, this 

Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with members 

of the bereaved family. 

 

With leave, Mr. Speaker, I move this motion. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Once again it's 



44 Saskatchewan Hansard March 1, 1993 

a pleasure for me to, on behalf of the official opposition, join 

the Deputy Premier today in this condolence motion to the 

family of Robert Irvin Perkins from Nipawin, who served in 

this Assembly for one term. 

 

Mr. Perkins is another one of these individuals, I'm sure, Mr. 

Speaker, who took time out from a very busy personal life to 

dedicate himself to the public service in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  As a registered seed grower myself, I know the 

regime that one goes through as a seed grower to live up to the 

expectations of the Act that governs you. 

 

I'm sure that Mr. Perkins's approach to public life was much the 

same as he did in his business career, that when that particular 

field of registered seed needed to be rogued, that Mr. Perkins 

was out there and did his roguing, otherwise the Anderson 

Award would never have been awarded by his peer group. 

 

It means that you are diligent, that you look after the things that 

need looking after.  And I'm sure that Mr. Perkins's tenure in 

this Assembly of only one term wasn't necessarily because he 

didn't do his homework, it is the shifting of the political sands 

that often occur in this province that determines the longevity 

of members of this Assembly. 

 

Nipawin is a long ways from Regina.  And I think in the days 

when transportation wasn't quite what it is today, that people 

that offered themselves for service here need to be commended 

because it meant that you were away from your family and 

your farm and your business for extended periods of time. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, it is with a sense of bereavement on 

behalf of the official opposition that we join in this condolence 

motion to Mr. Perkins's family. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is a privilege, 

on behalf of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party, to extend 

condolences to those who loved Mr. Robert Perkins.  It's 

important that we celebrate the lifetime of achievements and 

contributions of such individuals who give of themselves to 

improve the quality of life for us all. 

 

I just would like to let his family and friends know that we in 

my party think very highly of individuals who will do such 

things on our behalf and we appreciate the opportunity to 

honour him. 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise in my place here today to 

add my condolences to the family of Mr. Robert Perkins.  Both 

on behalf of myself and on behalf of the Nipawin constituency, 

I want to express our gratitude and appreciation for the life he 

gave us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I arrived at the legislature this morning, I 

took time to look again at his picture that hangs on the wall in 

the hall of this place, and I stood there for a few minutes just 

looking in silence at his picture and thinking of some of the 

memories that I have of Bob. 

 

Before his passing, Mr. Perkins was a resident for some time in 

the level 4 nursing home in Nipawin and I saw him there often.  

But I remember Mr. Perkins from 33 years 

ago when I was first old enough to vote in a provincial election.  

It was my privilege of . . . I had the privilege of casting my 

vote for that same Mr. Perkins.  And as has already been 

mentioned, he was a founding member of the CCF and it was 

under those men and under Tommy Douglas that brought in 

medicare to our province.  Mr. Perkins was a man of vision, a 

man of courage, and a man of integrity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those of us who knew him admired him, not only 

for the politician that he was but for the example he was in 

every aspect of the life he led.  We admired him for the 

dedication with which he served the church; we admired him 

for the dedication and the fine example he was to his family, 

and of course, as has already been mentioned, to his 

community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am one of those who can say along with many 

others, we are grateful for the life of Mr. Perkins and we are 

honoured to say that we knew him.  Thank you. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, by leave 

of the Assembly and seconded by the Leader of the Opposition, 

the member from Thunder Creek, I move: 

 

 That the resolutions just passed, together with the transcript 

of oral tributes to the memory of the deceased members, be 

communicated to the bereaved families on behalf of this 

Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the Premier for 

giving me the privilege and the honour of moving the motion in 

support of this, the third Speech from the Throne of this 

government. 

 

I am honoured; I am proud.  I am awed at the privilege and 

responsibility given me. 

 

As the member from Meadow Lake said last April: I recognize 

the tradition of this moment.  In taking part in the debate, I am 

taking part in the parliamentary tradition for which I have great 

respect.  With that recognition in mind, I realize that this 

moment is both fleeting and timeless. 

 

Just as the comments we've heard in the legislature today, you 

are a small part of a tradition that all of us should have great 

respect for. 

 

In one way though, Mr. Speaker, my moment in the spotlight 

today represents something fairly new in the Saskatchewan 

parliamentary tradition.  And I would like to take just a 

moment to comment on that. 

 

I mentioned the member from Meadow Lake.  Before him, 



March 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 45 

the mover of the first throne speech from this government was 

the member from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden.  Three speeches, two 

women members.  I don't want to make too much of this fact, 

but I think it's worth mentioning in passing.  The gender 

imbalance in this Assembly has not been broken yet, but it's 

bending.  Fifty per cent of the population is represented by 20 

per cent of the members of this Assembly.  Not great, but a far 

cry from previous times. 

 

Of course, Mr. Speaker, numbers really don't count.  What 

counts is that this Assembly is represented by a fair sampling 

of the infinite variety of people which we have in this province.  

The old barriers are falling because they were too silly to stand.  

Gender barriers, racial barriers, religious barriers, and so on.  I 

am proud of being a member during this time of transition 

because it is a simple fact that broader representation means 

better representation. 

 

I'm equally honoured, Mr. Speaker, that I can present my 

address to you and through you to the members of this 

Assembly.  We are both teachers in our other lives, Mr. 

Speaker, so we both understand the necessity of discipline and 

the necessity for it to be exercised judiciously.  The wise use of 

discipline, the delicate enforcement of order, make the learning 

process work. 

 

Random, excessive, legalistic enforcement of the rules impede 

the child's development.  You, Mr. Speaker, have made the 

wise transition from classroom to the Speaker's Chair, and this 

Assembly is better for it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, most members spoke in one or more of the 

previous throne speech debates.  We paid tributes to our 

constituencies and to the voters, who in their wisdom have put 

us here.  A few people, especially the press, thought that this 

was an exercise; it seemed to trouble them, the tribute paid to 

our constituencies.  But I don't think that we can remind 

ourselves often enough about the people that we represent and 

why we are here and who put us here.  We can't do that too 

often. 

 

So I am proud to represent the people of Cut 

Knife-Lloydminster.  I'm proud of its people, its business 

people, its ranchers, its farmers, its oil producers, its home 

builders, its teachers, and its home-makers.  Mine is a 

constituency rich in resources and rich in people and history. 

 

Some of the last shots fired in anger on Canadian soil were 

fired at the Battle of Cut Knife hill.  Two of the bravest, wisest, 

and most inspirational leaders of the Cree nation, Big Bear and 

Poundmaker left their mark on my part of the province.  It's a 

good place to live and work, and I am proud to represent it. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I'm also a Saskatchewan MLA, not just the 

representative from Cut Knife-Lloydminster.  I'm sure all 

members will agree with me when I say that we represent more 

than just our area; we represent and are responsible for the 

common good of all of Saskatchewan. 

 

We represent our constituency best by recognizing that we are 

one province within one nation, that our ultimate interest is the 

interest of the whole, not the part.  As 

Edmund Burke said 200 years ago:  when I choose a member, 

that member is not just a member from Liverpool but from the 

whole parliament. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as the MLA from Cut Knife-Lloydminster, as 

a member of the governing party of Saskatchewan, and as a 

Canadian parliamentarian I am proud to lead the debate on this 

throne speech.  I am proud to note that this speech continues us 

on the path of renewal, rebuilding, and restoration, the path we 

began on October 19, 1991. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it's a rocky road we've been on.  We have 

some back roads in my constituency in the Battle River valley 

that are two-tires-a-mile roads.  Renewing the Saskatchewan 

economy and its society has been equally bumpy because of 

the Tory potholes and clip-joints left along the way. 

 

The sorry Tory legacy is well known to the people of 

Saskatchewan.  And now to the people of Canada courtesy of 

the Toronto Globe and Mail, a legacy of favouritism, bad 

planning, and worst of all, debt.  Even 15 months after the end 

of the bad-dream government, I'm still astounded as how deep 

that incompetence can be. 

 

As a school teacher I suppose I should look for something good 

to say about the previous administration.  After all, everyone 

has a useful purpose in life, even if it is to serve as a horrible 

example.  But, Mr. Speaker, a time of renewal is not a time to 

talk of the failures of yesterday. 

 

As this throne speech says, the process of restoration is well 

under way.  We have begun to restore common sense and 

competence to government.  Unlike the federal government, we 

have tackled the horrendous deficit, reducing it from 1.2 billion 

to just over 500 million.  I dare say it'll be even more greatly 

reduced when the new budget is introduced this session. 

 

It's worth repeating that if we had the $760 million in the 

interest payment and if that did not come off the top, then the 

1992-93 budget would have shown a $200 million surplus. 

 

We have restored some sanity and appropriateness to the 

salaries of government and Crown corporation executives.  We 

are returning the civil service to its former level of 

professionalism, a level that once was a model for Canadian 

governments. 

 

We're moving towards gender parity in appointments to 

government boards and commissions, and as well as greatly 

increasing the number of aboriginal appointments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the previous government used to talk about 

putting government on a businesslike footing -- this is such a 

joke to me -- and in the process of bankrupting the province, 

they also debased the word businesslike. 

 

(1530) 

 

What we have done is put government back on a 

government-like footing.  It is operating now as it did during 

the Blakeney-Lloyd-Douglas governments -- smoothly, 

efficiently, and effectively. 



46 Saskatchewan Hansard March 1, 1993 

Putting government back on track was a necessary first step 

and an ongoing process.  No good work can be done with a 

weak structure.  And one of the firmly held beliefs of the New 

Democratic Party is that government is the instrument of the 

people, not the enemy of the people.  What we can't do for 

ourselves alone, we can accomplish collectively with the help 

of government. 

 

As our Premier, the member from Saskatoon Riversdale said, 

and I quote: 

 

 It has not been easy in the past year and it will not be easy in 

the years ahead.  We seek the support of everyone in 

Saskatchewan, to lay aside their individual and personal 

causes . . . As important as they may be . . . for the common 

good of all. To look to the future and to take on change. For 

change is not something we should fear, it is our source of 

hope for a better future. 

 

What pleases me most about this throne speech, and why I am 

proud to be a member of this government, is it continues our 

pledge to rebuild our economy and to renew our society, both 

daunting tasks, both which we accept with determination. 

 

Like most of the constituencies in this province, Cut 

Knife-Lloydminster depends on agriculture for its livelihood 

and for its way of life.  From the days of the Barr colonists -- 

and Barr colonists, for people that don't know, were the 

colonists that settled in my constituency -- to the present time, 

we prosper or we tough it out, depending on the state of this 

our primary industry. 

 

Therefore as it was last year, efforts to help our farmers face 

the crisis facing them, will be at the forefront of our concerns. 

 

As the speech suggests, our efforts will be twofold: one, to do 

whatever possible to get us beyond this current situation caused 

by market conditions beyond our control; and two, to work 

towards a viable, sustainable, self-sufficient agricultural 

industry. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Mr. Speaker, the quick fix of the previous 

government, GRIP 1 (gross revenue insurance program) was a 

sieve of a program, so expensive and so full of holes that it 

couldn't be plugged.  It would have been outrageously 

expensive for the very people it was designed to help.  The 

program was so flawed that no matter how hard we tried, it 

couldn't be adjusted. 

 

We're back to square one.  And I'm happy to see the new Farm 

Support Review Committee created to develop new safety nets.  

Of course, Mr. Speaker, an immediate problem is that the 

responsibility of the federal government cannot be solved by a 

provincial government, nor should it.  We don't ask for the 

privilege to print money.  The federal government should not 

ask Saskatchewan to compete with the combined treasuries of 

Europe, which of course is what it is doing.  We continue to 

press the federal government to assume its responsibility and 

provide the promised third line of defence. 

But, Mr. Speaker, within the limits of our powers, we are not 

allowing the crisis to wash over us.  I'm looking forward to the 

discussions and responses to the minister's vision statement just 

released.  I'm proud to see the cooperation given us by the 

provincial banks and credit unions in the six-year leaseback 

program.  I particularly applaud this government's 

determination to support the Canadian Wheat Board and the 

Crow benefit.  We can withstand the forces we see and combat.  

But if the concept of federalism means anything, we must have 

support from the senior levels of government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will have something more to say in a moment 

about our economic program for renewal as I am sure will 

other members.  But first I want to say a few clear words about 

our government's pledge to restore our society.  I want to talk 

about health; I want to talk about education.  First though, I 

want to talk about human rights. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am proud to echo the words of Her Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor.  At this session amendments to the 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Code will be introduced to 

protect discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation, family 

status, and receipt of public assistance. 

 

There are only two things wrong with these amendments: first, 

they're long overdue; and two, they should not be necessary.  

Unfortunately they are necessary.  They are necessary, Mr. 

Speaker, because people like you and me -- white, 

middle-class, working people -- we have rights these three 

groups of individuals do not.  They can be denied housing; they 

can be fired from their jobs, not because of anything they've 

done but just because of who they are.  That's discrimination, 

and in our democracy discrimination is forbidden by law and 

morality. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 45 years ago in this Assembly the Hon. Woodrow 

Lloyd spoke in the debate introducing the Saskatchewan Bill of 

Rights.  As he did so often, Woodrow explained with 

impassioned clarity human rights are important. 

 

He said: 

 

 Human rights are more that just the protection of minority 

rights.  They are the building up of the recognition of the 

importance of people, just because they are people, whether 

they are in the minority or not.  People are important because 

they are people, whether black or white, American or 

Canadian, whether they live in Quebec or Saskatchewan, 

whether they're young or old.  We need to cultivate more and 

more the importance of people just because they are people. 

 

Time has not diminished the truth of this statement made 45 

years ago.  But, Mr. Speaker, sadly there are those among us 

who refuse to grant that all people are important.  That, 

regrettably, is why legislation is necessary. 

 

These amendments are very specific and limited.  They extend 

protection under the Human Rights Code in the 



March 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 47 

areas of employment, accommodation, and public service. 

 

In the consultation phase leading to the introduction of these 

amendments, this has been stressed repeatedly by the minister 

and by others.  The amendments will not change the definition 

of what is a family.  They will not extend spousal benefits or 

adoption rights to same-sex partners.  They do not, in the words 

of the opposition, give special privilege to anyone.  Nothing 

could be clearer. 

 

There are, I suppose, members of the Assembly, two attitudes 

towards human existence, two ideals of how society should 

function.  These attitudes work themselves into the political 

process just as they do into every area of human endeavour.  

One attitude is inclusive, acknowledging the worth of every 

individual; the other is exclusive, defining itself by what its 

adherents are not.  One promotes sisterhood and brotherhood; 

the other trades on suspicion and intolerance.  One accepts 

change as part of the ongoing evolution of society; the other 

resists change regardless of circumstances.  One says yes; the 

other one says no. 

 

I am confident in saying the New Democratic Party does what 

it can in the political arena to affirm life and to promote the 

well-being of every person in society.  That is the significance 

of this throne speech in general. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- The speech talks about health and the wellness 

model -- the second phase of medicare as Tommy defined it, 

the big job, the reorganization and revamping of the delivery 

system.  We're going to do this big job by being inclusive, by 

involving the communities and the health boards and the health 

professionals in a unified, cooperative way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government had two choices with health care.  

It could have left the old system continue to operate with no 

regard to changes in technology, costs, and population, 

allowing it to duplicate and reduplicate itself, becoming more 

and more unresponsive and becoming very expensive.  Or we 

could have recognized that times are changing, that our small 

population spread over a vast area is also an ageing population.  

We could meet some of the contradictions in the health care 

system head on, such as the fact that we have more hospitals 

and more beds per person -- thanks to you know who -- than 

any other province in Canada.  We could confront the fact that 

we have over 400 different health agencies to administer our 

programs and systems.  And we have done that. 

 

As the speech announces, we are developing a new way of 

looking at the province's health system -- the wellness model.  

And we are developing a new way of delivering that approach.  

The wellness approach will empower communities to come 

together and offer a better range of services and better health 

care to their communities. 

 

As the speech says, four health boards have already been 

established.  The proposed legislation to promote health 

districts will increase community control over the health 

system at the same time that it reduces the inefficiencies 

of the current system. 

 

With these modifications we ensure that medicare is preserved 

for future generations.  And I can tell you that the members of 

this government have had the courage to do that.  Without them 

our health system is in danger of sinking under the weight of its 

own costs and inefficiencies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is no accident that as a new administration 

begins office in the United States, one of its first actions is to 

acknowledge the desperate condition of its own health system 

and to look at ours as a model.  Saskatchewan initiated 

medicare in North America in 1962.  It takes a while for a good 

idea to catch on but it will spread because no society can afford 

to exclude its citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I grant you that for years people have talked 

about preventative health, that it's better to save a dollar than to 

spend it, and that the best way to make health delivery more 

effective is not to get sick.  We have had and continue to have 

prevention programs:  stop-smoking campaigns, Students 

Against Drunk Driving, dietary advice, cancer screening, and 

so on.  Those are all good programs.  They work and they need 

to be expanded.  But with the wellness model, these prevention 

strategies are only a part of the overall plan. 

 

The wellness model is promoting good health in every aspect 

of our life:  physical, mental, and spiritual.  It involves not only 

the traditional health services sector but all government 

departments as well as non-government organizations and 

community agencies.  Programs that promote safe driving, that 

encourage the safe use of pesticides, workplace safety laws, 

business practices that reduce stress, school programs that give 

meals to children before you try and teach them -- each of these 

is a part of wellness. 

 

Wellness is a health-driven program promoted and directed by 

the Minister of Health, her department, and the health boards 

and districts.  But it is a program that cuts across departments 

and the areas of societal effort.  Quality of life can no longer 

just be a slogan.  It can no longer be the responsibility of one 

agency or one minister.  Trickle-down health doesn't work any 

more than trickle-down economics.  Wellness is everybody's 

business and this program invites everyone to be involved.  

That's inclusion, not exclusion. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Speaker, approximately 14 per cent of our budget goes 

towards education, to schools of all levels.  That's a lot of 

money, and it doesn't include the portion raised by property 

taxes and student fees.  I am happy, therefore, to note that we 

will be working very diligently with the schools boards, the 

universities, and the technical colleges, to review and 

streamline our educational programs. 

 

Not, I remind you, with the idea of saving money -- though if 

we do this no one will complain.  Expense is not the main 

issue; quality of education is.  As Benjamin Franklin said, 

there's only one thing that's more expensive than education, and 

that's ignorance.  It is a 



48 Saskatchewan Hansard March 1, 1993 

truism . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- It is a truism that one can easily forget in these 

days of restraint.  But the society of tomorrow is conceived in 

the schools of today.  We are short-changing our future if we 

don't provide the best possible education for our children. 

 

So I am glad to see the initiatives of education announced in 

this speech.  They are another example of inclusion -- 

government working with communities, schools, and teachers 

to minister to the whole child.  The wellness model goes to 

school. 

 

As a teacher with some years of experience, part of me still 

believes that the best teaching method is the teacher and the 

chalkboard and the chalk.  But the other part of me recognizes 

that to provide quality education to all our students in far . . . in 

this province, being the size it is, we have to take advantage of 

technology to expand opportunities.  So I welcome the 

initiatives in long-distance education for Northerners and for 

rural students.  It doesn't make much sense to enter the 21st 

century on a horse and buggy.  And I am happy to see our 

schools gearing up for the future. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the most laudable and the most necessary 

piece of legislation . . . necessary piece of inclusion is 

cooperation between government and community as mentioned 

at the beginning of the speech.  Without economic renewal, the 

wherewithal for education is absent.  Without jobs, the health 

system all dries up. 

 

If the measures announced by this government in this speech 

and in the previous two speeches had not been taken, the lights 

would have been going out all over Saskatchewan.  Thankfully, 

they are not.  Mercifully, with financial stability being restored, 

economic activity is following. 

 

And the same approach applies here just as it applies to health 

and education.  Co-operation, consultation, streamlining and 

determination.  The partnership for renewal last November is 

working because its mandate is clear, its targets are modest and 

achievable, and its planning is sound.  And we are making no 

wild claims, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  But it is fair to say that we 

are beginning to see results, modest results, befitting the 

necessary caution of our plan.  The good things are happening. 

 

The first issue of Saskatchewan savings bonds raised 565 

million.  Housing starts nearly tripled in 1992.  Tourism 

inquiries more than doubled.  Population is stabilizing after 

declining for the last several years.  These economic indicators 

are not spectacular, but they are encouraging. 

 

And frankly, Mr. Speaker, we have seen enough of what 

spectacular does.  One word says it all -- Rafferty.  A hundred 

years from now the Rafferty project will be used to define the 

word "folly".  We are not depending on megaprojects to drive 

the economy because we want the economy to be driven 

forward, not backward.  The 

partnership for renewal is based on manageable and 

manageable items because that's what works.  Be sensible, be 

cooperative, be slow, and be sure. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is so much to praise in this throne 

speech, and I have only mentioned a few points.  It's 

enveloping idea is what is most commendable, and that is what 

I have tried to emphasize.  This speech and this government is 

about renewal; about rebuilding our province; about, as it says, 

reinventing Saskatchewan's future.  And I can tell you, 

members of the Assembly, that we, sitting here, have to believe 

that.  We're going to believe it and it's going to work. 

 

It is visionary and practical at the same time.  It states the goals 

that we hope to reach and it charts the path to these goals.  It 

invites the Saskatchewan community to take part in this 

renewal because it is a renewal of the Saskatchewan 

community that is at stake. 

 

We all, governments and individuals, recognize that these are 

perilous times -- socially, economically, environmentally.  

Many of us recognize that to a great extent these times that we 

are living through now are the result of Thatcher, Reagan, 

Bush, Mulroney, and the guy here who wanted to be just like 

them when he grew up. 

 

The era of Reaganomics was the era of exclusion -- the era of 

much for a few, a little for most, and nothing for too many.  

These people reinvented the Dark Ages, which is why we are 

slowing coming out of it. It's taking a long time. 

 

The previous Saskatchewan government talked of freedom and 

put us in bondage to the bond dealers of Zrich, Tokyo, and 

New York.  They talked of progress and smartly marched us 

backward.  They said they could bring the children home.  

Where are my children?  They're not home.  They said they 

could bring the children home, and then slowly depopulated the 

countryside. 

 

And they said they were open for business.  Then they watched 

while their friends shoplifted this province blind. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Mr. Speaker, we can do better than that.  With 

the cooperation of the great people of Saskatchewan, we are 

doing better.  In our slow, methodical way, we are reinventing 

Saskatchewan's future.  One hundred 

_and-some years ago, Abraham Lincoln said: I walk slowly but 

I never walk backwards. 

 

With the direction given in this throne speech, with the 

leadership of Premier Roy Romanow, we are forging 

partnerships in agriculture, business, health, and education in 

the Saskatchewan community that will carry us with caution 

but with optimism into the new century. 

 

I am proud of this throne speech, and I move, seconded by the 

member from Kelsey-Tisdale: 

 

 That an humble address be presented to Her Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor as follows: 



March 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 49 

 To Her Honour the Honourable Sylvia O. Fedoruk, 

Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

 May it please Your Honour: 

 

 We, Her Majesty's dutiful and loyal subjects, the Legislative 

Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in session 

assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the gracious 

speech which Your Honour has been pleased to address to us 

at the opening of the present session. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I firstly would like 

to thank you for the leadership that you have shown to the 

Assembly and to myself personally in the last session, and I 

want to thank you in advance for your leadership in this 

coming session. 

 

I would like to also wish the Assembly staff an enjoyable 

session. 

 

My constituents and myself would like to take this opportunity 

as well to offer condolences to the families and friends of Mr. 

Perkins, Mr. Broten, and Mr. Thurston. 

 

I would also like to congratulate the organizers and the people 

of Saskatchewan in another very successful Kinsmen 

Telemiracle; $2.1 million was raised yesterday, Mr. Speaker -- 

$100,000 more than last year.  I think it made a lot of people 

very happy in the true Saskatchewan spirit. 

 

After a few remarks, I will second the motion just moved by 

my colleague, the hon. member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster, 

who so eloquently presented her motion of acceptance. 

 

I support the motion because I suppose to me this is one of the 

most important, if not the most important throne speeches in 

this time.  It's a throne speech of renewal, a throne speech of 

rebuilding, and a throne speech of a continued progress that our 

government has made over our first 16 months. 

 

I firstly would like to mention, Mr. Speaker, that I'm not sure if 

it's out of modesty or out of deference to me that the former 

speaker did not mention her claim to the constituency of 

Kelsey-Tisdale which I serve.  She is understandably proud of 

her constituency, and rightly so.  But she did attend high school 

in Tisdale and she had her first teaching job in Tisdale as well. 

 

I had the privilege of working for her mom, Mrs. Helen 

Owchar, and she was also a very, very fine lady. 

 

So I'm very proud that we can lay claim to my hon. colleague.  

And I'm certainly glad that for my own political career, that she 

chose to live and teach in another constituency. 

 

Like her constituency, the constituency of Kelsey-Tisdale is 

varied; it is interesting; it's so diversified, like our province 

itself.  We have somewhat a different mix than 

Cut Knife-Lloydminster, but we do have a rich assortment of 

people, resources, and history. 

 

Part of my constituency were first visited by Henry Kelsey, an 

early explorer, and apparently not-so-good poet who wrote his 

journal in verse.  And we are proud of that. 

 

We have forests, we have farms, we have bees, we have canola, 

we have industry, commerce, and education.  One of the 

loveliest parks in all of Saskatchewan is located in 

Kelsey-Tisdale.  And of course many of you would have had 

the opportunity to visit that park, the Greenwater provincial 

park.  It is also the jumping-off place for one of our important 

ports, the port of Churchill.  The train station in Hudson Bay 

will accept your ticket and I would encourage that all members 

visit the port of Churchill and visit the fine community of 

Hudson Bay. 

 

Our greatest asset of course is our fine people.  I appreciate the 

opportunity to serve the people of Kelsey-Tisdale.  It's hard 

work but it's rewarding.  And, Mr. Speaker, I don't think many 

of us say this often enough: that it's fun being a working 

member of this Legislative Assembly, serving the larger good 

of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

(1600) 

 

As are my colleagues, I am gratified by the blueprint of 

renewal presented in this speech.  There is much in particular 

to praise and there is a general theme that is gratifying.  It is 

truly a social democrat blueprint by a government willing to 

make tough decisions.  I would like to thank our Premier and 

cabinet for that.  This will ensure a future for our children. 

 

It speaks of a new direction.  Unlike the previous 

administration, the government will not dictate direction but 

the directions will be determined by partnerships -- community, 

people, and their government coming together.  It's very unlike 

the previous government where they had programs like Fair 

Share which divided communities, which divided people, 

which divided occupations.  This is a coming together of those 

same communities, of those same peoples.  This throne speech 

and the action of this government in the past 16 months makes 

one thing clear, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan is assuming its 

place again as a leader. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Renaud: -- It's once again leading the way in progressive, 

responsible, and necessary programs.  The province that 

introduced comprehensive automobile insurance, that 

pioneered medicare, and that led the way in capturing the 

benefits from its own resources for its own people, that same 

province, Mr. Speaker, is back in the forefront: health care 

reform, a new vision for economic renewal, a vision for 

agriculture now and in the future, financial responsibility, 

public accountability. And the list goes on.  None done alone, 

Mr. Speaker, but in partnership with communities and with the 

people of this province. 

 

I would like to speak for a moment on new partnerships and 

how they are linked or connected. But firstly I want to 



50 Saskatchewan Hansard March 1, 1993 

speak about fiscal responsibility and how this very important 

issue is connected to every partnership. 

 

To talk about fiscal responsibility we first, of course, must 

speak about our debt.  Mr. Speaker, the numbers are there for 

anyone to see and they are sorry numbers.  Saskatchewan has 

the highest per capita debt in Canada -- $15,000 for every man, 

woman, and child in this province. 

 

Interests on our debt are now the third-highest item in our 

budget, behind health and education, and if left alone would 

soon take over education.  Over $2 million a day in interest, 

Mr. Speaker; $760 million dollars of our taxes every year goes 

to Zrich, Tokyo, London, Toronto, New York. 

 

As the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster said, think of 

what we could do in this province with $760 million.  Those 

are the numbers and they are horrific.  Other governments have 

serious deficit problems as well, but none so serious as ours.  

Our credit rating is at an all-time low; our borrowing power is 

threatened. 

 

It reminds me about a person having a mortgage on a home, 

perhaps overbought, perhaps spent unwisely, but the mortgage 

for his home is threatening his livelihood and in fact his home.  

That person must make adjustments so that that mortgage 

payment can be made, otherwise he loses his home. 

 

We haven't got that choice here, Mr. Speaker.  We will not lose 

our home.  We will make the necessary adjustments so that our 

mortgage payments can be made.  They will be made. 

 

This throne speech and the budget speech to follow in a few 

weeks outlines a plan, a workable plan to not only reduce the 

deficit but to eliminate it, and over time to rid ourselves of that 

dead weight, Tory millstone of debt and interest that is around 

our neck.  As the throne speech says, Saskatchewan was the 

only province in Canada to make real progress towards getting 

its financial house in order. 

 

And not by ourselves, Mr. Speaker.  Again, I want to 

emphasize the partnership with the people of Saskatchewan 

who are working with us to rid ourselves of that debt --local 

governments, rural and urban, working together with us to 

reduce that debt.  School boards. 

 

I want to mention again that we are leaders and not followers.  

It's interesting to note that the new President of the United 

States, Mr. Clinton, has similar goals.  Other premiers will 

follow; other prime ministers will follow. 

 

I want to give notice to the members opposite that we are not 

throwing up our hands in despair.  This government, in 

consultation with the people of Saskatchewan, are making the 

hard, tough, necessary choices to defeat the deficit.  We are 

making them not as ends in themselves, not because it's 

pleasant; we are doing it because it is a simple but profound 

truism that until we can pay our own way we are not truly free. 

 

Saskatchewan people must be able to determine their 

own destiny.  Today's decisions will ensure that this happens.  

Financial freedom will give the Saskatchewan people the 

opportunity to set an agenda for the people by the people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will, in partnership, eliminate the deficit.  We 

will tackle the debt.  We will keep that $760 million in 

Saskatchewan.  We will again allow the Saskatchewan people 

to become masters of their own house, or as they say in the 

province to the east of us, matre chez nous. 

 

As mentioned earlier, it is interesting to note that other 

governments, both within and outside Canada, are beginning to 

make similar financial decisions.  Governments in British 

Columbia and Ontario have recently introduced measures to 

control their deficit situations. 

 

In the U.S. (United States) the new president is not only 

speaking of deficit reduction but seems to have staked his 

reputation on doing something about it, while kick-starting the 

economy at the same time.  He seems to actually be doing, not 

only talking, which distinguishes him from his two 

predecessors. 

 

And he is giving much the same reasons.  He needs the deficit 

under control so the government can conduct its business and 

the country can finally move forward.  I wish him well as I'm 

sure we all do.  The American people have accepted the 

challenging partnership, as they have in our fine province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

It is interesting I think that the governments of the 1980s -- the 

Thatcher, Reagan, Bush, Mulroney, Vander Zalm, Getty, and 

the opposition next -- these governments called themselves 

Conservative.  They trumpeted their businesslike approach.  

They talked about responsible fiscal policy, and without 

exception they robbed the candy store blind.  For their friends 

every day was a dollar day. 

 

And I want to say one word about excuses, because I've heard 

excuses.  In a recent article in the Toronto Globe and Mail 

called "How the gravy train went off the rails" in 

Saskatchewan, well the former premier, the member from 

Estevan, was asked to explain why there were so many 

scandals in his administration.  He said, and I quote: 

 

 We are not without sin, but I don't elect MLAs, the people 

do.  People select those folks and some are stronger than 

others.  Some are easily fooled.  I had some people with a lot 

of problems. 

 

That's remarkable, Mr. Speaker.  To say it's not my fault, it's 

the fault of the voters who elected me -- that's incredible. 

 

Most of those leaders are gone, all of them as of June of this 

year.  And it's the governments of the Clinton administration in 

the U.S., the Rae administration in Ontario, the Harcourt 

administration in B.C. (British Columbia), and our government, 

Mr. Speaker, in partnership with the people, left to clean up the 

mess. 

 

I want to again thank our Premier and our cabinet for having 

the courage to make the tough decisions but the 



March 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 51 

correct decisions.  This is what responsible government is all 

about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Renaud: -- I found it quite interesting that in his 

resignation speech last Wednesday, the Prime Minister bragged 

that he was leaving the funds of the Progressive Conservative 

Party with a substantial surplus.  He neglected to mention that 

he was leaving the Canadian people with nothing but an empty 

barrel and a pair of suspenders. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Cut Knife pointed out that 

deficit reduction is far from our only priority.  We are not 

single-minded.  We are not sacrificing our commitment to the 

well-being of Saskatchewan people.  We are determined to 

maintain and expand the safety net for the undefended in our 

society.  We are upgrading and updating our educational 

system.  And we are embarking on new adventure in health 

care with the wellness model, all in partnership and 

consultation with people and with communities. 

 

The wellness model is ground breaking approach to health care 

delivery.  It focuses on health instead of sickness.  It expands 

our awareness of wellness into every area of our lives.  It takes 

as its starting point something our aboriginal people have 

known for ages -- everything is connected; nothing exists in 

isolation. 

 

The great Chief Seattle said, and I quote: we did not weave the 

web of life; we are merely a strand of it.  Whatever we do to 

the web, we do to ourselves.  One cannot stop a child's cough 

with just cough medicine until the child has warm, draught-free 

housing.  Everything is connected.  And that's what wellness is 

-- connected. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, other jurisdictions are taking note of this 

new partnership, community-based approach to health care.  

People from all over North America watched the introduction 

of medicare in 1962.  Today governments from Ontario, B.C., 

and from states like Minnesota have come to observe. 

 

We are not leading because we look for a leadership role, but 

as the movie says: if you build it, they will come.  If you build 

it and if it is good, they will come. 

 

I'd like to quote from the Toronto Globe and Mail from 

February 3, 1993:  "BC to overhaul health-care system" is the 

headline: 

 

 Newly created community health councils and regional 

boards will make the bottom-line decisions . . . 

 

They're talking about B.C.  Further down in the article it says: 

 

 In 1991, the Premier's Council on Health Strategy in Ontario 

recommended handing over decisions about health-care 

spending to local authorities.  Last year, Saskatchewan 

entered what was described at the time as uncharted territory, 

 creating regional health boards to administer their own 

budgets and operating plans. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I guess we are leaders, and it's good to see other 

provinces follow. 

 

As wellness is connected to itself, it is also connected to other 

initiatives.  Reinventing the future of this great province also 

touches other areas, in particular agriculture, the lifeblood of 

this province. 

 

We are what we are because of agriculture.  We will become 

what we can be because of agriculture.  The previous 

administration made a quick deal with the federal government 

to participate in a program, a program that was very best 

questionable and at worst a program that could ultimately cost 

farmers their livelihood. 

 

Why could it hit the very people it was supposed to help?  

Well, Mr. Speaker, because among other things it would 

become so outrageously expensive that farmers would actually 

wind up paying enormous bills rather than collecting from a 

program supposedly designed to protect them. 

 

I would also like to quote from The Edmonton Journal, I 

believe, Mr. Speaker: A two-year-old farm subsidy program 

that governments claimed would be self-funded has already 

piled up a $400 million deficit in Alberta.  And the troubled 

gross revenue insurance plan cost provincial and federal 

taxpayers up to 1 billion within the next four years, says 

Alberta Agriculture Minister Ernie Isley. 

 

And we tried, Mr. Speaker.  We responded to farmers' insistent 

demands that the programs needed to be changed, that it 

needed to be more market responsive, and it had to eliminate 

the part of the program that forced some farmers to make 

business decisions to farm according to the program. 

 

We made changes that were designed to make this bad program 

a little bit better, and what happened?  The bottom fell out, 

that's what happened.  The federal government, who has been 

saying for over a decade that they're here to help us, pulled the 

plug on cooperation again, and this time they pulled the plug 

on the third line of defence commitments and they've pulled the 

plug on continuing support for western Canadian and 

Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

They are pleading that they have no money to help us, yet they 

seem to have funds to buy expensive military rescue 

helicopters and funds to assist east coast fishermen who, I 

might add, face a dilemma similar to ours, to our Saskatchewan 

farmers.  We're not saying the federal government should not 

assist the fishermen.  I believe that that's the right thing to go.  

But it raises the question, where is our structure; where is our 

protection? 

 

Those are tough questions, and I expect, Mr. Speaker, that we 

likely will not get the answer to them soon.  And that leaves us 

to trying valiantly to make up for the federal government 

shortfall in safety net programs, which is very 



52 Saskatchewan Hansard March 1, 1993 

difficult, given the financial difficulties that our province faces. 

 

Nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, we do have hope for the future.  We 

do have a vision for this province in agriculture, a vision that 

will be shaped and developed in partnership with farmers, 

communities, and the agriculture and food industry. 

 

A recently released discussion paper for a long-term strategy 

for Saskatchewan agriculture is the foundation for some pretty 

exciting policy.  It will help provide the framework for 

agricultural strategy for the next century.  And the best thing 

about the document, which is called "Forging Partnerships in 

Agriculture," is that it will test the minds and hearts of those 

across our province.  It will challenge all of us to find solutions 

to the crises facing agriculture today and tomorrow. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Renaud: -- The paper will identify three areas, three vital 

areas which will form the basis for public consultation:  firstly, 

the role and development of agricultural institutions like the 

Canadian Wheat Board; secondly, the methods of adding value 

to goods produced in our province and finding new markets for 

our products; and third, the maintenance of the family farm. 

 

I'd like to pause here, Mr. Speaker, to interject what the vision 

statement is. 

 

 Our guiding principle must be to foster a self-reliant, 

sustainable agriculture and food industry and viable 

communities in rural Saskatchewan.  We must ensure the 

maximum opportunity for the highest number of families and 

individuals to earn a livelihood from agriculture. 

 

"Forging Partnerships in Agriculture," Mr. Speaker, will see 

eight regional meetings starting March 4 and continuing until 

April 21, 1993.  The meetings will be held in Swift Current, 

Weyburn, Watrous, Rosetown, North Battleford, Moose Jaw, 

Melfort, Yorkton.  At the end of the road is a conference in 

June to consolidate the views gathered at the meetings and to 

continue work on the strategy which is expected to be 

completed in August. 

 

This is an innovative approach to finding workable solutions 

for our province's agricultural future.  And those who actively 

participate in shaping policy will begin to see the results of the 

partnerships they forged as Saskatchewan's economy begins to 

revive. 

 

This wellness partnership in agriculture will add to the 

well-being of the entire province, Mr. Speaker.  Saskatchewan 

is showing leadership in fiscal responsibility, in government 

accountability in health and education, in agriculture, in land 

entitlement for aboriginal peoples.  We are taking control of 

our destiny once more. 

 

And we are leading in other areas, an area which envelopes all 

of the others.  We are pioneering in partnerships, in economic 

development, in tourism, in 

cooperatives, and in community organization we are leading 

the way by stepping aside.  We are becoming partners in the 

renewal of Saskatchewan, not directors. 

 

In the 1980s we were told that all we need to know about is 

how to manage a big bucks, megaproject agenda.  From that 

agenda, Mr. Speaker, we learned that the government cannot 

and certainly should not take all the responsibility and all of the 

risk, especially for megaprojects.  Many of those projects were 

splashy, all terribly expensive, very risky, and not much lasting 

economic worth. 

 

We have a better way and the minister's name for the strategy 

says it all -- Partnership For Renewal.  Government, 

communities, businesses, entrepreneurs, co-ops, working men 

and women, all working together on this journey of renewal. 

 

It is a very pleasant irony that Saskatchewan is once again 

taking the lead by creating a strategy in which there are no 

dictators, only partners. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have all heard it said that these are perilous 

times.  We need, it is said, new ideas, new approaches, a new 

vision to get us out of the economic soup and comfortably into 

tomorrow. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the Partnership For Renewal provides that 

necessary framework built on the foundation of fiscal 

responsibility and with the knowledge that we are all in this 

together and things are already beginning to happen. 

 

The indicators are not extravagant, but they are encouraging.  

The corner is being turned slowly but steadily.  Crude oil sales 

are up by 12.7 per cent; coal and potash sales are up.  Housing 

starts are up a whooping 87.2 per cent in the first nine months 

of 1992; bankruptcies were down by 13.3 per cent in the same 

period.  Tourism inquiries are up by 52 per cent and visitor 

registrations at tourism reception centres were up 18 per cent.  

A new and improved AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.) 

agreement has been signed, an agreement that does not commit 

us to a nuclear waste dump nor a nuclear reactor. 

 

Saskatchewan communities are accepting the challenges of 

Partnership For Renewal.  And what I really find gratifying 

about all this, Mr. Speaker, is the willingness, the enthusiasm, 

the spirit in which Saskatchewan people are meeting the 

challenges facing us. 

 

Change can be scary to be resisted.  But change can be 

positive, invigorating, renewing.  And this is the case here.  

The Partnership For Renewal is not just about dollars and 

cents, it's about restructuring the Saskatchewan economy.  Like 

the wellness model or the vision in agriculture, it's about a new 

approach to well-being.  It is responsive to the needs and 

aspirations of Saskatchewan people.  They will be able to 

continue to live and work and prosper in this province.  The 

economic benefits will spin into social benefits so that 

Saskatchewan people will have the opportunity for happiness 

and good health.  As I said, everything is connected. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I've been an MLA for 



March 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 53 

16 months and during that brief time I have learned some 

things.  I've learned first, gratitude for those who put their trust 

in me.  I've had re-emphasized the strong Saskatchewan 

foundation -- agriculture, resources, small business, and the 

working people -- that Saskatchewan is built on.  I have learned 

a great deal about how to do things, or how not to do things, I 

should say, by moving into the ruins of what was once a 

smoothly operating and efficient province. 

 

We have seen the truth of that old statement: any jackass can 

kick down a barn, but it takes a good carpenter to build one.  

Well we've cleared away the rubble and now we're rebuilding.  

I've learned that it takes courage to govern with a $15 billion 

debt, interest bills of $760 million a year, over $2 million a 

day, and a credit rating that is extremely low. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I've learned what our poets and preachers 

and teachers have always known -- that Saskatchewan's spirit is 

strong, resilient, and deep.  Without going too far it is fair to 

say that we only dimly understand how strong that spirit really 

is. 

 

In my constituency of Kelsey-Tisdale -- and I am sure there are 

similar stories across the province -- communities are taking 

responsibility for their own development.  They recognize that 

government resources are stretched beyond their limits and are 

taking up that slack themselves. 

 

For example, the town of Bjorkdale put in its own artificial ice 

plant without any government help.  And professional groups 

like the optometrists who also recognized the need of 

cooperation and are willing to contribute to free eye 

examinations in the first week in March to take the area that 

government can no longer afford to support. 

 

This is cooperation.  This is partnership.  That's what 

Saskatchewan is all about. 

 

There is a saying about people who visit China.  If you go for a 

week you can write a book.  If you stay for a month you could 

write a magazine article.  If you stay for a year, you remain 

silent so you can begin to learn.  That's how I feel about 

Saskatchewan, the province where I've lived all my life. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have a number of challenges facing 

us.  There are big ones, daunting ones, for those with less 

determination.  But we will meet those challenges.  With the 

leadership of our Premier and this government, with the plan 

outlined in the speech, and with the partnership of the people of 

Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan will be restored to its rightful 

condition of wellness. 

 

Not long ago Irma Douglas sent a note to the Premier, a note of 

encouragement and hope.  And she said, and I quote: someday 

soon the sun will shine again on Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with that vote of confidence, for one who surely 

knows what this province is made of, I am proud to second the 

motion in support of this Speech from the Throne. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Once again 

it's a pleasure for me to enter into a throne speech debate in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, it's the 

second one of this new New Democratic government that 

everyone in the province has been waiting to bring forward 

some kind of a plan. 

 

I must say off the top though that I would like to thank Her 

Honour for the tremendous asset that she has been to the 

province of Saskatchewan.  Her delivery the other day here 

with the leaders and movers in our community, was 

tremendous.  And certainly over the last five years that Her 

Honour has been Lieutenant Governor of this province she has 

fulfilled her duties as an example, I think, to other people in the 

province. 

 

And I'd also like to thank the people of Thunder Creek for the 

opportunity to speak on their behalf once more in this 

Legislative Assembly.  Thunder Creek is a large, sprawling 

rural riding, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I guess it epitomizes so 

many of the problems that are out in Saskatchewan today.  It's 

mostly made up of people that either make their living directly 

from agriculture or are related to agriculture in some direct 

way.  It means that everyone is feeling the pinch today. 

 

It means that the towns and villages are under as much stress as 

the people living on the farms.  So many of the problems that 

they're experiencing, I believe, as being exacerbated by this 

particular government because of its inability to project to these 

people some type of a plan, a window of opportunity that will 

give them some hope that there is a future for rural 

Saskatchewan and for those towns and villages that have been 

the bulwark of this province ever since our entry into 

Confederation. 

 

I guess the thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about this second throne 

speech of the government of the member from Riversdale, is 

the fact that once again we are faced with some awful truths.  

And I guess if I was to develop some headlines for this 

particular throne speech, it might be slightly different than the 

ones which the government presented to us last week.  I would 

have to start with the first headline, which is one that says total 

dishonesty. 

 

As I said earlier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is the second 

attempt of this government to bring forward a plan of action, a 

plan that would show Saskatchewan people that as we went 

through the '90s and into the next century that this province 

was going to keep moving ahead, that this province would be a 

land of opportunity, that this province could deal with some of 

the very difficult circumstance that it has before it. 

 

Instead I'm faced with a document that, on the economic 

development side, only talks about initiatives of the former 

government, that only talks about AECL and community bonds 

is the way that they're going to lead this province to a better 

day.  And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those ideas were all roundly 

condemned by the previous New Democrat opposition. 



54 Saskatchewan Hansard March 1, 1993 

So that is why I'm afraid, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the titles 

that are assigned to various components of this speech don't 

work out very well.  Nowhere does the government talk about 

all of the election promises delivered only a short while ago, 

about all the election promises that obviously were never meant 

to be kept. 

 

Nowhere in this document do I see the issue of taxes addressed 

in the way that it is being thrust upon Saskatchewan people.  

Nowhere did the former New Democratic opposition talk about 

the breadth of the taxation increases which they would foist 

upon Saskatchewan taxpayers and consumers, as we have seen 

in the last 16 months. 

 

Nowhere do we try to see an explanation of why we would 

promise to do away with sales tax and now the reality is that 

they have increased and may increase more.  Nowhere in here 

do we see an explanation to Saskatchewan people of why the 

family of Crown corporations is back in business, digging into 

the pockets of Saskatchewan people as they did in years gone 

by, where we see utility increases, utility rate increases, 

occurring every six months.  And for what justification?  The 

justification being that, well, we have to make the Crowns 

profitable.  Well I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that all records 

show that the Crowns were profitable.  That we have to have 

these rate increases because we're paying for the debt that 

we've transferred from one Crown to another Crown. 

 

Well nowhere in here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, does anyone 

explain to Saskatchewan people and taxpayers how using one 

Crown's debt to justify rate increases in another is going to 

bring forward some type of a plan that will make people feel 

good about the province of Saskatchewan, about paying taxes 

here, about living here and being here to try and build for the 

future. 

 

Because quite frankly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we see 

before us is more of a shell game based on control and power 

and picking the pockets of Saskatchewan taxpayers to make up 

for the lack of an agenda and for the, I believe, total, total 

dishonesty of the former opposition in this province as they 

told people one thing and actually intended on doing another. 

 

Because we have to go through the major areas of our 

economy, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and assess them for what they 

are and where they are and, I believe, to be quite up front with 

Saskatchewan people in these times of difficulty.  And instead 

we take an area like agriculture which the previous speaker 

said is the foundation, and will be for many years to come, the 

foundation of Saskatchewan's economy. 

 

And we see agriculture in terrible straits, promised so much by 

the previous opposition; promised so much during the last 

campaign.  Agriculture promised that all we had to do was get 

on an airplane and fly to Ottawa with some of our friends and 

everything would be right with the world.  But that hasn't been 

the case. 

 

The people in agriculture in my constituency are like the 

people in agriculture in every other rural riding in this 

province, and they are saying we are in trouble.  We expected 

more from a government that promised us so much.  If they had 

never intended on delivering, if they had intended on instead 

taking away every tool that we had at our disposal to weather 

this economic storm, then I believe the tremendous number of 

rural back-benchers, which this government brought to this 

Assembly in October of 1991, would not have been here. 

 

We saw health. Day after day in this Assembly, we saw the 

former opposition -- the New Democratic Party, the people 

who founded medicare in this province in the old CCF days -- 

standing here demanding more, more, more, more from the 

government of the day.  And saying: we will deliver more.  

We'll deliver it with less and there will be so much more. 

 

And as my colleagues so aptly pointed out in question period 

today, that so many of those services which Saskatchewan 

people used in order to get well and stay well, so many of those 

programs the government has said: farewell.  Well, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I'm afraid that the philosophy of wellness seems to be 

saying to Saskatchewan people: get well, stay well, or farewell. 

 

And then we have the issue of patronage where we had the 

former opposition talk day after day after day about patronage.  

And we have seen in the short 16 months, this New Democratic 

Party government indulge in patronage to the tune of hundreds, 

of hundreds.  We've got former members of this Assembly who 

sat for the New Democratic Party running around the province, 

people who are on very significant pensions, doing studies for 

the government. 

 

We have almost the entire structure of the family of Crown 

corporations populated by people who existed in the 1970s 

when the family of Crown corporations ran rampant across the 

face of this province and were roundly rejected by people. 

 

We see defeated candidates back in the service of those who 

stood in this legislature and said under a New Democratic Party 

government this will never happen; things will be different.  

We will have a public service which is truly a public service, 

one that doesn't have political appointments attached to it. 

 

Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, nowhere in the Speech from the 

Throne document, at least nowhere that I have read, have I seen 

these issues addressed.  And I can only take from there that the 

government of the day doesn't want Saskatchewan people to 

know and talk about those things because it might cloud their 

ability, it might cloud their ability to smooth things along for 

that day in 1995 when they once more will have to be 

accountable to Saskatchewan people. 

 

It doesn't talk about the broken contracts with public servants, 

the broken contracts with farmers in this province.  And it's 

interesting to listen to the perspective of the government 

members who have entered the debate today on that particular 

issue. 

 

If things were so wonderful in the decisions made in the spring 

of 1992 by the member from Rosetown, then why 



March 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 55 

today does the government find itself back in court again?  

Why today does it find people across this province contributing 

money to defence funds?  Why will the Government of 

Saskatchewan invariably find itself in the Supreme Court of 

Canada over this issue of a broken contract? 

 

And I say it is because these people, these new-found 

Democrats, were so busy designing programs that weren't for 

people but for their own political agenda, that they were willing 

to risk to take the rights of Saskatchewan people away, take 

away the rights of Saskatchewan people to take their own 

government to court.  And any government that hides from the 

people, that isn't capable of facing its peers in a court of law, is 

a government that is rapidly losing touch with those it is 

elected to represent. 

 

And it appears, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the same can be said 

for health workers, organizations that have been providing care 

to Saskatchewan people for a hundred years, that their 

contracts, the service they provided, no longer means anything. 

 

It appears from the letters that I'm receiving as Leader of the 

Opposition and MLA for Thunder Creek, that the role of 

volunteers in this province is being shunted aside, that this 

government, the treasury benches, the cabinet, have determined 

that people like the Wildlife Federation, people like the 

hundreds of organizations who go out and raise money in 

bingos and other ways, shouldn't have access to that 

hard-earned money, money which has always been seen to be 

dedicated to certain worthwhile endeavours in this province. 

 

And each and every one of us over the weekend watched 

Telemiracle once again reach tremendous goals.  But you 

know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that goal was built on volunteers.  

That goal was built on bingos, on various charitable 

organizations, on people being able to work together to raise 

money to help their fellow citizens. 

 

(1645) 

 

And nowhere in this Speech from the Throne does the 

government talk about trying to take away the dedicated funds 

of the Wildlife Federation, about the threats to the charities, to 

the countless thousands of people in this province who say that 

the government has designs on their money, all in the guise of 

accountability.  And I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it's terrible 

that the government would use the Gass Commission as the 

cover when explaining to wildlife members, as I attended a 

meeting last week, that their money had to be taken and 

directed in a different way. 

 

And most of all I guess when we talk about broken contracts, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, one has to think about the contract of 

October of 1991 when over 50 per cent of Saskatchewan 

people said we are voting for the New Democratic Party based 

on the promises that they've made, the commitments they've 

made, on how they would govern this province.  And that 

contract is broken each and every day -- each and every day 

that this government continues to use its large electoral 

mandate to ramrod its way over Saskatchewan voters and 

taxpayers. 

 

There are some things in this speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

I think I would like to hear government members talk about 

over the next five days, and give some people in this province 

some assurance that the things that they talk about in there are 

for real. 

 

This is the second throne speech where I have seen the 

government commit itself to reform of the Legislative 

Assembly, reform of conflict of interest guidelines, reform of 

the code of ethics of members of this Assembly.  And I would 

like to say to the government members today, on behalf of the 

opposition, that we take this matter very, very seriously.  That 

we, in our role as members of the Board of Internal Economy, 

have proposed to that board and to members of the Assembly 

that perhaps it's time for us to find some impartial third party to 

once again adjudicate the way in which members receive 

certain reimbursement. 

 

And I can assure the government that if they are serious this 

time about bringing these issues forward to this Assembly, that 

with some consultation with members of the opposition, with 

some cooperation, that we are ready to move speedy passage of 

these types of items, which would once again give 

Saskatchewan taxpayers the security and the knowledge that 

their Legislative Assembly and its members are conducting 

themselves in a reasonable fashion. 

 

We would say to the government members and commend them 

for some of the documents that they've brought forward like the 

Partnership for Renewal -- A Strategy for the 

Saskatchewan Economy, a white paper that says many good 

things. 

 

But we want to know from the government -- because we 

haven't seen it in the throne speech -- we want to know from 

the government that they are listening to the very stakeholders 

mentioned in this particular document, that they are listening 

when they bring proposed legislation forward, legislation that 

we hear could be diametrically opposed to the objectives of a 

strategy for the Saskatchewan economy. 

 

They talk about having a single window of delivery for 

economic projects.  And once again we applaud that concept.  

But we want to know from government members that that 

single window of delivery actually is a reality and that there is 

meat and potatoes there for people to grab onto in the business 

community. 

 

We want to know from this government -- and don't see it in 

the throne speech -- that the Minister of Economic 

Development's words on NAFTA (North American Free Trade 

Agreement) are real, that his words about Saskatchewan having 

more to gain from the North American Free Trade Agreement 

is greater than any other province in our Confederation.  And 

yet we don't see it in here. 

 

And we want to know, Saskatchewan men and women, 

business people want to know, that the minister is serious, that 

when he says that about NAFTA, it is a reality, and that he is 

prepared to work with people all across our 



56 Saskatchewan Hansard March 1, 1993 

province to enhance our exports. 

 

We want to know that when they talk about an energy strategy 

in this province, a province blessed with all five natural 

energies, that the government is serious, that all of the 

co-generation projects that people talk about, which could 

mean diversification for this province, are all going to be 

judged on their merits and not someone in SaskPower. 

Someone potentially with very strong connections to the 

Government of Saskatchewan could stand in the way of 

community after community being part of the energy solution 

to the year 2000. 

 

And we want to know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from the 

government members -- because it isn't told to us in this throne 

speech -- if this government is truly serious about stopping the 

flow of Saskatchewan people out of our province.  And I guess 

I can only think with some degree of hypocrisy back to the 

election campaign of 1991 when I saw NDP campaign ads on 

TV about bus loads of people leaving our province, a province 

that under the previous New Democrat administration in the 

1970s got down to 890,000 people, a province that went over 

the million mark for the first time since the early '30s under a 

Conservative administration in the 1980s, but which to this 

very day in the numbers that, when I inquired last month, saw 

1,600 more people leave our province -- a problem that I 

believe can only be arrested when the government comes 

forward with an economic and social agenda that says to 

people: in the next two or three years this is what 

Saskatchewan is going to look like. 

 

It's an agenda which isn't prevented from achieving its goals 

because of short-sighted political-gain attempts by the 

Government of Saskatchewan.  It's an agenda which won't be 

short-sighted in its implementation because members of this 

government aren't willing to come clean with Saskatchewan 

people with some of the promises that they made in the past. 

 

I think it's absolutely incumbent if that plan is to work, if 

Saskatchewan people are to feel confident enough about 

staying here, and if others are confident enough to come and be 

part of our fabric in this province, that this government stop the 

doom-and-gloom scenario which seems to be the only message 

that members of the treasury benches can give Saskatchewan 

people at this time. 

 

It's interesting that others around the province are starting to 

question, starting to question this negative story provided by 

the government to each of us every day.  And I was looking at 

the Star-Phoenix of February 26, 1993, where a person writes 

in and says that we should be talking about the net debt of the 

province of Saskatchewan rather than the gross debt. 

 

 . . . the "gross debt" the Romanow government reports which 

does not take into consideration the offsetting value of the 

assets the province owns). 

 

 Regina keeps telling us that Saskatchewan has a debt of about 

$13,000 a person and that this is the highest in Canada . . . 

But that is the gross debt (Mr. Deputy Speaker).  According 

to Statistics Canada, our provincial net debt is $4.8 billion or 

about 

$4,800 a person. 

 

That means that there's seven other provinces, seven other 

provinces in worse shape than Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker.  And I wonder, as we develop a plan in this province, 

that we shouldn't be telling people both sides of the story.  

Because it seems to me that the only way, the only way that 

this province, as a cohesive unit, is going to pull itself up by the 

bootstraps and lick the problems that are in front of us is if we 

are told the absolute truth about where we're at; we aren't told a 

story that simply tries to cover up a political party; and the 

campaign promises that they made to us a short time ago in 

which this second throne speech in a row has not had the 

fortitude to come forth and talk about. 

 

Because I can tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as my colleagues 

will mention over and over again in the days to come, that if 

this government doesn't come and flesh out this particularly 

very weak document, that the only hope for Saskatchewan 

people in the future is that this government is a one-term 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, because the time draws 

to a close, I'm going to move adjournment of debate at this 

time. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:57 p.m. 

 

 


