




















































Hansard: June 10, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2381 

 June 10, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's my 

pleasure this afternoon to be able to present a petition on behalf 

of Saskatchewan citizens and residents of Saskatchewan.  And 

I'll read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petitions come from the Buchanan, Sturgis, 

Canora, Yorkton, Young, Zelma areas of the province. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I too have 

petitions to present to the Assembly.  Petitions . . . I'd like to 

read the prayer first: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the petitions are signed from individuals 

from across the south-east -- Glenavon, Rocanville, 

Windthorst, Grenfell, Estevan, Langbank, Quill Lake, Kelso, 

Wawota, and a number from the Theodore area. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have 

petitions to present today.  The prayer reads: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the Redvers, Regina, 

Archerwill, Rose Valley areas of the province, also throughout 

all the north-east corner and some from the south-east, Mr. 

Speaker.  I present these today. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have petitions to 

present on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan as well today.  

I'll read the prayer: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Coming from the areas of Indian Head, Sintaluta, Qu'Appelle, 

Springside, Theodore, quite a few from the Theodore area, Mr. 

Speaker, and I'm happy to lay them on the Table now. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to join my 

colleagues this afternoon in presenting petitions to the 

Legislative Assembly, and the prayer reads: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners that I have this afternoon come 

from the northern part of Saskatchewan, more specifically, 

Turtleford, Livelong, Edam, Spruce Lake, Southey -- a number 

of pages from Southey here -- Spiritwood, Leoville, Medstead, 

and many, many more from Spiritwood, Mr. Speaker.  It gives 

me a great deal of pleasure to table these at this time. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have petitions 

here.  I'll read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I have petitioners from Edam, Turtleford, Tisdale, Star City, 

Melfort, Canwood, P.A. (Prince Albert), Weldon, Shellbrook, 

Tisdale, Rockglen, Scott.  I table them for the petitioners today. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's a 

pleasure for me today to rise in the Assembly and table the 

names of concerned Saskatchewan citizens.  I will read the 

prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 



2382 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1993 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, I have concerned citizens from the 

communities of Rosetown, Turtleford, Spalding, Quill Lakes, 

Spalding again; people all over the province of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, and I gladly table these today on their behalf. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I, too, have petitions 

that I will table with respect to the NewGrade upgrader and I 

will read the prayer and table them. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The people here that I am tabling represent the communities of 

Tisdale and Admiral. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order, the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7), they are hereby read and 

received: 

 

 Of citizens of the province praying that the Assembly defeat 

any legislation introduced to redefine the NewGrade Energy 

Inc. corporate governance and financing arrangements. 

 

And: 

 

 Of citizens of the province praying that the Assembly cause 

the government to order SaskPower to facilitate the 

production of non-utility generated power in areas of 

increased demand. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure this 

afternoon to introduce to you and through you to members of 

the Assembly, 28 grade 4 students from St. Angela School in 

the constituency I represent, Regina North West.  They are 

seated, Mr. Speaker, in your gallery.  They are accompanied by 

their teacher Laurie Ruhr, and chaperon Sylvia Gervais. 

 

I would look forward to meeting with them after question 

period, Mr. Speaker, to discuss matters of the Assembly and 

any other questions they want to raise with me.  And I would 

ask all members to join with me in welcoming them to this 

Assembly this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

I'd like to introduce to you and through you to members of the 

Assembly, two groups today. 

 

One was a surprise group, but I'm very happy to see them.  In 

the east gallery is Barb Fraser, Melissa Lerat, Maggie Angiyo, 

Tina Pelletier, and Clint Saulteaux, who are all summer 

students at the Saskatchewan Indian Federated College summer 

institute of journalism. 

 

And although we haven't arranged to have pictures, if you want 

to meet me out on the stairs at 2:30 I've got another group I'm 

having pictures with and we could have our picture taken, if 

you'd like.  Clint Saulteaux I worked with at Rainbow Youth 

Centre.  It's nice to see you.  And could you join me in 

welcoming them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- My other group in the Speaker's gallery is 16 

grade 7 and 8 students from Holy Rosary School.  We have 

Clarence Demchuk, their principal with them, and Leona 

Carigan, community coordinator.  And we're going to be 

meeting for a photo at 2:30 and a drink after question period.  

So again I thank you to welcome them with me. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

introduce to you and to members of the Assembly, Dr. Dixie 

Lee Ray who is in your gallery.  If Dr. Ray would stand please.  

Dr. Ray is a former governor of the state of Washington.  She 

is a recipient of the United Nations peace prize, a university 

professor, and an author on the role scientists should be playing 

in helping address environmental issues. 

 

Dr. Ray will be speaking this evening in Saskatoon on the topic 

of the trashing of the planet.  She is here as a guest of the 

Canadian Nuclear Society.  And I would like all members of 

our Assembly to please join with me in welcoming her today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is my pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to members of the Assembly, 

members of the Regina Rotary Club who have with them six 

gentlemen from Japan.  They are also members of the Rotary 

Club there.  And I will apologize to them in advance as I read 

their names with an English accent. 

 

We have with us Mr. Karino Toshikazu who is the team leader. 

Mr. Masamichi Miura who is interested in real estate marketing 

practices in Canada and in our city. Mr. Matsuki Kameoka who 

is someone who works for the city of Shiroishi.  Mr. Hideaki 

Hishinuma, and he is an officer in the local hospital so is very 

interested in hospital operation here.  We have Mr. Katsuhiko 

Sato who works for the town office; and Mr. Takemi Suzuki, 

who is also a worker in the town office and a planner. 

 

With them is Mr. Dai Sato who's the interpreter from 



June 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2383 

the Regina Rotary Club; and also someone I was working with 

at the city of Regina, a city police officer, Mr. Rod Ash, who 

has just returned from a visit to Japan. 

 

I would ask all members of the Assembly to welcome them, 

and hopefully they will learn a lot from viewing the 

participation of members in the Assembly this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to join 

with the member from Saskatoon Greystone in extending 

words of welcome to Dr. Dixie Lee Ray, because I will be 

going to Saskatoon this afternoon and I'll have the pleasure of 

hearing Dr. Ray and meeting with her at the annual meeting of 

the Canadian Nuclear Society.  And I very much look forward 

to her remarks. 

 

As the member from Greystone has said, she's a very 

distinguished guest to our province.  And I too would like to 

welcome Dr. Ray. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

Assembly, a group of 23 students, grade 7 to 12 students from 

Artesian School, Spring Valley, my constituency 

Bengough-Milestone, who are visiting here today.  They are 

seated in the east gallery. 

 

And I'm looking forward to having a visit with them after and 

having drinks and photos.  I'm sure we'll have a good 

discussion and question time about the proceedings here today.  

I ask all members to help me join in welcoming this group 

from Spring Valley. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I just want to join 

with members of the legislature in welcoming Dr. Ray to the 

Legislative Assembly here in Saskatchewan and let her know 

that we really appreciate having people come into the province 

of Saskatchewan and speak about environment issues, 

particularly those associated with nuclear energy, and welcome 

Walter Keys who is with her, to take my hat off to him for all 

the work that he has done in promoting sound environmental 

knowledge with respect to the nuclear industry and wish you 

well, both of you, in the days ahead. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like 

just to take a moment to recognize a group of elite people in 

this Assembly.  They happen to be sitting above you, Mr. 

Speaker -- the press corps.  And I notice there's a number of 

vacancies and I don't know if that exactly reflects the 

strenuousness they put into the ball game last night, but, Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to suggest that if we'd have had your 

presence and your unbiased opinion behind the plate, we might 

have . . . the outcome of the game might have been a little more 

favourable.  But we want to extend our congratulations to the 

media. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Free Vote on Bill 38 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Minister of Justice and actually to the 

Premier, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Minister of 

Justice laughed off the suggestion of a free vote in this 

Assembly so that all the members of his caucus would be able 

to stand up and exercise their opinion on Bill 38. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, the minister 

knows fair well that his comments of yesterday that there was 

one vote taken; the vote has already been taken; there won't be 

any more votes, Mr. Speaker, we all know that there will be 

numerous votes taking place in this Assembly as yet. 

 

I would ask the minister and the Premier if he would do the 

honourable thing, if he would get out from behind his desk and 

be the honourable leader that he attempts to portray. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you allow a free vote on Bill 38 in order that 

all MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) may fully 

stand in their place and represent the overwhelming wishes of 

their constituents? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, if I may respond, I 

want to say to the member opposite that I don't know how the 

decisions are made in the Conservative caucus when they 

deliberate on the legislation or any other debate that is taken on 

in this House.  I think I know how the debate takes place in the 

Liberal caucus. 

 

But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that in the New Democratic 

Party caucus there is a considerable amount of debate and 

exchange of views openly and the caucus of the government 

makes a decision on whether there is going to be a support for a 

piece of legislation.  The New Democratic Party caucus, the 

government caucus, has made such a decision.  We brought 

forward the amendments to Bill 38 because we think they're 

important, because they provide some legislation to protect 

people from discrimination on the basis of employment and on 

the basis of shelter.  I don't think there's anybody in society 

who can object to that and neither do the members of the 

government caucus.  If the member from Moosomin and his 

members want to object to that, that is their right.  We have had 

a vote on second reading, which is on the principle of the Bill 

and, Mr. Speaker, that vote is now completed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, and to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, I 

don't know if you heard the open-line show 



2384 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1993 

this morning, but I must say as I was on the open-line I was 

surprised to say the least.  I was surprised to find that about the 

calls that came in fully 100 per cent totally disagreed with the 

way you, your minister, and your government is handling Bill 

38.  In fact many of them, Mr. Premier, stood up and they said:  

why won't the Premier allow his members to stand up openly in 

this Assembly.  Why is he shackling them?  Why are you 

shackling them, Mr. Premier?  Why are you denying them the 

opportunity to represent the views of their constituents?  Why 

will you not give them the ability to stand up openly, rather 

than forcing them not to appear in the Assembly when the vote 

is taken on third and final reading?  Will you not now, Mr. 

Premier, allow your members to have a direct impact by voting 

freely according to their conscience in representing their 

constituents.  Will you do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, it is obvious the 

distinction that exists between that side of the House -- at least 

closer to you, Mr. Speaker -- and this side of the House.  

Because in the process of the debates that have taken place in 

this legislature in this session, this government has brought in 

legislation to protect workers in the workplace from injury and 

from death.  The members opposite have opposed that. 

 

The government has brought in legislation to protect people 

from discrimination from residence, and shelter, and from 

employment.  The Progressive Conservative Party has opposed 

that.  We stand behind the proposals that we bring forward on 

those two very important, fundamental issues to all human 

beings, and workers, and citizens of this province.  And we will 

support it because we believe in what those amendments bring 

forward.  If the members wish to oppose that, that is their right.  

They will have to explain to the public why they oppose any 

amendments that bring protection to people from accident, 

from injury, from death, and from discrimination. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and to the Deputy 

Premier since he's answering the questions today.  I just want 

to remind the Deputy Premier, in case he wasn't here for the 

debate, that there were over 60 amendments put forward on 

workers' comp and occupational health and safety, put forward 

by this side of the House to strengthen and increase the 

flexibility of those Bills.  And yet the government voted totally 

against them. 

 

Mr. Premier, it's quite clear that you will not allow a free vote.  

It's quite clear that the last shred of democracy left your 

leadership when you took the chair, a position that you hold on 

to jealously.  In spite of your wish that this issue just fade 

away, Mr. Premier, there will be another vote. 

 

Mr. Premier, in the absence of a free vote, will you then admit 

that for every empty chair on your side of the House, that for 

every member that refuses to 

summon the courage to stand and be counted, as members of 

the public asked this morning, a vote has been cast not only 

against the consequences of Bill 38, but a vote has been cast 

against your dictatorial leadership?  Is that not true, Mr. Deputy 

Premier? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, if that was the 

conclusion that one should draw from the way the member 

describes it, then clearly the member of the Liberal Party, who 

was not present for many of those votes, one can conclude 

whether she took a position one way or the other. 

 

I don't make any conclusion because from time to time 

members are not in the House.  All of the members of the 

Progressive Conservative Party were not in the House.  But I 

can say one thing very clearly, that this government carefully 

considers all legislation that we bring forward with all of its 

implications.  And from time to time, Mr. Speaker, as was the 

case -- and I am told about a half a dozen of the amendments 

proposed to The Occupational Health and Safety Act by the 

members opposite -- we'll accept reasonable amendments that 

help to improve the Bill.  And they were accepted, Mr. 

Speaker, because they were reasonable amendments. 

 

But when the amendments do not make any sense to the 

legislation, they will not be accepted because we're here to do 

what's right and not here to do what's political. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Before I take the next question, I do want to 

remind the Deputy Premier he is not to refer to the presence or 

absence of any particular member in the legislature. 

 

Information on Hospital Conversions 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My 

question is to the Minister of Health, and perhaps we will have 

more success in getting her to agree to listen to the will of the 

people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Madam Minister, back in April when you cut off funding for 

the 52 Saskatchewan hospitals and when you used closure to 

ram your destructive legislation through this legislature, many 

people in those communities had questions that they want 

answered, and you provided all kinds of assurances that those 

answers would be forthcoming and that people would have 

nothing to worry about. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, since that time a couple of months have 

passed and people in those communities are now more 

confused, frustrated, and angry than ever.  You haven't 

answered their questions.  You haven't answered their 

concerns.  And yet the arbitrary deadline that you have 

proposed comes closer every day. 

 

Madam Minister, the doors of Arborfield hospital will be 

closing on September 30 at 4 p.m. and 26 employees are being 

laid off.  And they have yet to find 



June 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2385 

out whether your department will be providing enough 

transitional funding for their severance packages. 

 

Madam Minister, why is there still so much confusion and so 

many unanswered questions when you have assured us that all 

of these issues will be addressed by now? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, there is not the confusion 

that the members opposite talk about.  In fact there are a 

number of planning groups that are very close to forming 

districts in the province.  We anticipate that most of the 

districts will be in place by August 17. 

 

I am told that there's a tremendous amount of work going on.  

The departmental officials have been dealing with planning 

groups and hospital boards that are affected by the reductions 

in acute care funding.  They are looking at alternatives with 

respect to placement of patients.  There has been a core 

services discussion paper that has been developed for planning 

groups to discuss.  There will be a meeting some time next 

week for the rural health advisory committee to talk about 

options in how the transition will take place.  There has been an 

incredible amount of work taking place in the province. 

 

That doesn't mean, Mr. Speaker, that there aren't anxieties -- 

there are.  And people will have concerns and they will have 

anxieties, and we deal with their questions as they come up, 

and departmental officials are meeting with all these boards 

and discussing things with them on an ongoing basis. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, 

there's one salient point that you just made to which I will 

agree: there's an awful lot of anxiety out there and that's why 

we're still continuing to have phone calls. Madam Minister. 

 

We've spoken to a number of those hospitals that are doing 

everything that they can to try to remain open.  But they don't 

know how much interim funding they are going to be 

receiving.  They aren't getting the information and the 

cooperation that they deserve from your government.  In some 

cases, they don't even know what health district they're going 

to be part of. 

 

Because of all of these factors, Madam Minister, they honestly 

don't know if they're going to be open come October 1.  The 

employees don't know whether they're going to have a job.  

They don't know whether they're going to have to move some 

place else, or to try to sell their house.  They aren't getting any 

answers to those questions, Madam Minister.  Yet that October 

1st deadline is hanging over their heads like a guillotine. 

 

Madam Minister, quite frankly, it's not too late to set this 

deadline back and admit that both the 

government and those communities need more time.  Will you 

do that? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I do want to reiterate the 

fact that there has been a tremendous amount of progress that 

has taken place in the last month or two on this very issue.  

There are several months for us to work with communities and 

with the hospital boards and planning groups to get all the final 

touches in place.  I am advised by the Department of Health 

that it is progressing very well. 

 

We hope to have many districts up by August 17, and the 

October 1 deadline should be met.  As I indicated, Mr. Speaker, 

there is going to be a meeting next week through which a 

number of discussion papers will be put forward and will be 

discussed at some length by planning groups and health care 

stakeholders and advisers.  And it is a part of the process of 

consultation and working forward with creative solutions to 

some of the difficulties that people are facing throughout 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that the people of Saskatchewan are 

working very hard to meet the deadlines, and the Department 

of Health is giving them a lot of assistance in that regard. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, I know for a fact that you 

were out to one or two meetings across the province.  Now 

what you have just told this Assembly is that the Department of 

Health is assuring you that things are progressing very well.  

That's what you just said. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, welcome to the real world.  Stay in 

touch with the people out there.  For example, these 

communities and the residents in these communities are doing 

their best to work with a government under these most difficult 

circumstances, but they're finding it extremely futile. 

 

In Cabri, for example, Madam Minister, the hospital board 

there wanted to join the Rolling Hills health district.  That was 

originally approved by you.  They started planning on that 

basis.  And now the government has told them, whoops, you 

can't join that district because we don't want you to.  You have 

to join a different district. 

 

Madam Minister, after all the assurance you gave us about 

local control and local decision-making, why is this happening?  

And why should residents be putting their time, their effort and 

resources in trying to make this work when the government is 

going to come along and willy-nilly, do what you want anyway 

and tear up any progress that they may have made.  Why, 

Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- With respect to, you know, local 

involvement, I think it's very important, Mr. Speaker, for 

people to be involved at the community levels.  I think it's 

important for people to have input and be involved with the 

consultations with the Department 



2386 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1993 

of Health.  And we do that, not just in the health care area, but 

in many areas across government. 

 

It doesn't mean, however, that everything everyone wants is 

going to be exactly the way it is.  Consultation doesn't mean 

that if you ask for "a" you get "a".  Now I'm not speaking with 

respect to the Cabri situation because I don't have the details of 

that. 

 

So if the member opposite has specific situations, very detailed 

little situations about this particular area having some 

difficulty, they should come and advise me of that and I will 

look into the matter.  So I'm prepared to look at specific 

situations that they may raise. 

 

However, I do want to say this:  there is massive consultation 

going on throughout the province -- massive consultation, and 

it's been ongoing since August, Mr. Speaker -- unlike the 

members opposite who didn't have the courage to even talk 

about health reform with respect to communities in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, if you were truly devoted to 

the consultative process, the dictatorship that you are showing 

and that your government is showing, and your . . . without 

hesitation your willingness to use closure or whatever means to 

get your way.  That, Madam Minister, is not consultation, let 

me assure you. 

 

You ask, do you have specific information?  I've already raised 

Arborfield, I've already raised Cabri, in this question period.  

How many more do you want, Madam Minister?  Hospitals are 

telling us that the interim funding that they are receiving is 

supposed to keep their hospital going for six months.  And 

that's also supposed to, in addition, Madam Minister, pay for 

the severance packages. 

 

Madam Minister, they are telling us that that's just not realistic.  

You want examples?  Here's another one, Vanguard.  

Vanguard, for instance, has told us that the budget of $10,000 a 

month that they are going to be receiving isn't enough to heat 

the building, let alone pay for severance packages.  And they 

simply just have no idea where the money's going to be coming 

from. 

 

Madam Minister, why is there so much confusion as to how 

this transitional funding is to be used?  Why aren't these 

questions being answered?  Why are my questions now not 

being answered?  Why, Madam Minister, again, don't you just 

simply change the deadline and take more time to answer these 

questions, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, with respect 

to Vanguard, Vanguard knows that the funding that will be 

allotted to Vanguard is going to the district board, and although 

some facilities get less funding than others, it goes into a pool 

to the district board.  They know that already because they 

have 

been told that.  It isn't simply the funding that they receive and 

that's all they get with respect to their facility.  It goes to the 

district board.  And they're already part of a planning group so 

they know where they fit, where they belong, and they know 

that they will have access to a larger pool of funding.  So it isn't 

as simplistic as the members opposite try to paint us. 

 

Now the members opposite are standing here saying, more 

funding for our small hospitals, more funding for health care.  

Well I would like the member from Estevan and the member 

from Rosthern, who are supporting Charest for the leadership 

of the PC (Progressive Conservative) party, to tell us what the 

province of Saskatchewan's going to do when Charest fulfils 

his promise of cutting $8 billion from transfer payments. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Methinks Madam 

Minister is beginning to smart a little bit.  She lights up her 

blame thrower right away.  Now, Madam Minister . . . Madam 

Minister, now you're blaming it on the district boards again.  

You're saying if they want to spend it on it, that's fine.  

Offloading . . . not only are you offloading funding, but again, 

right now, we heard that you're offloading your responsibility. 

 

Madam Minister, all we're asking for you is to keep your 

election promise.  You promised you would spend more on 

health and education with no taxes.  And this is what is 

happening to these people now, Madam Minister, knowing full 

well back in '91 what the fiscal situation in this province was.  

And in spite of that, you made promises. 

 

Madam Minister, in Vanguard for instance, 24 employees are 

being laid off.  And that's 10 per cent of their population, 

Madam Minister, by the way.  That's 10 per cent of their 

population.  That's like taking out the equivalent of 18,000 jobs 

in Regina or Saskatoon.  And you have literally passed a death 

sentence on the entire community by bringing in a plan that 

you're not even sure is going to work, because you don't have 

any answers. 

 

The minister, Mr. Speaker, says that some communities and 

some health districts are more organized than others.  If that's 

the case, Madam Minister, I have a simple suggestion.  Why 

not take those two or three examples that you're citing and 

create a pilot project that will make sure that the system will 

work, and get the bugs out before you pass such a death 

sentence on communities like Vanguard.  Madam Minister, 

would you be willing to do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, as I pointed out already, 

there is a committee of health care professionals and planning 

groups looking at the whole issue of rural health services and 

we are going to be discussing that next week. 

 

Now let's talk about who I blame for this.  I blame the 



June 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2387 

members opposite and their friends in Ottawa -- over $500 

million this year in transfer cuts.  Let's talk about the cuts from 

Ottawa.  Let's talk about that.  Let's . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order, order.  Order. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- This year we're short some 500 million, 

Mr. Speaker, because of the changes made by their cronies in 

Ottawa.  We also have a $15 billion debt that the member from 

Estevan, who's chirping from his seat, created and left a legacy 

to the people of this province -- $15 billion. 

 

It's about time the members opposite faced reality for their 

actions and accepted some responsibility for their actions and 

the actions of their counterparts in Ottawa. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to thank Madam Minister 

very sincerely for the plug that she has been putting in for Mr. 

Charest.  I really appreciate that and that'll be a good thing.  

With the $17 million additional funding through equalization 

payments, Madam Minister, $17 million extra, that's fine. 

 

Madam Minister, the bottom line is, in this issue of the health, 

and your health initiatives, is simply this: there are too many 

unanswered questions.  And when we raised that concern two 

months ago, you provided all sorts of assurances that these 

questions would be addressed by now.  And that simply hasn't 

happened, Madam Minister. 

 

You said that no facilities would be closing.  And now we 

know that they are.  Arborfield is laying off 26 employees; 

Vanguard is laying off 24; Cupar is laying off 23.  Hospitals 

don't even know if they'll have enough money to pay the 

severance packages.  Some hospitals are not being allowed to 

join the districts that they want to join.  Their local decision 

making is being hampered.  People in these communities don't 

know whether their hospital, Madam Minister, will be open or 

closed.  They don't know how far they're going to have travel 

for emergency care.  And they do not feel that your 

government is responding to their concerns or addressing their 

questions. 

 

Madam Minister, what answer do you have for those people?  

Why should they believe you now when all the assurances that 

you gave them back in April are beginning to ring hollower and 

hollower.  Why, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

simply raises red herrings and a lot of nonsense.  He knows full 

well that there's massive consultation, that the board . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I'm not cutting off the minister.  I'm 

simply holding up the question period until the opposition 

gives the minister a chance at least to answer the question. 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- . . . full well that there is consultation 

going on, that the funding levels have been provided to 

facilities, that they are working with individual hospitals.  And 

of course there will be people who express concerns as we go 

through this process.  But the process is taking place.  And it is 

taking place quite effectively throughout the province with a lot 

of discussion with respect to future services that will be 

provided in rural communities and how we will phase those in.  

So there's a lot of positive things going on. 

 

I think the people of Saskatchewan are more interested in 

knowing, Mr. Speaker, what advice the campaign manager for 

Mr. Charest is giving him when he suggests an . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, 

you have embarked on your own version of your unfair-share 

system.  I want to talk for a moment about the families that are 

involved.  I have just listed for you 26 employees being laid off 

in Arborfield.  Vanguard is laying off 24.  Cupar is laying off 

23.  Madam Minister, do you have any feeling for the families 

of these many, many people that are now going to see 

themselves being forced and uprooted, a total uncertainty for 

their future? 

 

Madam Minister, what do you say to those people?  What 

assurances can you give to these men and these women and 

their families and their children that yes, there is a reason for 

them to remain in Saskatchewan?  What will you say to them, 

Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite also 

knows that there will be some jobs created in community-based 

services that people will be able to fill.  The members opposite 

know that.  Now it may not mean that everybody who's being 

laid off is going to be re-employed, but we will, over a period 

of time, be moving toward more community-based services. 

 

Now I would like to ask the member opposite about the 

feelings of these people and what he was thinking of when he 

squandered $15 billion in this province.  Where was he about 

considering the feelings of families and children and 

grandchildren and great-grandchildren and 

great-great-grandchildren?  Because they're going to be paying 

for your squandering of public dollars over a period of nine and 

a half years to the tune of $15 billion.  What were you doing 

and were you thinking about the feelings of these families?  

And is the member from Estevan thinking . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  As soon as members come to 

order we can go on to the next item on our agenda.  Why is the 

member from Kelsey-Tisdale on 



2388 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1993 

his feet? 

 

Mr. Renaud: -- To ask leave, Mr. Speaker, to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Renaud: -- I would like to introduce to you and through 

you to my colleagues in the Assembly, 18 grade 5 students in 

the west gallery, from Archerwill, Saskatchewan.  They are 

accompanied today by Linda McAuley-Elliott, their teacher; 

and some friends: Lorraine McLeod, Doris Wilson, Eugene 

Chorney, and Charmaine Wilgosz.  And I would like you to 

join with me in wishing them a very enjoyable visit to the 

Assembly and to Regina and a safe trip home today.  Thank 

you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I too would like to join the member to 

welcome Linda, who used to teach up in La Ronge, and . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I'd like to join the member to welcome 

Linda who used to teach up in La Ronge and also in 

Cumberland House. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too would like 

to join the member in welcoming Linda and her class over here 

at the legislature.  She used to teach up in Cumberland House 

and also in La Ronge and other areas.  We thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day I beg 

leave of the Assembly to make a brief, pressing report to the 

Assembly on a matter of utmost importance and urgency. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Media-MLA Ball Game 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's my 

pleasure today to report on the annual softball game between 

the MLAs and the media.  The game was held before a crowd 

of thousands last night at Sherwood Forest just outside of 

Regina.  As usual it was a hard-fought but friendly game.  I 

would just caution members about believing some of the 

rumours they may have heard about the final score of the game.  

While indeed the media team got lucky this year, the score was 

much closer than the press are claiming.  In fact one might say 

we didn't lose, we just ran out of time. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- However, as our team was in charge of the 

official scoreboard or score card, anyone wanting to know the 

final score will have to find out in the usual democratic way 

and that is to fill out a freedom of information request form. 

 

As I said, Mr. Speaker, it was a close game.  It would have 

been closer if the media hadn't engaged in one of those nasty 

filibusters in the sixth inning.  Seldom has there been such an 

appalling lack of democratic tradition in a baseball game, Mr. 

Speaker.  In fact someone suggested from the bench we should 

have imposed time allocation and then closure on the sixth 

inning. 

 

I would like to take a few moments more to highlight some of 

the stars of last night's game, Mr. Speaker.  On the MLA side, 

the member from Thunder Creek made a strong case for his 

leadership aspirations by hitting an inside-the-park home run.  

Not to be outdone, the member from Kindersley followed with 

another solid shot to deep centre field.  Unfortunately, the 

member from Kindersley's campaign kind of ran out of gas as 

he rounded second base. 

 

Another of the MLA stand-outs was the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview-Haultain.  While the member played his 

usual strong game, he still refuses to dive for those foul balls 

for fear of getting dirt on that pretty uniform.  I'd also like to 

recognize the strong pitching performance by the member from 

Regina Albert South. 

 

The media squad had several stand-out players as well, Mr. 

Speaker, the brightest of which were the four women of the 

press team.  If not for the stellar play of these four players, Mr. 

Speaker, the media would have gone down to defeat for sure. 

 

I would also like to single out the play of the media team 

captain, Murray Mandryk, from the Regina Leader-Post.  Mr. 

Mandryk had a pretty good day at the bat, but nobody could 

quite figure out what he was doing in the out field.  Just like the 

logic in his newspaper columns, Mr. Mandryk couldn't decide 

if he wanted to play left, right, or centre field. 

 

I also want to say how much both teams missed your presence 

at the game, Mr. Speaker.  However, I'm sure you had a 

wonderful time exploring all the lovely farm land around the 

Regina district.  I'm told that next time, Mr. Speaker, we will 

ensure you are given a detailed map of the location of the ball 

diamond. 

 

Most importantly of all, Mr. Speaker, last night's game raised 

money for a worthy cause.  A total of $156 was collected, 

which will be donated to the Canadian National Institute for the 

Blind. 

 

All in all it was a good night for a good cause.  And I would 

like to congratulate the 20 MLAs who 



June 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2389 

participated in last night's game, and also the media team who 

will be in custody of the trophy until next year this time. 

 

And I'd like to close on this personal note, Mr. Speaker.  In the 

words of some great baseball manager before me, I believe it 

was Casey Stengel, who said: I coached well, but boy, did they 

play badly.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Before orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, 

with leave to make a statement on Environment Week. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

National Environment Week 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise today in 

recognition of National Environment Week.  I am pleased to 

see more and more attention being paid every day to the 

environment.  As a member of the provincial Environment 

Committee, I have been able to attend many meetings in many 

parts of the province. 

 

As a result of these meetings, I have heard many ideas and 

situations for environmental issues as well as concerns that 

have yet to be dealt with.  There is hope for solutions to our 

environmental problems -- working together.  The environment 

is not going to be improved or enhanced or saved by a few 

people working very hard.  It will however survive and prosper 

if each and every one of us do our part to save the environment. 

 

I would like to mention an effort which is supported by 

everyone in this province, and that is the SARCAN recycling 

system for beverage containers.  Hopefully we can develop a 

similar system to recycle other products in our society such as 

paper, tires, and plastics. 

 

Another environmental concern is the health of our agricultural 

land.  We must encourage and develop better soil conservation 

methods and programs which reflect our growing awareness of 

environmental issues in dealing with the land.  This concern 

becomes even more critical whenever we face a drought.  For 

with a drought we see severe wind erosion of the soil.  This 

cannot continue without a loss of our most productive land. 

 

It is incumbent on the government and on the stakeholders to 

work together and find solutions to this problem that we have 

faced in this province since the first plough broke the land. 

 

I would like to encourage all Saskatchewan residents to 

continue to learn more about the world we live in and what we 

can do to preserve it.  After all, Mr. Speaker, that's the only 

way we can make our world a better place for our children and 

our grandchildren.  Thank you. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 79 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 79 -- An Act to 

Provide for the Division of Saskatchewan into Constituencies 

for the Election of Members of the Legislative Assembly be 

now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, as I 

observed question period take place today, I was beginning to 

think that maybe the Premier better come out from behind his 

desk very quickly or he'll find the member from Regina 

Hillsdale taking over as Premier. 

 

It would seem to me when we look at the debate taking place in 

this Assembly regarding constituencies and the redistribution 

of electoral boundaries and after the debate that has taken place 

over the past number of days, past number of weeks, I can see 

why the government today is looking very seriously at 

redistributing the boundaries and establishing new boundaries 

in the province of Saskatchewan.  Because it would appear to 

me that if we left the boundaries as they are, the government is 

indeed in serious trouble. 

 

Even in the urban sectors, I think just from the responses to the 

phone-in this morning on the open line, Mr. Speaker, it 

indicates that the calls came in from across the province, from 

within the city of Regina, and there was an overwhelming, in 

fact a resounding no, to what the government is doing on a 

number of issues, specifically Bill 38.  And then you get into 

the debate that we'll be entering into a little later as well, on 

Bill 90.  And then even the boundary question. 

 

And one has to ask themselves, what's the government 

specifically up to?  What are they trying to hide?  Why are they 

bringing in another boundary commission today when the 

boundaries . . . other than the fact that maybe the debate over 

the number of MLAs in this Assembly is something that could 

be raised, and we on this side of the House have brought it 

forward time and time again.  It would seem to me that the 

suggestions put forward by my colleague, the member from 

Thunder Creek and certainly by our caucus, are very sound and 

certainly very open.  And it would seem to me from reports, it 

would be very acceptable to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I enter again the debate on Bill 79 and debating 

the electoral boundaries and the process by which they should 

be determined, I just want to 



2390 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1993 

remind the Assembly that this is not a foreign process in this 

Assembly, or any other Legislative Assembly for that matter.  

Instead, this issue is one that has been debated at great length 

and on many separate occasions throughout the past several 

years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm not going to go on and on about the NDP 

(New Democratic Party) political agenda.  However, I believe 

it is easy to see that this Bill is before this Assembly for none 

other than political reasons. 

 

And I mention that, Mr. Speaker, because we went through a 

format of redistribution, and certainly there was a lengthy 

debate that took place in this Assembly, less than, I believe it 

was four years ago -- I believe 1990 to be exact.  And at that 

time, to be entering into another redistribution -- we know the 

costly process it takes -- I find it inappropriate that the 

government would choose to now redesign and redraw the 

boundaries again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a government must first consider the effects of 

the methods when modifying constituency boundaries. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, before this issue is drafted into a Bill like 

Bill 79, the government presenting it should heed the advice of 

many highly qualified people and how they have examined this 

issue in depth, and they should take that advice and look at it 

very carefully before proceeding and just moving forward with 

another Bill to just redistribute boundaries and redesign 

boundaries across the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

In 1982 Senator Gerald Beaudoin considered the possible 

impact of the democratic rights enshrined in section 3 of the 

Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, and made some 

observations concerning the way Canada and its provinces 

were divided into constituencies for the purposes of conducting 

elections. 

 

Those who know of Senator Beaudoin know he is both a law 

professor and a lawyer and former joint chairman on the 

amending procedure of the Constitution of Canada, and has 

also served on many committees including legal and 

constitutional affairs, aboriginal peoples, and many more. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Beaudoin in his comments, he said it was 

unfortunate, he said, that section 3 of the charter does not refer 

to equal suffrage, for there were reforms in that direction which 

were needed. 

 

At the time in the United States the courts had mandated equal 

representation for equal numbers of people -- one person, one 

vote -- and it was to be expected that our courts would 

eventually be influenced by American jurisprudence. 

 

Beaudoin went on to predict that in the event of the importation 

of the one person, one vote principle into Canada, the principle 

will be Canadianized to a certain extent under section 1 as a 

result of our 

particular situation.  That particular situation, Mr. Speaker, was 

characterized by sparse population and great distances -- two 

factors which make it extremely difficult if not impossible to 

attain equality between ridings. 

 

And, he added, one thing is certain.  Excessive discrepancies in 

representation will tend to be reduced by the courts.  There is 

much astuteness in Mr. Beaudoin's insights.  Before the charter 

was very old, the Canadian courts did address discrepancies in 

representation and acted to reduce them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, an attempt was made to Canadianize the 

American principle of one person, one vote by way of section 1 

of the charter.  The Saskatchewan Court of Appeal's 1991 

decision striking down Saskatchewan's electoral map in 

reference re: provincial electoral boundaries, led on appeal to 

the first declaration by the Supreme Court of Canada on the 

subject of the electoral boundaries.  And, Mr. Speaker, we all 

know the outcome of that case. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Supreme Court upheld Saskatchewan's 

electoral map and concluded that what Beaudoin called 

Canada's particular situation required an interpretation of the 

section 3 right to vote which comprehended effective 

representation. 

 

The same issues we must deal with today regarding boundaries, 

Mr. Speaker, were the same issues being considered in the 

Supreme Court just two short years ago.  Before a decision was 

made regarding Saskatchewan's constituency boundaries, more 

than a dozen interveners, including the governments of Canada, 

five provinces, two territories, and two cities took part. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the court's 6-3 decision, dated June 1, 1991, 

upheld the proposed changes to the Saskatchewan boundaries 

for the following reasons. 

 

The question before the court, as stated by the majority, was: to 

what extent, if at all, does the right to vote enshrined in the 

charter permit deviation from one person, one vote rule?  Two 

different views on this question had been presented. 

 

According to the first view, equality of voting power was the 

right protected in section 3 of the charter, and deviations from 

the state of equality should be minimal.  According to the 

second, effective representation was the protected right, and 

equality of voting power was but one consideration among 

several. 

 

(1500) 

 

The second view became the court's.  The purpose of the right 

to vote enshrined in section 3 of the charter is not equality of 

voting power per se, but the right to effective representation. 

 

Extremely important words, Mr. Speaker, when we have a Bill 

before us that is outlining changes to electoral boundaries in a 

province such as 



June 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2391 

Saskatchewan.  Equality of voting power was desirable for 

what it contributed to effective representation. 

 

At the same time, Justice McLachlin noted it was a practical 

fact that effective representation often cannot be achieved 

without taking into account countervailing factors.  It was 

possible to have too much equality if achieved at the expense 

of other factors pertinent to effective representation. 

 

One of the Supreme Court judges, Justice McLachlin, 

reiterated the position she had taken that the strict principle of 

one person, one vote, was neither appropriate for Canada nor 

part of its experience, and there was no evidence that the 

framers of the charter had contemplated the reading of such a 

principle into the provisions of that document.  Mr. Speaker, 

the numbers were the weak side of the case against the 

Saskatchewan electoral map. 

 

The Supreme Court not only condoned the distinction between 

rural and urban electors, which was reflected in the outcome, 

but the Supreme Court also underwrote that distinction by 

treating as fact the proposition that rural constituencies are 

more difficult to represent than urban ones.  Mr. Speaker, the 

same holds true today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are 10 MLAs for each, Regina and 

Saskatoon, cities where it takes more than maybe 20 minutes to 

drive from one end of the city to the other.  Then there are 

ridings like Shaunavon where at least 150 miles separate the 

east-west borders of the constituency. 

 

And talking about distances and travel, Mr. Speaker, we were 

just talking about hospital districts in question period this 

afternoon.  And some of my colleagues and I went out for 

lunch and we happened to run into a couple from Ceylon, and 

they mentioned the problems that they are facing in trying to 

set up their district.  And the district that they are being forced 

into or being asked to look at, Mr. Speaker, is going to require 

that in some instances people are going to be over 110 miles 

from their nearest hospital. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, anyone in Saskatchewan, even in our large 

urban centres, realizes the difficulty not only of individuals in 

our rural communities in receiving good health care, but also 

recognizes the difficulty that members of our society in our 

rural communities face in getting fair and equal representation 

due to the distances that many people have to travel and the 

largeness of our rural constituencies, and in light of the 

government's proposal, which may even become larger. 

 

Different consideration must be given to these diverse 

situations because we all believe that people from Shaunavon 

deserve to be represented as thoroughly and effectively as those 

residents of Saskatoon.  Effective representation -- that's what 

it's all about. 

 

Bill 79 does not allow for effective representation. 

 

Bill 79 basically says: well we need to cut away the 

voices of rural Saskatchewan but we won't touch northern 

Saskatchewan.  This in itself is highly suspect, Mr. Speaker, 

considering this Bill strengthens NDP strongholds and 

eliminates some rural ridings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don't know why the NDP government bothered 

appointing a boundaries commission to deal with this issue.  

The variances have already been set by the government and 

they think it is a done deal.  Who knows, there may even be a 

map that's already drawn out that the boundaries commission is 

going to be asked just to bring before this Assembly for 

approval. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe there is a much better solution, an 

alternative that has been welcomed by pretty much everyone, a 

proposal the members opposite are supposedly examining as 

well.  Mr. Speaker, it's an alternative presented by my 

colleague, the member from Thunder Creek, and I believe it is 

fair to everyone. 

 

In addition, it will save taxpayer dollars, more than the 

government's proposal, and also provide more effective 

representation.  Mr. Speaker, the proposal presented by my 

colleague, the member from Thunder Creek, will also provide 

better coordination between the federal and provincial levels of 

government in our province. 

 

Under our proposal, Mr. Speaker, each of the 14 federal 

constituencies would be divided into 4 provincial 

constituencies.  This would produce a total of 56 provincial 

ridings -- two less than the number proposed by the members 

opposite.  And that's not all, Mr. Speaker.  This system would 

eliminate the charges of gerrymandering that often accompany 

electoral boundary reviews, Bill 79 being no exception. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the whole process of electoral boundaries would 

be depoliticized once and for all.  Mr. Speaker, not only would 

it take the politics out of electoral commissions and changing 

of boundaries, it would save taxpayers dollars in three ways. 

 

First, there would be fewer MLAs than currently serving in this 

legislature.  And possibly, Mr. Speaker, we could go one 

further by suggesting . . . by looking at the federal boundaries, 

maybe the commission could even . . . rather, we're suggesting 

four members per constituency.  Maybe the commission could 

be given a little more latitude in deciding the number of 

members. 

 

Second, the work of the Provincial Boundary Commission 

would be less costly since the federal boundaries would 

provide a solid starting point from which to work. 

 

Third, a provincial boundary commission would only have to 

be established every 10 years as the federal boundaries are 

redrawn. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP proposal establishes a new boundary 

commission every five years.  That in itself becomes a fair 

expense to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 



2392 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1993 

Further benefits would be provided through better coordination 

between elected officials at the federal and provincial levels.  

Basically right now there is no rhyme or reason when you look 

at the federal boundary map compared to the provincial 

boundary map. 

 

Under our proposal each federal riding would have exactly four 

provincial ridings within its boundary.  And MLAs would not 

have their ridings broken up between two or more federal 

constituencies.  This would make it much easier for our elected 

representatives at both levels to work together in the best 

interests of their constituents.  Mr. Speaker, it is obvious that 

our proposal is fair, will save more money, and is much more 

efficient. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let's take a look at what others have to say about 

our proposal.  The Leader-Post says: 

 

 The PC's proposal of taking the existing federal boundaries 

and dividing each into four provincial ridings is even better 

than what the NDP legislation proposes for a few reasons: 

 

  It pares the Assembly down to 56 seats from the 58 MLAs 

proposed in the bill; 

 

  It could enhance federal/provincial co-operation by 

establishing a regional basis; and 

 

  It could result in all the ridings coming surprisingly close 

to the plus-or-minus five-per-cent variance the NDP 

bill proposes. 

 

 Eliminating the inherent unfairness of two special northern 

seats where votes are worth twice what they are in the south 

is the real genius of the Tory proposal. 

 

And that's from the Leader-Post, May 22, 1993. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many articles that support this proposal.  

And certainly the people are in favour of it.  Many people that I 

have talked to have said it sounds fair and it sounds reasonable.  

And what people have also said, is it sounds like you're doing 

more than just complaining about changes or about the 

government, but at least you're putting proposals forward, or 

suggestions, or alternatives forward.  And I think that's what 

people are looking for.  Mr. Speaker, in a nutshell, our plan 

makes perfect sense, which is probably why this government 

will reject the idea. 

 

In fact one headline says, it's so simple, it might work, if the 

government would listen. 

 

Instead the NDP wanted to stick to Bill 79, there where the 

NDP control where the boundaries are drawn.  And where did 

the proposal from the members opposite come from? 

 

The Star-Phoenix said it best. 

Our provincial politicians seem to have an unlimited talent 

for unnecessarily getting their shirts/blouses into knots.  The 

latest hassle is over a number, 58. 

 

 This is not a case of numerology, demonology or anything 

else.  It is just a number -- the number of seats the 

government has decided, arbitrarily, there should be in the 

legislature. 

 

 Why 58?  Well, gee whiz, no particular reason, according to 

Justice Minister Bob Mitchell.  It could have been any 

number in the same ball park. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the article goes on, and I continue to quote: 

 

 Mitchell has created the impression that perhaps someone in 

the NDP caucus threw darts at a board and came up with 58.  

Perhaps, rather, they used a video lottery terminal. 

 

 Whatever the method, the government is so enamored of 58 

that it does not want to let an independent electoral 

boundaries commission decide the number of seats.  The 

commission will draw the boundaries but it has to come up 

with 58 constituencies.  Period. 

 

 The legislative opposition (naturally) has detected the aroma 

of fish . . . 

 

 For the government to stubbornly stick to the magic 58, after 

admitting it chose the number "more or less at random" . . . 

would serve only to convince the real people that the 

opposition is right and something fishy is indeed going on. 

 

That's Star-Phoenix, May 25, 1993. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's not only the opposition that is certain 

something is going on with the NDP government's proposed 

changes -- everyone else thinks so as well.  But let me say, Mr. 

Speaker, I believe there is an opportunity here.  The members 

opposite can take this opportunity to say, well the official 

opposition's proposal makes more sense, it saves more money, 

and is fairer than ours.  We wish we would have thought of it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is all right for a government to implement a 

recommendation from an opposition.  And in the spirit of 

fairness and openness and what is best for Saskatchewan 

people, in fact it is the right thing to do in this case.  Therefore 

the members opposite have a decision to make. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they can continue to ignore the wishes of the 

people of this province and continue along the NDP path of 

political warfare.  Or, Mr. Speaker, they can do truly do what is 

right, what is fair, and what is just for Saskatchewan and the 

people of Saskatchewan.  They can take a serious look at the 

position and the proposal put forward by my colleague. 



June 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2393 

And they can, Mr. Speaker, look at the proposal and maybe 

offer some suggestions to enhance the proposal, and, Mr. 

Speaker, allow the commission to look at that proposal and 

decide at the end of the day the number of ridings, the number 

of seats, and the number of electorate per constituency.  I 

believe that would be fair.  I believe it would be fair and it 

would be very honourable for the Minister of Justice to take the 

time -- and as he has told us time and time again in this 

Assembly that he is trying . . . wants to be open.  He wants to 

be consulted.  Here's an opportunity for the Minister of Justice 

to do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, by doing that, the government would take the 

redistribution of boundaries out of the political sphere and then 

that would allow our efforts to be directed to more pressing and 

urgent matters. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing, I urge all members to open their minds 

and their agenda today for the good of the people of 

Saskatchewan.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to join the 

discussion today on Bill No. 79 for a number of reasons.  And I 

want to point out some of them from a historical background 

and I want to point out a number of circumstances that exist 

within the framework of the rural person doing rural business 

in a rural community in a rural constituency so that the people 

of this Assembly and the people in the province have an idea 

about what some of the dynamics are in relation to the 

responsibilities that individuals have. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, I've been involved in politics for a 

considerable length of time and it was my opportunity to run 

for political office in 1975 for the first time.  And in that 

decision to do that, Mr. Speaker, I ran against two sitting 

MLAs in the redistribution and redrawing of the map that was 

done by the NDP government of that day. 

 

(1515) 

 

And the two sitting MLAs, one was Mr. Reg Gross and the 

other one was Mr. Jack Wiebe, both of different political 

parties.  And the competition was very intense, Mr. Speaker, 

for that constituency, and it has always been intense because 

that constituency was represented by the Liberal premier of the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Ross Thatcher, at one time.  

And when he passed away, Mr. Wiebe took that seat in this 

Assembly. 

 

What happened then is redistribution took 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, which was a large seat that ran across 

the middle of the province east to west.  It was narrow and long 

and . . . So what the decision was, the Morse constituency 

would be an area surrounding the city of Swift Current, and 

that would deal more with the trading area and the trading 

patterns of the community that these individuals lived in.  And 

so they went, I believe, in a reasonable fashion and the NDP 

drew the constituency boundaries in a way that I think reflected 

a sense of reasonableness in 

some of the things that I think need to be considered. 

 

The Bill says in one place that there has to be considerations 

given in a number of areas, Mr. Speaker, and these areas deal 

with a number of things.  They deal with sparsity; they deal 

with density or relative rates of growth of population in various 

regions in the southern part of the province; accessibility to the 

regions; the size and shape of the regions described; and a 

special community interest or diversity of interests of persons 

residing in regions south of the dividing line; and the physical 

features of regions south of that dividing line.  And the 

dividing line in this Bill is considered to be the area north of 

P.A. (Prince Albert) and it runs in an east-west boundary 

division between northern Saskatchewan and southern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

What causes me a great deal of concern in how the 

interpretation is going to take place in relation to this Bill is 

that I believe that there has been some decisions already made 

about how the boundaries will be drawn.  For example, we 

have had the member from Moose Jaw say to the local paper in 

Moose Jaw that he already knows that that's the area that his 

constituency will be.  The member from P.A. has also said that 

very same thing. 

 

And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that when the provincial 

government has brought down their magic number of 58, they 

said, we will put a special decision in place to make the region 

north of P.A. a special region with two constituencies.  They've 

already said that. 

 

They do that because of sparsity of population, difficulty in 

transportation, difficulty in various ways -- getting to know 

your constituency and getting to do the work that has to be 

done in that constituency. And they're very large.  And that, 

Mr. Speaker, has some relevance in relation to the arguments 

they make. 

 

In the same way, Mr. Speaker, the south-west part of the 

province of Saskatchewan has a sparse population, and that 

sparse population has some rights in relation to the province of 

Saskatchewan.  And in 1991 there was a challenge to the 

Supreme Court of Canada.  And in that challenge, the people 

who challenged the division as it stands today said that there 

has to be representation, one vote, and equality of that one vote 

to this Legislative Assembly. 

 

And the Supreme Court ruled that the individual . . . the way 

the Constitution of Canada is drawn up, and the sense of 

community in Canada, there has to be a significant 

understanding of how the electoral boundaries are going to be 

drawn up. 

 

I want to use as an example the work in the federal government 

that they did in deciding that there should be 14 constituencies 

in the province of Saskatchewan.  If we were to go according to 

the rules that they've set out in the Bill here where we would 

have a 5 per cent variable across Canada, the division of the 

constituencies in Canada would be forcing the people in the 

province of Saskatchewan to have less representation federally. 

And that 5 per cent variance, 



2394 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1993 

Mr. Speaker, would say that we would have somewhere 

between 8 and 10 constituencies, as compared to 14 which we 

have now. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, the reason the Supreme Court said that 

you could have sparsity of population was because that is a 

tradition in Canada.  Northern Canada, which is the Yukon and 

the Northwest Territories, they, Mr. Speaker, would have 

almost no representation if we went and did it the way the Bill 

is going to say that it should be done in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now using those same principles about reasonable 

representation to the Assembly by the individuals who are 

voters in the province of Saskatchewan, there should be a 

reasonable access to the administrative part of the provincial 

government, and I think that has to be taken into consideration. 

 

There are certain aspects of this that I think are important, and I 

want to point out to the people in the province that we need to 

take a look at some of these things. 

 

In 1975 I said that there were two sitting MLAs; they had 

redistribution.  In 1982 redistribution again confirmed that it 

was going to stay very much the same way.  I think there were 

some changes in the urban centres, and that was all that there 

was. 

 

Now in 1991 we had another change, Mr. Speaker. The 

decision . . . and the Bill was presented in the spring session of 

the legislature, and the Supreme Court made the ruling that it 

was a legitimate law in the province of Saskatchewan.  It was 

legitimate on the basis of custom, precedent established over a 

long period of time. 

 

Now the reason that individuals in urban centres have a 

significant benefit, and I'll point this out.  In my constituency I 

have about 7,500 voters in my constituency. And people will 

say, well another constituency has 12,000.  But I want to point 

out to the people in this debate and in this Assembly, that I 

have 18 towns and villages with councillors and administrators 

in each one of those.  And every rural constituencies have 

exactly the same.  We have 18 towns and villages that have to 

be helped and serviced through the work of the member of the 

Assembly. 

 

I, Mr. Speaker, have five parks in my constituency and that 

each one of them have a local board that runs these regional 

parks.  And I have a provincial park. 

 

I have 12 rural municipalities, Mr. Speaker, in my constituency 

and each one of them have a council that I visit on a regular 

basis.  And each one of them believe that they need to have this 

representation come from themselves to their elected MLA and 

then to the Legislative Assembly.  And I believe it's important 

for these individuals to become involved. 

 

Now in my constituency -- I will use mine as an example -- in 

relation to the member from 

Elphinstone, and I just point out that the member from 

Elphinstone can take the afternoon of a day in the session or 

the morning and drive into his constituency and have coffee 

with any one of a number of groups of people who have special 

interests in his constituency.  He can drive down the street here 

and he is five minutes away from his constituency. 

 

But the rural constituencies on the other hand, Mr. Speaker, 

have hours and hours of driving to do.  The member for Wilkie, 

he has five and a half hours of driving to go to his constituency.  

That's one way. 

 

Others in this province are even further from their 

constituencies.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is an important part of 

determining whether the individual can provide a service to his 

constituency on a reasonable basis.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

what we have to deal with when we talk about where these 

constituencies are located in relation to the capital, where the 

constituencies are located in relation to the boundaries that are 

natural boundaries -- and we have some of those. 

 

If you take areas of natural boundaries -- and I would point out 

two of them -- there are the South Saskatchewan River and the 

North Saskatchewan River.  There are a lot of places along 

both of those rivers that you can't cross in order to deal with 

constituency problems.  And I think that that's a very 

significant boundary.  And it talks about that in the Bill, and 

that's what we need to consider in relation to the sparsity and 

also to the natural boundaries that occur. 

 

If you go down into the South, you have the Cypress Hills 

create a natural boundary between one part of the province and 

another part of the province.  You have that extending in the 

North.  You have various boundaries that will occur on the 

same basis. 

 

Uranium City, for example, is north of the lake and you can't 

really get there from here if you decide to go in the 

summertime unless you go by plane, because the roads are a 

long ways around, and in the wintertime they take in and put in 

ice roads across the lake and that helps.  But that, Mr. Speaker, 

those are the reasons why.  The sparsity of the population, the 

kind of environment, the topographical area is of the 

constituency -- all of these things need to be considered. 

 

Now in my constituency, for example, I live very near the 

centre and it's an hour and a half drive to the one corner and it's 

a two-hour drive to the other corner.  If I want to have 

significant involvement with my constituents from corner to 

corner, it's about a four-hour drive.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

of considerable significance if I want to have an involvement 

with them.  And that is significant for them as well as it is for 

me.  And I want to point that out to the Assembly here today. 

 

I have 18 towns and villages, 5 parks, 12 RMs (rural 

municipality). I have rec boards all over the place.  There is 

need for me to be involved with those.  And then, Mr. Speaker, 

I have three hospitals; I have two level 4 care facilities; I have a 

level 1 and 2 care 



June 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2395 

facility in my constituency, along with all of the other things 

that occur. 

 

And I would suggest to the members in this Assembly that 

there are probably urban centres, MLAs from urban centres in 

this Legislative Assembly who have no level 4 care facilities in 

their constituency, who have no hospitals in their 

constituencies.  They do not have to deal with any hospital 

boards in their constituencies. 

 

And I would say that perhaps makes it more difficult and it 

doesn't less reduce the problem. But in fact, Mr. Speaker, 

because rural constituencies have these, I believe they have a 

special consideration that should be made in relation to them.  

And I believe that it is important to look into that. 

 

Given all of that, you could say, well because there are fewer 

people, you have less responsibility.  Well I want to point out 

to this Assembly that there is a significant reason why rural 

municipalities should have significant representation in this 

Assembly, for the very reason that the population is reasonable, 

the distance is extensive, and there are a lot of boards and 

groups of people to meet on a regular basis. 

 

Now the opposition decided that they were prepared to look at 

some changes in the way the boundaries were drawn.  They 

decided that they would take a look at how to draw this up.  We 

said that for every federal constituency, there should be three, 

four, or five constituencies within the framework of that federal 

constituency.  We said there was no magic number to four, but 

we said we would like to see that the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan have four constituencies in each federal 

constituency. 

 

(1530) 

 

The rules that were applied, Mr. Speaker, in the establishment 

of the federal constituencies were the same same rules that 

applied to the way the constituencies were established in the 

province of Saskatchewan, the provincial constituencies.  

However what the federal constituencies did, they took a . . . 

The variable between constituencies is 25 per cent under 

federal boundaries.  Under provincial boundaries, or these 

federal boundaries within the framework of the province of 

Saskatchewan, they decided that they were going to have a 5 

per cent variable -- a 5 per cent variance in the population. 

 

And that's what they did, Mr. Speaker.  And at the time of 

every census they change those constituencies.  Now what we 

are suggesting is that you take four constituencies and put them 

into every federal constituency.  You'd have four constituencies 

provincially for every one federally, and those four 

constituencies times the 14 federal constituencies would give 

us 56 constituencies in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now the 5 per cent variable between the federal constituencies 

is what we would suggest we put in the framework of the 

provincial constituencies.  Within 

the framework of the 14 and 4 in each one with a 5 per cent 

variable, that's what we are suggesting to the Minister of 

Justice and to this Legislative Assembly. 

 

I believe that the four constituencies in the area that I live 

would slightly change the geographics of some of the 

constituencies, but it would not seriously erode some of the 

principles of sparsity and density and miles to travel in that 

relationship. 

 

Now I see some interesting things that play into this on the 

basis that the Minister of Justice brought forward in his Bill.  

He is suggesting that every five years you have a commission 

set up to re-evaluate the boundaries.  So every five years we're 

going to put a couple of million dollars into a study to see 

whether the constituencies should stay the same, should be 

changed, and draw a map that fits the parameters of the Bill.  

And that's what that's suggesting. 

 

Now let's just do a time line on this.  If that goes into place 

today, then the changes would be made before the next 

election.  The next election could be here in two years.  So two 

years down the road we would have an election within the 

framework of the constituencies that we have.  Given that we 

have three and a half to four years between elections, you 

would have another opportunity for the next government to 

also redraw the constituencies, costing this province more 

money and also making it available to have what was generally 

called a gerrymander of the constituencies again in relation to 

that decision to change the boundaries and change the outside 

areas of these provincial boundaries of the seats in the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

So within the framework of one election, Mr. Speaker, this will 

happen twice.  From today till the time that the election is 

called for the second time, it would have already been changed 

twice.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is another reason why we have 

suggested within the framework of the federal constituencies, if 

we had four for each one of them we would have a way of 

putting this together in a way that would make, I think, a 

considerable amount of sense. 

 

So my discussion has dwelt on a number of things.  The 

historic perspective of the way the constituencies have been 

drawn up have been on the basis that the federal law and the 

requirement by the federal government is that sparsity areas, 

the way the country is made, the culture of the country, all of 

these things are taken into place.  And the Supreme Court ruled 

that that was a fair assessment.  They did that in Canada.  They 

have a 25 per cent variable between those constituencies.  If 

they hadn't have had that, the province of Saskatchewan would 

have had a greatly reduced volume of members of parliament, 

and our representation on a national level would have been 

significantly less. 

 

Now taking that same principle and putting it and overlaying it 

into Saskatchewan, what we are going to have, Mr. Speaker, to 

the rural members in this Assembly, we are going to have a 

reduction in the rural seats based on the decisions made to have 

a 5 per 



2396 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1993 

cent variance and that, Mr. Speaker, is significant. 

 

Now what we are suggesting is, fine, let's reduce the volume of 

seats, but let's allow someone else to make the decision about 

how many seats we have so we don't have the same process 

where individuals who are in the government can decide and 

determine what the volume of seats is going to be, what the 

volume of displacement will be, what the volume of adjustment 

will be between elections, and allow that to be an outside 

setting force.  And then the determination can be made within 

the framework of each federal constituency.  We believe that 

that's fair. 

 

We also want to point out to the Assembly that we should 

consider allowing the commission to make the decision about 

how many constituencies there should be.  The Bill says there's 

supposed to be 58; and we say allow the commission the 

freedom and the capacity to set their own pattern as to how 

many there should be. 

 

The second point that I want to make in relation to this is the 

distance travel and the time it takes to cover the constituency as 

it relates to a rural and as it relates to an urban one.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, I have campaigned many times already, Mr. Speaker, 

and I believe that the last campaign was my fifth one. And in 

dealing with that, Mr. Speaker, I would just say to this 

Assembly, that the distance isn't any less today to travel from 

one end of my constituency to the other than it was in 1975.  I 

have about 7 or 800 less people in my constituency but the 

decision that individuals made when they were in government 

in 1975 are changing.  The rules are changing and I say to you 

and to them that the same kind of conditions exist; therefore 

why change the rules in order to accommodate some of the 

gerrymandering that the members opposite want to do. 

 

And I believe it's basically a political decision to change these 

constituencies, and I say to the members of the Assembly that 

that's not the way it should be.  The commission should be 

allowed to determine itself what it wants to do.  And we say 

that by saying how many seats there should be, the government 

is putting that and limiting that to the 58 seats in the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, because there are other people that are going 

to want to talk about this, I'm going to adjourn debate for today 

and then we're going to move on to other items of business.  I 

move that we adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: -- Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion?  I believe the no's have it. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On a point of order, 

by agreement with the Government House Leader, we were led 

to believe that adjournment would be in order. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Do you want to be on a mike or 

are you . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- In the spirit of the member 

from Maple Creek, the member from Morse may have missed a 

page in his notes.  Why don't you read the comment for a 

moment and I'll check on this. 

 

The member from Rosthern claims there's an agreement.  I can 

check that quickly.  I think the member from Morse may have 

missed some of his comments that we're eagerly awaiting. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I will review some 

of the items that I have talked about in order to have the House 

pass through some of the gyrations that we're going to be going 

through here in a few minutes. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out . . . and I believe 

that perhaps some consideration should be given for my 

constituency in relation to this so when you come and speak to 

your commission, then point out to the fact that I held onto the 

debate while the House Leader was going out and negotiating 

some opportunities for the continuation of the debate. 

 

I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that the people in the city of 

Regina have, for example, one mayor to talk to.  The people in 

the city of Regina, who have 11 constituencies in the city of 

Regina, have only one mayor to talk to.  They have 10 or so 

councillors.  Well, Mr. Speaker, I have 18 towns and villages in 

my constituency -- 18 towns and villages.  I have 18 mayors.  I 

have at least three councillors for every one of those towns and 

villages.  I have 12 municipalities.  I have one municipality that 

has eight councillors.  I have 11 municipalities that have six 

councillors and a reeve.  So you add that all up, Mr. Speaker, 

and that is really the dynamic of the significance of public 

involvement that a member who is in rural Saskatchewan has 

to have as a sitting MLA. 

 

And that is, Mr. Speaker, the reason why I have a considerable 

amount of problem in limiting the . . . reducing the volume of 

constituencies to have a 5 per cent variance, because urban 

people have a lot greater access to their member of the 

Assembly than the rural people do.  And it is significant, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I believe that the opposition's suggestion that the federal 

constituencies, the 14 federal constituencies be the drawing 

board, that allows an outside agency to determine the volume 

of constituencies; then the commission should be set up within 

that framework.  The commission should be set up within that 

framework to deal with every one of the constituencies in a 

federal basis and say that there's three or four or two 

constituencies for every federal constituency.  And that would 

be the Assembly . . . the volume of people in this Assembly.  

And I believe that that would be significant. 

 

Now when we talk about the distance . . . I notice that the 

member from Moosomin talked about the distance it is to the 

service; he talked about it in health care.  And the Minister of 

Health is deciding that the distance in health care should be 

expanded, the distance to health care services should be made 

larger.  And that is significant, Mr. Speaker. 



June 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2397 

The reason it is significant is that we have, in the area that I 

live, in the rural community around Swift Current and the 

south-west part of the province, we have people who will have 

no acute care services provided to them 100 miles away from 

that service.  Now the city of Swift Current to Mankota and 

south to the U.S. (United States) border is considered a health 

care district.  That service will not be provided.  And I believe 

that's too great. 

 

The same thing applies to the constituency boundaries.  If there 

is a need -- whether it's a social services need or whether it's a 

health care need -- in the bottom corner of my constituency, it 

takes me an hour and a half just to get there.  And that is a very 

serious concern that I have. 

 

Now the member from P.A. who has no problem in just getting 

out of his easy chair in his home in Prince Albert, just walking 

down the street and visiting at the coffee shop all through his 

constituency, he can walk that distance. 

 

But I want to say to this Assembly that if I started walking 

from where I live, I wouldn't get off of my property and I 

would still be walking, Mr. Speaker, and there's nobody else 

living there besides myself.  And so that's the kind of thing that 

happens.  And then I would have to walk back in order to have 

coffee. 

 

Now the member from P.A., he can just decide to go down the 

street and get his cup of coffee and go to the convenience store.  

He goes three more blocks and he can go to the hospital.  He 

can go see the doctor.  He can do almost anything he wants. 

 

And therefore the concern that I have is that people within the 

framework of the rural part of the province of Saskatchewan 

have the same availability to their member of the legislature 

that an urban resident has.  That's all that we're asking, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And we feel that the way the federal constituencies are drawn 

up, that that can provide to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan what they want to have.  They want to have a 

reduced volume of individuals in this legislature to reduce 

costs.  Now that raises a question too, Mr. Speaker, in the very 

fact that will 10, 8, 15 less MLAs in this Assembly reduce 

costs? 

 

(1545) 

 

Now in dealing with this, Mr. Speaker, there's a number of 

costs that are going to stay constant.  For the size of a 

constituency and the volume of constituents that you have, the 

price will go up in your telephone costs.  That's bound to 

happen because you have more people and greater distance.  

Long-distance calls will be greater. 

 

And that in itself will increase the costs to each of those 

individuals.  It won't reduce the overall costs in the province.  It 

won't increase the overall costs in the province.  But for the 

members opposite to say that the costs are going to be reduced 

in the area of 

communications is wrong. 

 

Now each one of the MLAs gets the equivalent of three postage 

stamps times the constituents you have to be able to send letters 

and communicate with your constituency.  Now if you increase 

the size of your constituency, you're also going to increase your 

constituents.  The constituency size of the province of 

Saskatchewan is going to remain the same and therefore the 

volume of dollars paid out to that constituency will increase, 

but the provincial volume will still be that overall volume of 

dollars paid to provide information to your constituents.  So 

I've talked about no change in telephone cost, no change in 

communication costs as it relates to this Assembly.  So the 

individuals who are in the province of Saskatchewan won't 

have any reduction in costs in those two areas. 

 

Now the travel allowance by members in the rural part of 

Saskatchewan, the way the process works, Mr. Speaker, the 

way the process works is that the individual can get mileage 

from his home to the Legislative Assembly for 52 trips a year, 

52 trips a year to this Assembly. 

 

In the rural part of the province that has a significant impact.  

You can drive to your constituency.  Mine is 150 miles away.  I 

can drive to that constituency 52 times in a year.  The province 

. . . the taxpayers pay for that.  Then what they do is they take 

the size of your constituency and use that in the formula in 

determining how many miles there are in your constituency, so 

that if you make these rural constituencies bigger, you don't 

have a reduction in the volume of dollars in the province that 

are going to be paid out. 

 

So now you don't have any reduction in cost in your telephone, 

you don't have any reduction in cost in your travel, you don't 

have any reduction of cost in any of the areas that I've 

mentioned, so where does this massive development of gains in 

money occur?  Where does it occur? 

 

The problem is very, very significant, Mr. Speaker, and to the 

people of this Assembly.  The problem is that the public 

perceive that if we have 60 or 100 or 30 MLAs, that's where 

the cost is.  But, Mr. Speaker, and to the members of this 

Assembly, since 1982 when I first got elected there have been 

significant changes in people's expectations of what a sitting 

member's responsibilities are. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have sat in my office and I have been a 

counsellor on many decisions that have been made by farmers 

to quit-claim their land, get off the land.  I've sat and listened to 

stories of families who have alcoholic children, crisis 

situations.  I've listened to all those kinds of stories. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was reeve in the municipality for six years, and 

in those six years I had one visit from a sitting member of the 

legislature -- one visit -- and that, Mr. Speaker, I think was 

considerable.  However, Mr. Speaker, if I would add up all of 

the times that I 



2398 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1993 

have visited municipalities and been available for discussion 

with municipalities, you can just see the volume of this 

responsibility just has been increasing as the time has gone on. 

 

And from the time when I began till now, people are dealing 

with this, with changes in legislation, changes in regulations, a 

rule for this and a rule for that and another rule for the other 

thing, and, Mr. Speaker, basically they don't know what to do. 

 

And so many, many of the people coming to my office ask: 

how do I apply for this opportunity? What's my unemployment 

insurance doing?  And then I say, go down to my federal 

constituency office and ask them.  They come in and ask about 

social assistance, they come in and ask about a whole host of 

items, Mr. Speaker, that really are difficult for them to gain 

access to in any other way.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

important; I believe it is of value. 

 

Now you're going to take and reduce this volume by 10.  What 

you're going to do is increase the volume of work and 

responsibility to the rest of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan; you're going to change that so that that is very 

significant. 

 

So it's not going to go . . . the volume of responsibility will not 

go down, Mr. Speaker.  The volume of responsibility will not 

go down, Mr. Speaker; however that is why I believe that it is 

significant that the people of the province of Saskatchewan 

realize that the responsibilities and the jobs and the workload 

are very significant as it relates to this Assembly. 

 

And they have changed.  And what was considered at one time, 

Mr. Speaker, to be a part-time job is not a part-time job today.  

And I'm not going to defend how much I work to this 

Assembly, but my constituency has provided, I believe, for me 

an excellent opportunity to work on their behalf. 

 

But I want to say to this Assembly that they are not a 

quarrelsome people; they are very good, they are good to me, 

and they have been willing to support me in this Assembly on 

an ongoing basis.  And with all of that in that framework, I say 

to this Assembly that probably in the last 12 years is the 

hardest I have ever worked in my life.  Not physically of 

course, Mr. Speaker, but for time spent, for the involvement in 

the whole process of time, I believe, Mr. Speaker, that it is 

significant to believe that we have a very, very legitimate 

responsibility in this Assembly.  And to reduce it is also going 

to increase the workload of every one of the MLAs sitting in 

this Assembly. 

 

I have thought about this a long time, Mr. Speaker.  And I went 

and I spoke at the hearing the commission held in 1989, I 

believe, or 1990.  There was a commission set up and it 

appeared in Swift Current; and I went and I spoke to it.  And I 

believe the head of the commission was a chief justice in the 

province . . . or for Canada, and his name just eludes me at this 

point.  But he was the former member of the legislature for the 

constituency of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 

And that individual, Mr. Speaker, came to me afterwards, when 

I had outlined some of the same concerns that I had here 

earlier, he came to me and he said to me, he said, there isn't a 

single person who is an urban sitting MLA that understands 

what you're talking about.  And he said, when I was a sitting 

MLA for the Assiniboia-Gravelbourg constituency, nobody 

understood me there either. 

 

And so I believe that in this framework of time that is of 

significant essence, the volume of work that has to be done in a 

rural constituency. I believe that there should be special 

considerations made in relation to that.  And as I said before, 

we have no value given to how much travel the member for 

Athabasca has in relation to his constituency.  We have no way 

where we consider any of the travel time that he takes to get to 

his constituencies. 

 

And I believe he told me one day that it took 11 hours just to 

drive one way to his constituency -- 12 hours, excuse me.  

Twelve hours one way.  Now that, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. 

Minister, is a very significant time to provide to his 

constituency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Cumberland member probably has the same 

amount of time that it takes for him to get home.  I know the 

member for Meadow Lake has a significant time.  That could 

be about six, six and a half, or seven hours.  To go to Nipawin 

is six hours.  So the distance that it is in relation to the city of 

Regina is significant. 

 

That is the reason why I say there has to be a variable placed 

into the equation so that individuals can have time to spend in 

their constituencies outside of the two major centres.  The two 

major centres are served in a very significant way by their 

members of the Assembly, and I'm not going to discount the 

work that more people have.  But somewhere along the line 

you have to take and value in the time spent in delivering the 

service to these individuals. 

 

And I want to say to this Assembly that it's important for that 

decision to include those variables that take place.  In a time of 

evolution of what governments are responsible for, what MLAs 

are responsible for, I think that it's time to take that into 

consideration.  And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I believe that all of 

these things need to be assessed in relation to this Bill. 

 

And sparsity and density of population at a variable from urban 

to rural of 5 per cent, I do not believe is taking into 

consideration what people in Canada said should be a part of it, 

what the Supreme Court said, and when they ruled in 1991 that 

that was what it was supposed to be.  And I think that that is 

very significant and needs to be taken into consideration. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when I deal with this, as it relates to the 

commission, I personally will be speaking to it on that basis; 

that the value and time allocation that has to be given 

consideration in relation to the size of the constituency, the 

distance you are from the capital, the volume of time that that 

takes, has to be taken into consideration at some proportion, 

Mr. Speaker, in 



June 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2399 

relation to the time that is spent with the volume of voters that 

are there. 

 

That is the reason, Mr. Speaker, why I believe that there should 

be some adjustments to the 5 per cent.  I really believe that, 

because that's a variable that should be taken into 

consideration. 

 

When I come to Committee of the Whole on this, Mr. Speaker, 

I'm going to raise these issues with the minister as points that 

he needs to take into consideration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

wasn't anticipating on making my remarks this afternoon, but 

seeing as the government has changed its mind once again on 

how this Assembly works, I will be making some comments on 

the electoral boundaries Act at this time. 

 

It isn't surprising, Mr. Speaker, that this situation would occur, 

you know.  When anyone in our society these days offends the 

current NDP government in any way or has raised the political 

ire of the NDP in some way, there is always a given result, and 

that is that we unilaterally change the rules.  And we either use 

this Legislative Assembly to pass laws to say that things didn't 

occur or that we rewrite agreements or we take the right of 

court away from Saskatchewan citizens.  That's seems to be a 

fairly predictable result of raising the ire of the government, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it's strange, Mr. Speaker, that a group that is so large in 

electoral terms would be so insecure, so absolutely insecure in 

themselves and their ability to govern that they constantly have 

to rewrite history in order to try and rectify the situation. 

 

And one only has to look what's happened in this Assembly, 

Mr. Speaker, over the last 16, 18 months to verify that.  If you 

don't like the contract that 60,000 farm families have, a legal 

binding contract, you simply come in here and you rewrite 

history and you change the rules and you take away the right of 

those people to have access to the court system.  If you don't 

like the agreement that a particular company struck in the past, 

because it didn't go along with your political wishes, then you 

say I'm going to rewrite history and I'm going to redraw the 

contract and I'm going to take away your right to go to court. 

 

(1600) 

 

It appears, Mr. Speaker, that the issue of electoral boundaries is 

no different.  One only has to hearken back to the last time that 

the Electoral Commission sat, which I remind, Mr. Speaker, 

was in the normal pattern that was established by the Hon. 

Allan Blakeney in 1971.  And that's when The Electoral 

Boundaries Commission Act was passed in 1972. 

 

And after that we've gone through the practice, Mr. Speaker, in 

this province of having the boundaries looked at by the 

commission every second election. 

And sometimes that varies a little, Mr. Speaker, because as you 

know governments in the British parliamentary system in 

Canada are allowed to call elections at various times.  They 

aren't set on a given day as they are in the United States.  So we 

have the case of the Blakeney government calling an election 

after three years, in 1978, and we had the case of the member 

from Estevan's government going nearly five years.  

Governments must call elections within a five-year term, and 

that is the practice in our system and has been for a long, long 

time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of my colleagues wishes to introduce guests, 

so I'll take my place and allow him to ask leave. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave for the introduction of 

guests? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to my 

colleague, the Leader of the Opposition, for allowing me the 

opportunity to introduce these guests in the gallery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my colleague from Arm River, I'm 

pleased to be able to introduce to you and through you to 

members of the Legislative Assembly 63 grade 2, 3, 4 and 5 

students from Kenaston School in Kenaston.  They're seated in 

your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Their teachers that are with them today are Michael Hertz, 

Melanie Kerpan, Kelly Ireland.  Their chaperons are Donna 

Engel, Bev Pavelich, Francis Matovich, Gayle Lee, Yvonne 

Millsap, Joan Rink, Steve Prpick, and their bus drivers are 

Annette Jess and Les Howells. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my colleague, I'd ask everyone to 

give these folks a very warm welcome to the legislature this 

afternoon.  And I'll be meeting with them in a few minutes just 

to visit with them a little bit after their visit here to the 

Assembly. 

 

So please join me in welcoming them here this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 79 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I think it's 

important, Mr. Speaker, our guests in the Assembly come here 

when we're discussing things like the electoral boundaries 

because it affects the future of so many people like the young 

folks here from the town of Kenaston.  Kenaston is in a rural 

area.  Certainly the 



2400 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1993 

electoral representation that towns like Kenaston get in this 

Legislative Assembly is a very important and integral part of 

being able to sustain communities like that. 

 

As I was saying, Mr. Speaker, the practice of redistribution in 

this province since 1972 has been that we go with every second 

census, and upon that census result being in, that we then go 

through the review process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, ever since the early 1950s there have constantly 

been additions to the number of seats in the Assembly of 

Saskatchewan.  That was after a major depopulation occurred 

during the 1930s.  As you know, Mr. Speaker, the province of 

Saskatchewan is the third largest in area in Confederation.  

Before the 1930s Saskatchewan was also the third-largest 

population centre in Confederation.  When people left this 

province in large numbers, we then had a decrease occur, Mr. 

Speaker, in a number of seats. 

 

Saskatchewan's population, Mr. Speaker, in the mid-1980s 

went back over the million mark again for the first time since 

1929.  In other words the devastation of the 1930s in our 

population drain was only reversed in the 1980s, and we once 

again broke the million-person mark for the first time in nearly 

40 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the progression upward in the number of seats in 

this Assembly is one that until very recently no one argued 

with.  And I think, Mr. Speaker, it has only been since the 

agricultural economy of this province has faced tough times 

and we have seen rural depopulation occurring, and also 

significant fiscal problems occur because of that, Mr. Speaker, 

that we have seen the public in the province of Saskatchewan 

begin to address the question of the size of government and 

government expenditure in a serious way. 

 

And it has become very popular, Mr. Speaker, very, very 

popular now amongst the voters and taxpayers in every 

jurisdiction in Canada to look at this area, to look at the 

problem -- size of government, cost of government, 

government delivery of programs, rationalization -- in what is 

the most sensible electoral system to provide representation to 

Canadians and indeed Saskatchewan people. 

 

We have seen the rise, Mr. Speaker, of political parties in 

certain regions of the country.  And I believe you've seen the 

rise of those because people have felt frustrated and alienated 

with the traditional political parties and the system that has 

been in place in Canada at least since the Second World War. 

 

So when you see the Reform Party, when you see the bloc 

populaire, when you seen the Confederation of Regions Party 

in New Brunswick, we're seeing Canadian voters and taxpayers 

expressing some dissatisfaction with the process. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I generally agree.  The Canadians and the 

type of government that they receive needs to 

undergo some revamping.  The power of the executive in 

government today is far stronger than it was in the days of my 

parents, far stronger than in the days of my grandparents.  

Today in the Canadian system and indeed in this provincial 

Assembly, the power of the Premier and the power of cabinet is 

far stronger than it was even 20 years ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we don't start addressing some of those 

problems, then indeed the alienation that Canadians feel with 

their brand of the British parliamentary system, I believe will 

begin to grow.  That is a very long and deep topic, Mr. 

Speaker, and I'm not going to dwell on it at any great length 

because the topic before us is how we, as people who live 

within that British parliamentary system, design the rules under 

which members are elected to this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Assembly of Saskatchewan and its make-up 

was last redefined by an Electoral Boundaries Commission in 

1989.  That, Mr. Speaker, was approximately 10 years from the 

previous time.  At that time, Mr. Speaker, the Electoral 

Boundaries Commission redrew the map of Saskatchewan and 

had 66 ridings instead of 64. 

 

If you remember at that time, Mr. Speaker, there was a legal 

challenge issued by a group of citizens in the province of 

Saskatchewan, primarily a bunch of professors, law professors 

from the universities, who issued a . . . took the challenge to 

ultimately the Supreme Court of Canada that the variance used, 

Mr. Speaker, at that time to establish boundaries in the 

province of Saskatchewan was wrong. 

 

The reference, Mr. Speaker, to the Supreme Court said that 

there was too much variance for Saskatchewan citizens to feel 

equal.  At that time members in New Democratic Party spoke 

out of both sides of their mouths.  The prospect of having more 

urban ridings in the province of Saskatchewan was appealing.  

The prospect of having 25 per cent variance possibilities 

between the largest and the smallest riding in Saskatchewan 

they didn't like, because they said it gave too much power to 

rural people.  So we had this situation where the New 

Democratic Party wanted it both ways. 

 

Well the outcome of that, Mr. Speaker, was that the Supreme 

Court upheld the commission and the electoral law of 

Saskatchewan, as they had done twice previously for two other 

jurisdictions in Canada which used the same variation, which 

the federal Government of Canada currently uses and has used 

for some time. 

 

And I won't go into the details of that reference, Mr. Speaker, 

but it essentially said that because Canada is a very large land 

with a very small population, with many natural boundaries 

occurring like mountains and lakes and rivers and many 

different communities of interest and trading areas, that in 

order to maintain what is uniquely a Canadian type of British 

parliamentary democracy that those variations are reasonable 

and a reality of life in a land so vast.  And it is the reason, Mr. 

Speaker, that this particular 



June 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2401 

province constitutionally is guaranteed 14 federal ridings. 

 

If one, Mr. Speaker, took the arguments put forward by the 

current administration and by the law professors who sought 

the Supreme Court judgement, Saskatchewan would only have 

four to five members in the federal parliament -- four to five 

members.  In other words the city of Toronto, the city of 

Montreal, the city of Vancouver, all of those areas would have 

more representation and Saskatchewan would have very little. 

 

Now that may change, Mr. Deputy Speaker, some time in the 

future.  But I think before it does, you will see many other 

changes occur in the parliamentary system of Canada before 

provinces like Saskatchewan, Manitoba, New Brunswick, Nova 

Scotia, Prince Edward Island, Newfoundland, and others are 

constitutionally deprived of that level of representation which 

they are now guaranteed constitutionally. 

 

I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you would see an elected 

Senate before that happens.  I believe that you would see the 

way that MPs (Member of Parliament) vote on certain matters 

changed.  I believe that you would see a lot of effort made to 

decentralize the federal government more than it has been in 

order to make all Canadians feel part of this great land. 

 

And it's funny, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that on the principle of 

Saskatchewan having 14 seats, 10 of whom are presently 

represented by New Democrats, there is very little complaint, 

very little complaint at all.  As a matter of fact, the federal 

electoral process and the federal Chief Electoral Officer and his 

people and the commissions that they have run . . . 

commissions, by the way, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I have 

appeared before in the past on behalf of the federal Progressive 

Conservative Party of Canada, as have some members of this 

Assembly.  I remember the member from Regina North West 

appearing on behalf of his party at hearings some 10, 12 years 

ago, I believe. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- 1984. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I didn't appear at the one in 1984, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, but prior to that. 

 

And you know what?  That process, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

widely accepted as being fair, as being reasonable, as taking 

into account distance, communities of interest, trading areas, 

and the ability of MPs to service ridings. 

 

And having listened, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to all of the 

arguments placed at those various commission hearings, I find 

it a little bit strange that the provincial NDP would now say 

what they wish to put into place is a system that is 

diametrically opposed to the one that they support federally 

which would see Saskatchewan drop to four or five ridings. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Didn't listen to me. 

Mr. Swenson: -- Didn't listen to me much either . . . would 

drop to four or five ridings, Mr. Deputy Speaker, four or five 

ridings.  And I find that strange.  I would be interested to hear 

the arguments of the New Democratic Party MPs from the 

province of Saskatchewan if in the House of Commons their 

voice and representation in Saskatchewan were put at risk. 

 

(1615) 

 

I suspect, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would hear very strong 

arguments about how the third-largest province in 

Confederation should be represented.  I would hear very strong 

arguments about how the Saskatchewan River in both its 

entities carves up the province of Saskatchewan.  I would hear 

very strong arguments based on the fact that certain people buy 

their groceries in Prince Albert and others buy theirs in Moose 

Jaw; that those trading areas and communities of interest are 

part and parcel of social economic life in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  I think I'd hear that. 

 

As a matter of fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have heard it.  I've 

read the submissions, I listened to the hearings, and I have 

heard those arguments repeated over and over.  And that is why 

the Supreme Court of Canada, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has upheld 

those principles. 

 

Now what we have today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, less than two 

years after the last election, is this crying need all of a sudden 

to redefine the boundaries in Saskatchewan.  Even though 

normal practice would say that we would probably go till 

1997-98, somewhere in there, and we would go through 

another census period before we did that boundary 

redistribution.  Because there is a certain cost attached to that, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, a certain cost to the taxpayer of the 

province to do this. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government politically did not 

agree with the process last time.  This political party did not 

agree with it.  And so as we have seen with the contracts of 

farmers, as we have seen with various companies and 

organizations like Federated Co-op, as we have seen with rural 

hospitals, as we have seen in so many instances, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, if you offend, if you don't agree politically, then we 

get legislation.  Legislation which I say to you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, they would not hesitate one iota to use closure on, as 

they have shown themselves so willingly to do in whatever 

instances comes along. 

 

Now the Minister of Justice stands in the House and he gives 

some very high-minded reasons why that this has to be done 

immediately.  And he says the taxpayers of the province 

demand that we cut back on the number of MLAs. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you don't have to be a politician in 

Canada today to realize that most taxpayers think that 

politicians are overpaid and underworked -- overpaid and 

underworked -- and we've got to do something about the 

political process. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I said earlier in my 



2402 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1993 

speech, I agree with the taxpayers and the voters of Canada that 

we have to change our system.  I believe that individual MLAs 

and MPs do deserve more respect and ability than they are 

getting in the current system.  They should have the ability, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, without fear of retribution by whoever 

happens to be the premier or the prime minister, from truly 

representing their riding in a better way. 

 

The British parliamentary system as practised in Great Britain 

allows MPs to vote against their leader each and every day.  It 

even goes so far as to have the removal of prime ministers built 

into the system.  And the earth does not quake and open up and 

swallow the country down because they did that. 

 

I agree that those changes must occur.  But the fact is, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that when the government gives that as the 

reason, it rings hollow -- it rings hollow.  And the reason I say 

that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is because if the government truly 

believed its own rhetoric, then it would strike an electoral 

boundaries commission which then would go visit with the 

voter and the taxpayer that thinks we have too many elected 

representatives, that they're overpaid and underworked. 

 

And the commission would go out and it would seek some 

input from people around the piece and it would say, what is 

the proper number of seats in the Legislative Assembly; what is 

the proper cost that should be attached; how do we serve the 

process better; how do we serve the taxpayer better? 

 

But no, no, the government wouldn't allow the ordinary 

taxpayers and voters to determine that, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

They will use their majority in this Assembly to dictate that 

particular number, and they will use their majority in the 

Assembly to dictate the variance. 

 

So in reality, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with all of the rules being 

predefined, the commission, who supposedly is addressing this 

question of cost, of fairness, of responsibility, will have very 

narrow parameters in which to work under. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is why the official opposition brought 

forward a counterproposal.  Because if the criteria, the criteria 

is to cut back on the number of MLAs, then you should do it in 

the most rational way possible.  If the criteria is to cut costs, 

then you should look how you can cooperate and work with 

others to achieve that. 

 

And if the question is truly fairness, Mr. Deputy Speaker, then 

you put in place a system that recognizes the Saskatchewan 

River valley does exist.  That people prefer to buy their 

groceries in Prince Albert rather than Melfort or Nipawin or 

North Battleford or Lloydminster. That the communities of 

interest and trading areas which are natural to the third-largest 

province in Confederation be recognized. 

 

I think that you would want a system, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that recognized that.  But no, the New Democratic 

Party doesn't like that kind of a process in the province because 

it might change all of the boundaries in some of their urban 

strongholds, and you would have cabinet ministers competing 

for the same seat.  That you might have a system that allowed 

taxpayers greater access to MLAs and MPs who work on many 

of the same issues.  But this government doesn't recognize that, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, because they simply want to pass a law 

that fits the narrower context of their political agenda. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the official opposition has no problem in 

cutting the number of MLAs.  It has no problem in trying to 

save taxpayers the cost of government.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, it 

is with some pride that I think of in nine and a half years of 

provincial government we cut the size of the civil service in 

this province from over 17,000 to around 13,000.  And I 

believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there is room to reduce that 

even more in a society that understands the value of a dollar.  

Because our economy hasn't been growing, no matter what the 

government promises, on an everyday basis.  The economy is 

stagnant, agriculture is still under difficulty, that we as 

Saskatchewan people and Canadians are going to have to learn 

to manage our dollars better. 

 

We have no problem, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with any of those 

arguments.  But what the government proposes is that 

taxpayers and voters should not have the right to help design 

the system that they feel most comfortably addresses those 

concerns.  And the minister says, well it's always been that 

way.  It's always been that way that the government will bring 

in the Bill and it will define all of these things. 

 

And then the commission will simply go out, after all the rules 

are made, and finish off the process.  And they will choose 

three eminent souls in the province of Saskatchewan to sit on 

there, who are above the political process, and at the end of the 

day we should be satisfied with it. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that only feeds the 

cynicism which most voters in this country today feel for our 

British parliamentary process.  They truly want it back in their 

hands. 

 

And I will say, the member from Greystone, who was the first 

to stand in this Assembly and raise the idea of the commission 

having that power, should be commended.  I totally subscribe 

to it, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I totally subscribe to it.  And any 

member in this Assembly that feels anything for the British 

parliamentary system and how it is under attack in this country 

today and doesn't recognize that people are very dissatisfied 

with the way it is handling things, anyone that doesn't believe 

that to be the case had better get on their feet in this debate and 

annunciate that to this Assembly.  Because I would love to 

send the copies of Hansard out to their constituents and see if 

their constituents agree with them. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are all sorts of issues.  And 



June 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2403 

we've got one in this House in this session on Bill 38 where the 

vast majority of people out there are saying you, my elected 

representative, are not speaking for the majority of people in 

your constituency on this issue. 

 

And there are a few government members coming to the 

realization that they had best heed the voters and the taxpayers 

in their particular constituencies on like-minded issues. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is not for me, the member of a political 

party, the current leader of a political party to stand in this 

Assembly and predetermine what an electoral commission in 

this province should do.  But I would like the opportunity, as 

would most voters and taxpayers, to present a plausible 

alternative and solution to what is perceived by many to be a 

problem. 

 

And I think it is only right, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in our society 

that that would be the context under which we would approach 

this problem.  We would not approach it as the government has 

done, who simply looked at the electoral map and said, I see 

too many rural ridings who hang there like the sword of 

Damocles ready to cut off my political head, and I'm therefore 

going to change the map.  That is not a proper solution. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, if there are three or five or whatever it 

takes, eminent souls in this province -- and I'm sure there are -- 

who can adjudicate these things in a non-partisan, unbiased 

manner, then I say, put them to work.  And let the New 

Democratic Party come forward with a proposal which they say 

addresses the basic tenets and concepts of how British 

parliamentary democracy is delivered in this province.  Let 

them talk about boundaries such as the Saskatchewan River 

valley.  Let them talk about communities of interest.  Let them 

talk about the services that MLAs provide on a daily basis to 

their constituents.  And do we provide them on a fair basis or 

an unfair basis? 

 

The questions that the member from Morse raised about the 

distances in rural Saskatchewan compared to the distances in 

urban Saskatchewan are legitimate questions, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, because the Supreme Court of Canada has three times 

-- three times dealt with the issue and adjudicated it and said 

yes, the unique character of this country determines that that be 

the case. 

 

Now be it that members of the New Democratic Party in this 

province are smarter than that, a lot of people will have issue 

with; that they know better, that they understand better, that 

they can deliver the wishes of voters and taxpayers smarter 

than those that have come before them, people have issue with, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1630) 

 

So I say to you, if there was any integrity in this new-found 

bunch of democrats over here who so 

easily use closure, so easily use this legislature to take away 

rights, who so easily take away the right to the court system of 

our country, this bunch of new-found democrats over here, who 

in opposition spoke so lustily for the rights of individuals, who 

spoke so lustily for the democratic process, if they actually 

believe their own rhetoric, Mr. Speaker, it would be very 

simple. 

 

The minister would bring to this Assembly a Bill that 

establishes an electoral commission, and he would not dictate 

the parameters but he would say we have a commission in 

place and we invite you, Mr. Leader of the Progressive 

Conservative Party, to present what you feel is the best solution 

to downsizing, to cost saving, to integration, to better delivery 

of government services. 

 

And they would say to the member from Riversdale, Mr. 

Premier, present your options.  And they would say to the 

member from Saskatoon Greystone, present your options.  And 

they would say to anyone in the province of Saskatchewan, the 

law professors who asked for the judgement from the Supreme 

Court in 1991, bring forward your proposals and we will 

adjudicate them for their fairness, for their ability to deliver 

good parliamentary representation to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But this new-found bunch of democrats over here don't want to 

do that, and I say to you, Mr. Speaker, it is for very narrow, 

partisan, political purposes that they don't want to do it.  

Because no one so far, Mr. Speaker, has convinced me in the 

limited, limited speech that I've heard from them so far that it is 

any other way. 

 

Now maybe in the debate, Mr. Speaker, some will have the 

courage to rise and tell me that it is some other way, but if it's 

like Bill 38, if it's like the GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) debate, if it's like FCL (Federated Co-operatives 

Ltd.), if it's like so many of these other instances where we use 

closure, where we strip rights, where we take away the right to 

the court, there will be nothing but a numbing silence, Mr. 

Speaker, from these new-found democrats.  Because precedent 

and history is showing us it is simply, if you offend them, if 

you don't fit the political agenda, then you pay the price. 

 

And I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we're going early . . . 

if the taxpayer is going to pay for the commission, if the 

taxpayer is going to have the bill presented to them for this 

exercise, then the taxpayer should have the voice to go with it.  

And they are not achieving that, Mr. Speaker, under this 

legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it only proper that this government at this 

stage would want to rethink and reconsider on this particular 

Bill.  It is not too late yet for this new-found bunch of 

democrats here to allow the voters and the taxpayers of this 

province to have their own electoral destiny in their own hands.  

That ability is still there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it is only proper then that I say to 



2404 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1993 

this government that I move that we adjourn this debate today 

to allow that thought to continue. 

 

The division bells rang from 4:35 p.m. until 4:45 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Toth 

Muirhead Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

Boyd Haverstock 

-- 10 

 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Serby 

Simard Whitmore 

Shillington Flavel 

Solomon Roy 

Hagel Kujawa 

Bradley Crofford 

Pringle Stanger 

Lautermilch Knezacek 

Calvert Harper 

Murray Keeping 

Hamilton Kluz 

Trew Carlson 

Draper Langford 

-- 26 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Obviously, Mr. 

Speaker, the members of the government are going to take a 

while in order to come to their senses on this issue.  And I'm 

afraid that the indications that we have in the official 

opposition is that this debate shall get very long and protracted, 

because what we're trying to bring to the Assembly, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, is the views of a lot of people. 

 

And as we've done in the past with other issues, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, if you're going to bring those views forward in a 

proper manner, it takes some time in order to do that.  Mr. 

Speaker, there's the whole question of how you deliver the 

service I think that sometimes is missed, not only by people in 

this Assembly but by the average person out there. 

 

When I think of my own riding, Mr. Speaker, I think of a riding 

that centres on the city of Moose Jaw, which is the natural 

trading centre for my riding, but goes from 15 miles west of 

this city to six miles beyond the town of Chaplin, the place 

where the big mound of white salt is along No. 1 Highway.  

And it touches on the shores of Lake Diefenbaker and it 

touches on the shores of Last Mountain Lake and it nearly gets 

to the Avonlea reservoir on the Moose Jaw creek, some 35 

miles south-west of Regina.  It cuts right through the centre of 

Old Wives Lake which, Mr. Speaker, is some 20 miles long 

and 10 miles across.  It does not have a road crossing anywhere 

near it.  It is a very large riding, Mr. Speaker, with many 

natural barriers and configurations involved in it. 

As this member from Morse said, it takes you a couple of hours 

to drive across it.  It takes you untold hours to service a few 

constituents.  The nature of my riding, Mr. Speaker, is that it 

requires, it requires a lot of time and effort, to put it very 

simply. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm not saying that the people in Thunder Creek 

deserve any better or any less representation than any other 

voter in the province of Saskatchewan.  But what they do 

deserve, Mr. Speaker, what they do deserve is the knowledge 

that their electoral process is fair and open-handed and even.  

Because I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that the constituents of 

Thunder Creek, the voters of Thunder Creek, who have 

returned me to this Legislative Assembly three times, are 

amongst the most politically astute people in this entire 

province. 

 

They have been represented in the past by a premier.  They 

have been represented by cabinet ministers.  They have had 

another premier born within the confines of its boundaries.  

And they are people, Mr. Speaker, who take their politics very, 

very seriously.  You don't return people like Ross Thatcher to 

this Legislative Assembly election after election without taking 

your politics fairly seriously. 

 

On this issue, Mr. Speaker, I would like them to have the 

opportunity, I would like them to have the opportunity to say 

what kind of representation they think they should have. 

 

And as I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, there's only one way, I 

believe, to do that.  That if we're going to move this process up, 

if we're going to fundamentally change the configuration of the 

province, then if Moose Jaw is the natural trading centre, if 

Moose Jaw is where our kids -- a lot of whom go to school 

there . . . if Moose Jaw is to be part of the political life of the 

rural area around it, then they need the opportunity to pass 

judgement on what they think would be the best configuration 

of MLAs and seats in the province of Saskatchewan.  And they 

should be the ones that would determine how many MLAs they 

will pay for as taxpayers.  And they should be the ones perhaps 

to determine how those MLAs integrate themselves with other 

elected representatives in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Because I honestly believe, Mr. Speaker, that the voting 

population of this province should not be -- not be -- 

second-guessed.  I have heard every member of this Assembly 

make comments about how grouchy, about how cynical, about 

how angry people are today about our political process.  Some 

of that, Mr. Speaker, is unfair.  Some of that is unfair and I, like 

other members of this Assembly, think we have a legitimate 

argument to make about some of the media reporting that 

comes out of this Assembly and others, because issues are not 

so simplistic. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, if those voters, if those taxpayers, are to feel 

ownership with the issue, then there's only one way to do it.  

There's only one way to do it, and it is not bringing into this 

Legislative Assembly an electoral boundaries commission that 

has the terms and 



June 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2405 

references all dictated to it, that has a commission in place that 

simply appears to be the tool of the government of the day, a 

government which has shown itself, has shown itself to be 

fairly callous when it comes down to the rights of individuals, 

groups, companies, and whole segments of our society, in the 

past. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I don't say that in some offhand way, 

drawing that conclusion out of the air.  The facts have been 

demonstrated in here on a number of occasions with closure, 

with access to the courts -- all of these things taken away.  

Those are on the record of the Assembly of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it's only appropriate then that with a voting 

population which today doesn't have as much confidence as it 

had in the past in its political process, that before this 

Assembly, before this Assembly will pass such a Bill into law, 

that it have the opportunity to discuss this issue in a great deal 

of depth, that a lot of sound reasoning has to go into this 

debate.  And for that reason, Mr. Speaker, because the 

government has rejected the solution of more time, I think it is 

appropriate that I move an amendment to the Bill, Mr. Speaker.  

And I move, seconded by the member from Kindersley: 

 

 That Bill 79 not now be read a second time because the 

principles contained in the Bill reinforce the recent trend of 

legislative action against the fundamental values of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

I so move. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Being 

near 5 o'clock I move the House stand recessed until 7 o'clock. 

 

The Speaker: -- The member has asked leave really to call it 5 

o'clock. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly . . . does the member 

have leave?  Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to accept that 

motion? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


