




















































Hansard: March 15, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 337 

 March 15, 1993 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 25 -- An Act to repeal The Saskatchewan Mining 

Development Corporation Act 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Bill 25 brings 

up a topic the NDP (New Democratic Party) don't much like to 

talk about.  It's the U-word, Mr. Speaker, uranium.  The NDP 

government is faced with a challenge, a challenge of just what 

to do with uranium.  I realize that leaps and bounds were made 

in the last NDP convention when the party voted in favour of 

uranium mining in Saskatchewan.  The previous stance of the 

NDP was somewhat confused.  Just think about it.  The same 

party that went bananas with taxpayers' dollars, buying every 

uranium mine in sight, was the same party that tried to phase 

uranium mining out of existence.  How ridiculous, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now the NDP of Saskatchewan have flip-flopped again and 

adopted a pro-uranium stance.  And I say, Mr. Speaker, it's 

about time.  But this stance wasn't reached unanimously.  In 

fact there was plenty of dissension on this issue and it's still 

there today, as is evident from the NDP convention last year 

when some of the members opposite tried to stall the 

convention to prevent the uranium issue from coming to the 

floor. 

 

The former government announced the AECL (Atomic Energy 

of Canada Ltd.) deal and the benefits it would offer.  When 

they did this, some of the NDP came out swinging against it.  

Other members in the opposition at the time waited.  In fact, 

one editorialist in the Star-Phoenix said, and I quote, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

 "Here's a project that will create 30,000 man-(hours) of work, 

particularly benefiting native people in the North.  It'll also 

turn Saskatoon into a major international centre for future 

sales of an estimated 30 CANDU reactors worth $25 billion 

world-wide.  Former mayor, Cliff Wright's considerable 

prestige and influence has been hauled into play.  Who can be 

against such an economic bonanza?  The hard left wing of the 

New Democrats, that's who.  Regina MLA Bob Lyons 

threatens to halt the project . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I think the member must 

be aware you can't use members names in the . . . Were you 

quoting from it?  All right, the member didn't indicate that he 

was quoting.  But if he is quoting, that's fine. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Yes, I am 

quoting from the Leader-Post . . . excuse me, the Star-Phoenix 

of January 12, 1989. 

 

 Regina MLA Bob Lyons threatens to halt the project with 

court challenge on court challenge, while fellow northern 

MLA Fred Thompson clasps the admirable pro-uranium, 

pro-progress line of T.C. Douglas.  Romanow, caught in the 

middle waits. And waits.  It's turmoil time in NDP ranks." 

 

And that as I said, Mr. Speaker, is from the Star-Phoenix of 

January 12, 1989. 

 

Other MLA's (Members of the Legislative Assembly) could 

also be named that would be trying to hold up the uranium 

debate.  Not only the member from Regina Rosemont, but such 

members as perhaps Regina Albert North, Saskatoon 

Broadway, the MLA for Redberry, and perhaps even the MLA 

for Regina Lake Centre.  I guess it always takes turmoil time in 

. . . I guess it's always turmoil time in the NDP ranks.  The 

budget will be further proof of that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, uranium isn't only a political topic among the 

NDP Party, it's a vital industry in this province.  In 1990, 20 

per cent of the uranium produced in the western world came 

from Saskatchewan.  This province is a world leader in 

uranium.  The world needs Saskatchewan uranium, Mr. 

Speaker.  And for Saskatchewan it means new jobs, new 

income, more diversification, new wealth, and a prosperous 

future. 

 

Since the early '80s alone, capital expenditures have totalled 

more than $1.2 billion with almost 500 million being invested 

in exploration and pre-development in Saskatchewan's North.  

In 1990 the uranium industry generated $66 million in salaries, 

wages, and benefits for its 1,100 employees.  It invested $44 

million in capital expenditures, paid close to $30 million in 

taxes and royalty expenses, and $2.7 million in industry fees; 

and donated, Mr. Speaker, $350,000 to community and 

charitable organizations plus another 38,000 to the education of 

the province's youth in the form of scholarships. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these figures reflect one year of what benefits the 

uranium industry brings to the Saskatchewan economy and its 

people.  These benefits could be multiplied many times, Mr. 

Speaker, if we were prepared to go ahead in this province with 

the development of uranium -- with not only the mining of 

uranium, but also with the re-manufacture of it. 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I wonder if the member from 

Cannington would be courteous enough to allow me to 

introduce some guests in the Speaker's gallery. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much.  This was a 

group which we had anticipated a little earlier.  They're from 

Regina Albert South.  The member from Regina Albert South 

had hoped to greet them a little earlier, but he had to leave. 



338 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1993 

I therefore, Mr. Speaker, hope you would join us in welcoming 

some Brownies from the 56th Brownies of Regina.  They're 

accompanied by their teacher . . . by their leaders, Linda 

Pettigrew, Joanne Beck, and Jim Ehmann.  Hope all members 

join me in welcoming these students today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As an ex-Boy 

Scout, I would also like to add my voice to that of the Minister 

of Labour in welcoming the Brownies to the Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Toth: -- To introduce a guest, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to just introduce to this 

Legislative Assembly the NDP candidate in the Moosomin 

constituency, Mary McGuire, who happens to be sitting in your 

riding.  We welcome her to the Assembly this evening. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 25 (continued) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The uranium 

industry, if we allowed it to develop properly within this 

province, would not only include mining, Mr. Speaker, but also 

could include the manufacturing and the use of the 

manufactured uranium products. 

 

There is a value to the mining of the industry, to mining of 

uranium.  But when you manufacture it into a more finished 

product, the value of that increases tenfold.  And when you 

start using it in electricity, it increases another tenfold, Mr. 

Speaker.  And there are many economic benefits available for 

us in that area. 

 

And that's one of the things which the privatization of SMDC 

(Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation) into 

Cameco provided to the people of Saskatchewan -- was the 

opportunities to utilize the resources that we have available in 

this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the figures I gave earlier reflect one year of the 

benefits the uranium industry brings to the Saskatchewan 

economy and its people.  Saskatoon receives the greatest 

benefits from all of this activity.  In fact, it is estimated that for 

every one person employed in the industry, there are two to 

three employed outside of the industry that support the 

industry.  And this support is mainly based in Saskatoon. 

 

This includes transportation for employees who must be flown 

into the northern mines, to equipment provision, engineering 

services, and catering services.  There is a wide range of 

support employment generated in Saskatoon by the uranium 

industry.  Mr. 

Speaker, it's an industry that must be fully developed for the 

benefit of both our urban and rural areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the 1988 debt of Cameco . . . was over $600 

million.  And only a few years after being merged, their debt 

was cut to $120 million at the end of 1991.  These figures are 

from the Star-Phoenix, February 15, 1992. 

 

Obviously, Mr. Speaker, that was a successful transaction.  

Even the NDP across the way can't deny that.  As I said, the 

NDP are faced with a challenge, Mr. Speaker.  That challenge 

is whether to do what is best for the Saskatchewan people or to 

continue to toe the party line regarding uranium.  There seems 

to be some ideology that believes social democrats should be 

hand in hand with the anti-nuclear movement, but that's just not 

so. 

 

One of the largest countries under social democratic rule today 

is France, a strong proponent of nuclear power with some 

three-quarters of its electrical generation being from nuclear 

plants.  And environmentalists should take note.  Tourists in 

Europe observe a marked difference between the blue skies of 

France and the grey ones of fossil-fuel-using Germany.  I cite 

France, Mr. Speaker, to suggest anti-nuclear is not a social 

democratic fundamental principle, although the NDP Party 

seems to believe so. 

 

In a world where the greenhouse effect and air pollution 

generally are severe problems, nuclear power, especially from 

smaller, less costly reactors, is an absolute necessity.  While we 

were touring the province this past fall and winter, Mr. 

Speaker, nuclear energy, the uranium issue, came up on our 

environmental tour.  We saw evidence of the benefits that the 

uranium industry provides to the North on our tour through 

Buffalo Narrows. 

 

While we were visiting there my colleague, the member from 

Kindersley, asked a person working at the local airport, what 

do you have in this area for industry?  What is the economic 

engine of the Buffalo Narrows area?  And, Mr. Speaker, her 

response was, well in the summertime we have fishing.  That 

didn't say anything about what they had in the wintertime. 

 

They had a very large unemployment sector in that area, Mr. 

Speaker, but one of the things that was creating some 

employment, was when the trucks would haul the uranium ore 

down from the North.  I'm not sure which mine it was coming 

from, perhaps it was Cluff Lake, but it comes down the road on 

the west side of the province down through Buffalo Narrows 

and that created employment opportunities within that 

community.  And I'm sure it creates employment opportunities 

along that whole highway.  One of the things that was available 

there was some service stations that, Mr. Speaker, because the 

large trucks that were rolling through that area used those and it 

provided a benefit for the whole community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need more electrical generation within this 

province.  Not that long ago at SaskPower 



March 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 339 

there was talk of shutting down the no. 6 generating unit at 

Boundary dam.  The government had to hold off, SaskPower 

had to hold off shutting down that plant because there was a 

prediction of cold weather.  There was not enough electrical 

generation capacity in the province of Saskatchewan to handle 

the peak-load demands that would be placed on the system if 

we had a cold snap while one of the units was down at 

Boundary dam. 

 

Now it's fine to say that we have enough electrical generation 

capacity while we have all units up and running, but that's not 

always the case, Mr. Speaker.  We need to take a serious look 

at producing some more electrical generation within this 

province.  Co-generation is one of the alternatives, but 

co-generation at the present time is only looking at a very small 

portion of our potential needs. 

 

We should be looking at nuclear generation as an alternative, or 

we should be looking at clean coal-burning units.  Now that 

technology is not yet in place.  It's not available.  But the 

nuclear option is available at the present time and we should be 

looking at that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are beginning a new era in uranium mining 

and nuclear development.  With the repeal of The 

Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation Act, we put 

onto the trash heap of history an ideological and 

narrow-minded approach to uranium mining and nuclear 

development -- the trash heap, Mr. Speaker, where it belongs. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, the lone NDP speaker in this debate 

said the Bill was necessary to clean up the mess left on the 

books.  And, Mr. Speaker, I certainly agree with that member 

that SMDC legislation was a mess.  Anything that commits the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan to owning mines is a mess and a 

dangerous idea in and of itself. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to relate to you how the legislation that 

this Bill will repeal is related to the financial difficulties the 

province faces today.  Mr. Speaker, The Saskatchewan Mining 

Development Corporation Act was passed in the 1970s.  In the 

1970s, Mr. Speaker, the government of the day enjoyed the 

greatest inflow of revenues of any government in the history of 

this province.  More revenue dollars poured into that NDP 

government than to any government before or since, Mr. 

Speaker.  And what happened to all that money?  What 

happened to it?  Was it put in the bank against a rainy day?  

Was it saved, Mr. Speaker, so that the people of Saskatchewan 

would have some measure of safety against the potential of 

collapsing commodity prices, the dangers of a deep recession? 

 

(1915) 

 

No, Mr. Speaker, the money was not saved.  It was managed in 

a shady, secretive, and closed way.  The people were told that 

the government had created this wonderful Heritage Fund and 

that in that fund was their future security.  The people were led 

to believe that the rainy-day fund did exist in the form of the 

Heritage Fund.  But what was that fund, Mr. Speaker, what 

actually was it?  Let me quote, Mr. Speaker, one Allan 

Blakeney, regarding these revenues. 

 

The Heritage Fund, said the former premier, the Heritage Fund 

was to take money and invest it like Saskoil, in potash, in 

uranium mines.  It was not the belief that the money would be 

there in cash to build hospitals and nursing homes.  End of 

quote. 

 

Allan Blakeney said that on CFQC on November 7, 1985.  The 

money was not there to provide services to the people or 

provide them protection for the future.  It was there, said Mr. 

Blakeney, to buy uranium mines through the SMDC legislation 

that we are now repealing in this House. 

 

All that wealth, Mr. Speaker, all that opportunity, all that hope 

that came in the form of cash from oil and other resources 

during the 1970s, all of it frittered away so that the member for 

Riversdale could say he was a uranium mining baron.  They 

used the wealth of this province to purchase existing holes in 

the ground rather than bank the wealth for the people of the 

future.  And the former premier now admits that this was what 

was happening when his deputy premier, the member for 

Riversdale, was the minister of nationalization in the 1970s. 

 

Getting rid of this SMDC law, Mr. Speaker, is very symbolic in 

that it is an attempt to purge the soul of Saskatchewan of the 

bankrupting of our people's future.  And that is what the SMDC 

Bill was, Mr. Speaker.  It was the bankrupting of the future.  

They took the tremendous riches of this province and they did 

not put it away in cash for the people as the people were led to 

believe. They used it to buy the uranium mines. 

 

They did not invest it in new jobs, they did not invest it in 

diversification or secondary processing and manufacturing. No, 

they did not invest it in the future but rather in holes in the 

ground -- potash and uranium mines.  And while the member 

from Riversdale was out on his shopping spree buying up the 

uranium mines as allowed by The SMDC Act, while he was 

doing that, Mr. Speaker, his boss, Allan Blakeney, was pressed 

by reporters. 

 

What would happen, the premier was asked, what would 

happen if all the commodity prices fell at the same time.  First, 

Mr. Blakeney stated, it would never happen.  It could never 

happen.  But the reporters pressed him and asked, what if, what 

if it does happen?  What if all the commodity prices, including 

the price of uranium, what if they all fell at the same time? 

 

And finally the premier confessed. He said, and I quote: It 

would be a disaster.  It would be a disaster, he said, Mr. 

Speaker. And it was a disaster.  This spending spree was the 

direct cause of the economic hardship that our people faced 

throughout the 1980s and that they continue to face today. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Speaker, how can this government get 



340 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1993 

and be so sanctimonious about the financial situation of this 

province when it was their wanton spending habits, their 

socialist zeal to buy up the entire resource sector of 

Saskatchewan.  Imagine, Mr. Speaker, if we had the money the 

NDP used to buy up the uranium mines, imagine if that money 

had just been left in the bank. 

 

At the tragically high interest rates that the economy endured 

during the Liberal-NDP coalition days of the early 1970s, at 

those interest rates the money spent on the uranium mines 

would have grown geometrically, exponentially, and we would 

have had some money available to support our people 

throughout the 1980s when the crunch came. 

 

They did not know how to save in the fat years, Mr. Speaker.  

They knew how to spend but not how to save.  They did not 

save for the lean years. 

 

What did they do, Mr. Speaker?  They spent the money on the 

Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation.  They put the 

future of this province at risk, and because of that, Mr. Speaker, 

we do approve of this Bill of repealing The SMDC Act.  Thank 

you. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is with indeed a 

lot pleasure, I guess it would be, to talk to this issue, Mr. 

Speaker, having not expected to have such a luxury in this 

sitting of the Assembly.  Certainly we never would have 

expected that the NDP government of the day would have had 

the kind of turn-about in their thinking as they have had in the 

past six months on the nuclear issue, and it certainly, I think, 

comes with a lot of relief to most of the province. 

 

And some, I'm suspecting, Mr. Speaker, might be sitting over 

in their seats tonight thinking, why would they choose to talk 

about this uranium thing?  We've accepted it now; we're going 

to go ahead and do some of it in spite of the fact that we have 

some problems within our party.  Why would they choose to 

talk about this at some length? 

 

And the reason, Mr. Speaker, is quite simple.  We believe that 

there is a lot more that needs to be talked about and thought 

about, and we want to drive home to all of the members of the 

government, especially to the back-benchers, that all of these 

other spin-off effects are available and that they should be 

pursued with reasonable caution, but with some vigour. 

 

We feel, Mr. Speaker, that if we take the opportunity, when we 

have it, to point out to the members of the government what 

they can accomplish for our province, that they might take that 

one extra step.  They've gotten over the hurdle of the infighting 

within their political party.  We all witnessed the great struggle 

they had, and we understand it.  I can't say that I envy anybody 

in that position.  There certainly are some serious concerns 

about the use of nuclear energy and how it can affect people if 

it's not properly handled.  It certainly must have been a difficult 

time for that party to make the turn-about that they had to 

make. 

But I want to compliment the Premier for having accomplished 

that with his party.  There aren't that many things that we can 

compliment him on these days.  But certainly the decision he 

made to turn about their direction and to use the nuclear option 

to some extent is a great, positive step for our province and one 

that they should elaborate on and should now go out into the 

public and actually use as their mechanism to try to gain back 

some business confidence in our province -- especially for the 

northern part of our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I suspect that we have a tendency to forget sometimes about the 

importance of the North because it has a tendency to be out in 

the north of the timberline and the population is very small.  

And I suppose maybe there isn't much feedback up there 

because we don't likely have a live television hook-up up there.  

So the folks up North probably don't feed back to us very often 

about the things and the needs that they have in terms of jobs 

and security and a way of life. 

 

And so I think as time goes by they will be telling us about 

that.  The city of Saskatoon certainly will be benefiting greatly 

by the expansion of the nuclear industry.  My colleague has 

alluded to that positive spin-off with regards to the larger city 

often in competition with the city of Regina for the limelight in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And so now that we've explained to the members why we need 

their attention, we should go into it just a little bit deeper and 

explain to them not only how this Bill can benefit so many 

people if it's taken in the right direction, but where those 

directions could lead to so that they won't miss them. 

 

Fear is the word that comes to mind for many people when we 

talk about nuclear energy or nuclear things.  And obviously 

when any kind of an energy source or a fuel source is used as 

dramatically as uranium was in the Second World War and so 

many lives are taken in one fell swoop, it is only natural that all 

of civilization would not only take note, but also take upon 

itself a sense of fear whenever the topic is approached. 

 

It's only natural, and yet at the same time gasoline is a source 

of energy that has driven the machinery of war all through our 

last century and a half.  Gasoline -- if it hadn't been available, 

we couldn't have had tanks.  We wouldn't have been able to 

have trucks.  There wouldn't have been airplanes.  We would 

have had to fight the war on foot.  First World War, Second 

World War, the Korean War -- take any of them. 

 

But nobody is afraid of gasoline even though once in a while it 

still blows up.  If you're not really careful with it, it will burn 

you really badly.  Gasoline is a very flammable product, and 

yet people don't fear the use of it.  We'll drive up to the gas 

pumps and fill our car up with it and drive merrily on our way 

without ever considering the fact that it's a very dangerous 

product.  I can assure you though that there are many people 

that have been seriously injured if they use gasoline to wash, 

say, a starter on a tractor or something like that and it ignites. 



March 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 341 

So, Mr. Speaker, my point is that fear is something that 

sometimes gets out of hand.  And in the nuclear industry I'd be 

the last one to say that we should go headlong without caution, 

but the fear is based a lot on the way the product was used and 

abused.  And if we use it with common sense in the way that 

technology has taught us, I believe that we have to trust the 

people that have researched all of these uses, that have done the 

work in the background and taken the chances with their very 

lives.  They work with it on a daily basis in research for quite a 

few decades already now. 

 

And the reality, Mr. Speaker, is that very few people are hurt 

any worse from the nuclear industry than are hurt from 

explosions of gasoline or any of our other power options.  

You've all heard about how the GMC (General Motors 

Corporation) trucks, if they're hit from the side, will burn and 

explode.  And many people have been burned up.  There have 

been law suits and all kinds of things. 

 

But we don't hear a hue and cry from the NDP or from the rest 

of the world saying that we should ban gasoline.  In fact, they 

would be the first ones to drive up to the tanks tomorrow to fill 

up their vehicle to make sure they don't have to walk to work in 

this cold, icy weather. 

 

Now nuclear, of course, is not as simple as gasoline in some 

ways because obviously you do have to take more pronounced 

precautions in using it.  But we do know what we're handling.  

We've got lots of scientific data and lots of scientists that have 

told us how to handle it, and there really isn't a problem if 

you're willing to follow the rules and follow the guidelines. 

 

One of the things that I've learned about nuclear energy though 

is that we do have to be very careful if we employ it.  And I'm 

suggesting to the government members, Mr. Speaker, that they 

take the advice of some of the people in Europe where nuclear 

devices and nuclear power plants have been in existence for 

many years. 

 

The problem that they're having, of course, is that their plants 

are getting old and the cement grows old along with it.  And 

one of the things that people in the concrete industry will tell 

you is that there's nothing more dangerous than old concrete 

when you depend on it for your life and your safety.  And the 

problem in Europe, of course, is the fact that these power plants 

are now growing older and no one is willing to spend the 

money to rebuild them.  Therein lies the whole problem of the 

fear of nuclear accident. 

 

We have to, as a society that produces uranium, convince the 

people that buy it that they have to agree to replace the broken 

and worn-out parts as they're needed.  That's a world 

responsibility, Mr. Speaker, a world responsibility that the 

sellers have to take and point out to the people that buy the 

product and use it.  If they're not willing to replace the concrete 

in their ageing facilities, they will blow up. 

I have that on firsthand from some of my wife's relatives out of 

Switzerland.  They have a power plant there.  And the problem 

that her cousin points out to me is that they've become so 

dependent on the use of the nuclear energy that nobody wants 

to live without it.  But at the same time, nobody wants to spend 

the money to fix it.  So it is a great dilemma.  And we have to 

be cautioned not to fall into that same dilemma if we happen to 

take that extra step and bring in a nuclear plant here. 

 

(1930) 

 

As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, I even have in my mind a 

good location that I could suggest.  I would suggest that you 

could take this next step and we could build a nuclear reactor 

just north of Burstall along the South Saskatchewan River.  

And you would say the argument there is that there isn't quite 

enough water in that system perhaps to cool a nuclear plant.  

Well I have the answer for that too because it's been pointed 

out to me by some of my constituents, we could quite easily 

bring some water from the North Saskatchewan, divert it down 

to the South Saskatchewan, irrigate with it on the way, run it 

through the power plant to cool the plant and run it into the 

South Saskatchewan River, and it will all end up back in the 

same place up in the North Saskatchewan River going out its 

normal process.  In the mean time the warm water could be 

used for some irrigation in the Burstall area and we could grow 

some hay crops for the much-needed feed stocks that we 

require during some of the droughts that our corner of the 

province is so famous for. 

 

Now somebody's going to say, boy this guy is really 

off-the-wall.  But the realization is . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- But the realization is after they think about it, 

that this not only is workable, it's probably something that's 

going to happen.  The first time I heard it I thought, it sounds a 

little off-the-wall.  Whoever heard of taking water out of the 

North Saskatchewan River and bringing it down to the South 

Saskatchewan River?  Well I hadn't, and I was quite frankly a 

little bit amazed by the idea and I thought, this can't possibly 

work.  But I did a little research as you folk's over there might 

try some day -- a little research might go a long ways. 

 

The reality is that it's not that hard to bring water down from 

the North Saskatchewan to the South Saskatchewan.  And 

believe it or not, it all runs into the same spot in the end.  And 

it wouldn't hurt anybody because the folks along the North 

Saskatchewan have got lots more water than they really need at 

this present time, so why not run it through a nuclear power 

plant and cool it off and then use some of that warm water for 

irrigation.  Sounds like a good idea to me. 

 

Well you may not agree with the location.  Mr. Speaker, they 

might not.  But they could always pick another one and I'm 

sure that it would serve just as 



342 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1993 

well.  My colleague from Kindersley thought it would be a lot 

better in his constituency than in mine, and I suppose maybe 

we could have a draw some place, maybe a hat, and all our 

names will be in and we'll pick one and that's where the plant 

would go. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- No, it goes to Kindersley. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- No he says, it goes to Kindersley.  Well if he 

wants it that bad, I suppose that we'll probably have to share 

and build two. 

 

But really, Mr. Speaker, there are many other uses for the 

uranium in our mines and it is so very important to us -- the 

jobs alone.  I have some cousins that have worked in the 

uranium mines.  One of them told me that he worked on the 

mole -- I don't know if the members opposite know what a 

mole is, but it's a big machine that needs expert operation -- 

and he worked in the mine. 

 

He told me that you have to take some very extreme 

precautions when you work there because obviously you're 

working with a very deadly material.  And they would work the 

right number of hours in the mine, and the doctor would check 

them, and it was all quite safe because they were monitored. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, with all due respect, if the NDP employ 

some of these spin-offs and use the nuclear option to our 

benefit, and follow the guidelines of the people that are 

working in the mines and have worked there for many years, I 

don't think they'll have near the problems that they're worried 

about. 

 

Quite frankly, my cousin looks quite healthy.  I haven't seem 

him shining in the dark yet.  It just seemed that he was quite 

natural and normal after he worked there.  So I don't think 

there's any problem at all. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the reality is that when people get so fearful 

of a thing that they're afraid to touch it, they sometimes lose 

perspective of the reality or even sanity.  It becomes a kind of 

craziness that we get with fear.  And yet they will forget that if 

they've got a cancer and need to be treated, they might go to 

Saskatoon and have a radioactive treatment right in the 

University Hospital, and they may even come to discover that 

there's been a small nuclear plant running on that campus, in 

that city, for many, many years. 

 

And it hasn't blown up.  The people of Saskatoon don't shine in 

the dark either.  And many people who have had diseases cured 

with the reactor materials and equipment that are used there are 

quite indebted and quite thankful to have had the right and the 

ability to be able to use those pieces of equipment to get 

themselves healthy again. 

 

The dangers, of course, can't be minimized.  There are risks 

involved and we have to be very careful with the product and 

how we use it.  But we can overcome those things, Mr. 

Speaker.  Other people have done it quite well.  We've seen 

some consumer resistance, of course, and in the process of food 

preservation, I 

recall some few years back that we had in our store packages of 

food that didn't have to be refrigerated.  They had been treated 

with radioactivity in a particular kind of a container and in so 

doing all of the things that could cause food to decay or to rot 

or to perish had been destroyed, and yet the food was perfectly 

good.  But there was consumer resistance because there was a 

fear at that time planted in the minds of the people, mainly by 

the wing of the NDP Party that didn't like nuclear things, and 

people refused to buy the product in sufficient quantities in 

order to make it economically feasible. 

 

The reality of life is, though, that in some parts of the world 

people have had to use these kinds of foodstuffs to stop from 

perishing; they simply had no other way to get food.  So, Mr. 

Speaker, what's happened?  They've used these foods that were 

treated in this manner, and lo and behold, they don't shine in 

the dark either, and they're still alive and they're quite healthy.  

And the process does work and it is not one that has been 

proven to be detrimental to people's health. 

 

We talked about . . . A few minutes ago my colleague 

mentioned that we are very concerned about our ozone layer.  

And I think it's very important that we take consideration of 

that and play our role, although I have to say out front that I 

don't feel that the people in Saskatchewan should share as big a 

blame for the holes in the ozone as do our bigger cities around 

the world.  Obviously where populations are concentrated they 

will emit more deadly fumes in probably one day than 

Saskatchewan would in a whole year, but we'll have to do our 

part.  There's no getting away from that.  We are members of 

the world society, and being members of the world society we 

have to do our part to try to protect the world that we live in. 

 

And I think that we have to then say, if there is a power option 

or an energy option that is not serious in the depletion of our 

ozone, we must promote that and use it not only for ourselves 

and not only to sell to people around the world, but we have to 

sell the idea.  We sell them the product and we sell them the 

idea.  We have to educate them along with the product. 

 

And there's nothing wrong with pointing out to people that, if 

you're going to buy our product we don't want you building 

bombs.  That's been done in the past and it should be done in 

the future.  And when the NDP go out to sell the uranium that 

they're going to get out of the mines that they've now decided 

are okay to have, I suggest to them, Mr. Speaker, that they do 

exactly that; that they send an education team along with it to 

tell them how to use it and where to use it, and lay out a set of 

rules that we believe should be followed in their use of our 

products. 

 

But at that point of course, Mr. Speaker, our responsibility has 

to end and we have to get back to the ramifications of the good 

the industry can bring to us.  Somebody has said recently that 

we'll have too much power in Saskatchewan.  We're going to 

burn a bunch of coal and put in some natural gas options, 



March 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 343 

and we may have too much power. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I dare say that the people that live in areas 

of the world where they have brownouts and blackouts that are 

planned because there isn't enough electricity, would not be 

ready to accept the fact that we have too much power. 

 

In fact I suggest to the members of the government they might 

have a ready market to sell some electricity and go ahead and 

produce it.  We've got the raw materials.  We have got the 

uranium.  We already dig it up; we're not afraid to do that.  

We've got the water to cool the plant.  We've got the location; I 

just told you where it would be.  I've told you how you could 

even irrigate along with it. 

 

And now I'll tell you where the market is.  Just south of us the 

Americans will buy any amount of electricity that we can 

produce that we don't need.  And there's nothing wrong with 

selling them a finished product.  Why would we continuously 

sell our uranium to the Americans to produce their own 

electricity when they could just as easily buy the finished 

product from us and we could have the jobs and the created 

activity and the spin-off here at home? 

 

And there's nothing wrong with that, Mr. Speaker, because 

whether we like it or not there are 300-and-some nuclear 

plants, I think it is -- I may have that figure wrong -- but there 

are many nuclear plants around the world.  Whether we like it 

or not, if they blow up in China or in Russia or in Africa, the 

effects as the residue comes around the world, as our world is 

round and does spin around, the effects would probably be as 

devastating for us as if we have one blow up at home. 

 

One of my colleagues one day said, what's the difference if you 

blow up now or two minutes from now? You're still blown up. 

 

So you might as well keep the thing at home where you can 

watch it and monitor it and make sure that it's fixed right and 

that it's getting the proper repairs, and that the proper 

precautions are being taken in the operation. 

 

Now why not do that at home with Canadians who are sensitive 

to the needs of others.  Whereas other parts of the world we 

have people in control of governments that are not sensitive to 

the needs of people, who are not sensitive to whether or not 

people live or die. 

 

The reality is that we've got the experience and history, Mr. 

Speaker, of people like Joseph Stalin who killed millions of 

people out of no regard whatever for humankind.  Those kind 

of people shouldn't be in charge of something that needs the 

attention of nuclear power plants.  We ought to do that in a 

country like Canada where the people who know how to do it, 

who can do it and will do it, have the opportunity to do it and 

take care of this very vital resource. 

 

We've also talked, Mr. Speaker, about whether or not these 

things should be privatized or government 

controlled.  And I understand that this Bill leans in the 

direction of the government privatizing the uranium industry 

further.  And I think that's great. 

 

I compliment the Premier again.  Once again, not only has he 

taken a vital industry from the proverbial scrap pile of the NDP 

policy book and made it a vital part of reality in Saskatchewan 

today, but now he's going to privatize it so that it actually will 

work.  I shudder to think what the nuclear industry would look 

like if government had total control over it.  And so I'm happy 

about that prospect. 

 

I'm sure though, that the MLAs in the back benches must be 

very confused in this government.  I'm quite sure they don't 

know exactly who to follow or which direction to jump any 

more.  Last year they were told to fight nuclear expansion and 

nuclear development with every ounce of energy they have.  

Then this year they're told to support the development and 

expansion with every ounce of energy that they have as well.  

So it must be a very confusing time for them and I don't envy 

their position. 

 

We have tremendous world opportunities, Mr. Speaker.  

Uranium sells very cheap in the world market, in my opinion 

far too cheap for the benefits it can provide.  For the amount of 

energy that you can get out of a small bit of uranium we 

shouldn't be selling it nearly as cheap.  I don't know how we 

get around that but it's something that the NDP should work on.  

We should definitely be compensated a lot more for the raw 

product when we sell it, and we should try to sell the finished 

product as much as we can. 

 

In Alberta they had the oil boom -- the oil boom that put 

Alberta ahead of Saskatchewan, not only by billions of dollars, 

but also hundreds of thousands of people.  People just naturally 

go to places where there's activity that creates jobs and wealth.  

And they went to Alberta. 

 

And we have that same opportunity with uranium, Mr. 

Speaker.  There's no question in my mind that we could have 

the boom out of Saskatchewan's uranium, if properly handled, 

that Alberta had out of their oil patch. 

 

We've been sitting on it a long time.  But what good is it to just 

sit on it for a long time?  It's usable.  We know how to handle 

it.  Let's put it to work and get ourselves out of this recession.  

Let's get ourselves out of the doom and gloom.  Let's use it to 

create the jobs and the forward thrust that our province needs.  

There are other areas of opportunity, but this is one that is 

clearly available to us now.  We don't have to search for it.  We 

don't have to have any commissions or boards study it.  We 

know it's there. 

 

Then we've had people say that there is problems with deciding 

what to do with the waste and all that.  Well, Mr. Speaker, one 

of my constituents said, you dig uranium out of a mine, is that 

true?  And I said, as far as I know.  And he said, when you 

finish with the mine you've got an empty hole that's quite 

radioactive yet?  Yes, I suspected that's true too, I told him.  

Well, he 



344 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1993 

said, why wouldn't you just put the waste back into the same 

mine shaft where you took the original ore out of?  If nature 

provided that it's safe enough to be there in the natural state to 

start with, why wouldn't nature take care of it in that mine 

shaft?  He said even to be safe about it, you could probably 

cement it in and all those kind of good things. 

 

To tell you the truth, Mr. Speaker, it made good sense to me.  

And I think we ought to have the government take a long, hard 

look at using those kind of alternatives so that not only we take 

care of the waste that we have, but we take care of the waste 

that's being misappropriated throughout some of the world. 

 

We have heard stories of people pushing barrels full of 

uranium waste into the ocean.  I don't know if that's true or not. 

I've never been there to see it, but I hear these things.  And that 

worries me.  So what we ought to do is bring these barrels and 

put them back in the mines and cement them in there, and we 

will at least know where they are so we can watch them and 

keep them out of harm's way. 

 

(1945) 

 

We not only provide opportunity and employment, Mr. 

Speaker, we now provide safety for the world by taking the 

proper action.  And I think the NDP could do well to follow 

that kind of a course of action, and I don't think we need a 

whole bunch of studies or commissions to do that either. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I just think that while we are here talking 

about this, we should also point out for the members, the fact 

that we can do a lot in terms of saving the oil and gas and other 

depletable resources we have as well, by using this power 

source.  And I want to point out to the members that oil and gas 

wells don't run for ever. 

 

I sometimes think we get to taking them for granted because 

they are here in our province and we have them and they're so 

nice and convenient, and somebody seems to always go out and 

do all the work and gets them producing, and we seem to enjoy 

everything.  But they're not for ever.  In spite of the fact that in 

Kuwait, the great fires are out and they say there is so much oil 

there, somehow I feel that if you keep burning up a product that 

you take from the ground, eventually it might be depleted. 

 

I've seen oil wells that have pumped for a few years and gone 

dry and been abandoned because there's no more oil in them.  

Well the nuclear option can help us with our atmosphere; it can 

help us with our depleting supplies of those things that we 

need. 

 

So quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, I don't know why the 

government would even hesitate but to get right busy and try to 

expand this industry and just go to work and produce. 

 

There are a lot of people that agree with our point of view on 

this, Mr. Speaker.  I have from the Leader-Post here, way back 

to 1989, the present Premier.  It said: 

. . . the proposed reactor would be judged on its merits if he 

becomes premier although he takes a dim view of it being in 

private hands. 

 

 But he wouldn't dismiss it out of hand, as a member of his 

NDP caucus did earlier. 

 

So even at that time, the present Premier was looking at the 

option as one that was good for Saskatchewan.  We've had 

other people that have talked about this energy situation and 

how the nuclear industry should be used.  We've got clippings 

from several: the former premier of the province; we've got 

several people from the federal government who have made 

comments.  And my colleagues are going to go into that a little 

deeper, I'm sure, Mr. Speaker, so I'm not going to quote all of 

them. 

 

But we have in an article here about the spin-off benefits for 

the members opposite who wanted me to go into this a little 

deeper.  And I heard them calling for that, so I'll quote a couple 

of little quotes here: 

 

 Those promoting the nuclear option say it will provide more 

than a new source of electricity, it also will be a major 

catalyst to economic development. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have private people saying that.  We 

have industry people like: 

 

 David Bock points (out) to nuclear medicine which had its 

beginnings in research conducted at the U of S, saying the 

province's failure to retain that portion of the nuclear industry 

has cost millions of dollars. 

 

Now this was back in the 1980s, Mr. Speaker, when the 

industry spokesmen were saying that we ought to have 

expanded the medical spin-off of the uranium industry a lot 

more than we had been doing.  We'd already lost a lot of our 

potential by not going after it faster. 

 

So rather than crying over spilled milk, Mr. Speaker, I'm saying 

to the NDP, what we've got to do is get right to work on this 

and promote the industry, promote sales, get us some activity, 

get us some jobs, get us out of this recession.  Use this weapon 

against poverty in our province.  Use it to the best of our ability 

so that we have a good place for our children to grow up with 

some prosperity instead of all the doom and gloom. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 

wasn't going to get into this debate today, Mr. Speaker, but I 

want to make a few remarks considering what I hear coming 

across from the other side.  They're talking about SMDC being 

in such a mess when they took over.  But I just want to indicate 

to the members opposite that if it wasn't for SMDC, we 

wouldn't have the situation that we have up in 



March 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 345 

northern Saskatchewan right now regarding the mining 

industry. 

 

I want to touch on a few items.  First of all, I want to assure 

you that it most certainly wasn't a mess when you took over.  

SMDC was a Crown corporation that was working well.  It was 

getting assets for the province in the field of uranium.  And I 

want to indicate to you quite clearly that all the activity that 

took place in the mining industry in northern Saskatchewan 

took place under SMDC.  All the exploration that took place in 

northern Saskatchewan, the Cigar Lakes and the McArthur 

Rivers and in the Midwest Lake, that was all through SMDC's 

initiatives.  They spent the money.  They had joint ventures 

with other corporations, and that's how we arrived at these 

large deposits. 

 

And I will indicate to you what that meant to this province 

before you folks came along in 1982 and sold off all the assets 

that we had.  We had 50 per cent of the assets in Key Lake, 

which is the biggest operating uranium mine in the world.  We 

had 20 per cent in the Cluff Lake deposit, and that's a fairly 

large deposit also.  And we had 50 per cent in Cigar Lake and 

Midwest joint ventures.  We were 50 per cent shareholders.  

The citizens of Saskatchewan were 50 per cent shareholders. 

 

Let me tell you, these were good assets.  They were good 

assets, as two of the members, including the Leader of the 

Opposition, the member from Thunder Creek, indicated just 

what it means to Saskatchewan, the uranium industry.  And I 

want to say that the price of uranium has dropped in the last 

few years, but it's on the upswing now.  And once they get rid 

of the stockpile in Russia, you're going to see the prices are 

going to continue to rise. 

 

And I think that one of the last big sales that was made . . . And 

these are long-term contracts; they're not at spot prices of 7, $8 

a tonne.  They are brought in at larger prices, and they're 

brought in at long-term contracts.  And the last country and the 

utility . . . a small country with four and a half million people is 

Finland -- living right beside Russia, which has stockpiles of 

uranium -- but they decided in their wisdom to come to Canada 

and to Saskatchewan and to get their long-term supply of 

uranium for their utilities.  And that's Finland, a small country 

right beside Russia.  So they have made a name for themselves, 

and that was created through SMDC. 

 

But we had assets until the Tories came along and they sold 

them off.  We had assets in the oil industry . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well I just tell the member over there: we had 

assets in the oil industry, we had assets in the coal industry, and 

we owned the forest industry in the province until you came 

along and sold off all those assets.  And that's why we're in the 

mess we are in this province today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- If the Conservative Party across the way 

had not sold off all the assets, we wouldn't be in 

the mess that we are in today.  Let me tell you, if we were 

getting the revenue from the oil industry, from the forest 

industry, which is booming right now, and the uranium 

industry, we wouldn't be faced with a $15 billion debt that's 

over our head right now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- Another thing under SMDC, under SMDC 

they set the rules as to how the uranium industry was going to 

be developed in this province.  And they were the strictest rules 

any place that you would find in this industry in the world.  

The environmental regulations that were put in were the 

toughest in the world.  Health and safety to the workers who 

worked in that industry are the toughest in the world.  And they 

were put in by SMDC.  And I say to you, it was a good 

corporation.  They set the regulations. 

 

And I just want to go back to tell you what it meant to northern 

Saskatchewan.  When the uranium industry was being 

developed in the early '50s, there was no such a thing as a 

surface lease.  We had local people up in Uranium City area 

where Eldorado Nuclear was operating, and all their employees 

came from other parts of Canada and other parts of the world.  

And the local people in the Fond-du-Lac area and the Black 

Lake area and Stony Rapids and Camsell Portage, they never 

got jobs in that industry, very few of them did. 

 

SMDC made sure that there was a surface lease agreement 

signed.  And what that surface lease agreement meant to 

northern Saskatchewan, I tell you it meant lots.  It meant that 

we were going to get 50 per cent of the jobs in the mining 

industries that were operating.  It meant that we were going to 

get 50 per cent of the construction jobs when they were 

building the new mines. 

 

And that took place at Cluff Lake.  At Cluff Lake, when that 

mine was developed, 50 per cent of the labour force were from 

northern Saskatchewan.  That's the first time northern 

Saskatchewan, the residents of northern Saskatchewan, have 

ever had an opportunity to work in the industry. 

 

And the same thing applied to Key Lake.  The surface lease 

was signed there with the Key Lake mines.  Again, 50 per cent 

of northerners had an opportunity to work in the mine when it 

was built -- 50 per cent of northerners had an opportunity to 

work in the construction phase of one of the biggest mines in 

the world and also 60 per cent of the apprentice jobs went to 

northerners. 

 

And then what did you do?  You came in in 1982, and you 

decided we didn't need a surface lease.  You decided in your 

wisdom that we didn't need the surface lease that was created 

by SMDC.  You decided that the industry would control itself, 

and they could hire to the best of their ability.  And what 

happened?  At Cluff Lake they always maintained the 50 per 

cent.  But you went to Key Lake, it got down to around 12, 14 

per cent, and that was Tory policy.  And that was the type of 

policy that you carried out, not only in this province 



346 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1993 

but in Saskatchewan. 

 

If there was ever a mess created, it was created by that 10 

Conservative members and their colleagues who are not here 

any more.  They were the ones who created the mess that we 

have in the province.  As I indicated, if we had all the assets . . . 

and let me give you one small example -- Cigar Lake.  

Saskatchewan and SMDC had a 50 per cent share in in Cigar 

Lake.  There's 365 million pounds of uranium in the Cigar 

Lake deposit -- 365 million pounds.  And at the way the prices 

are going right now, when that mine is developed, if it gets the 

go-ahead, ever is developed, it could be selling at 20 to $25 a 

pound.  Now you just figure that out, what that means to this 

province.  Just figure that out what it means to this province.  

And that's one deposit.  And the citizens of Saskatchewan, they 

owned that.  They were the owners until you came along and 

you sold it.  And I say that you are the ones that got us into this 

problem. 

 

You're talking about SMDC and you're talking about one 

specific industry today. You're talking about the uranium 

industry.  Well I'll tell you, it's not just the uranium industry 

that would have got us out of this mess, it's all the assets that I 

indicated -- the coal, the forestry, the oil -- all our assets you 

sold.  And that's why, that's why we're in this problem today. 

 

But I just want to close off by saying that most certainly 

SMDC was a good corporation. My colleague from 

Cumberland in his speeches always indicated that it was a good 

corporation.  And I tell you they believed in fairness, not just to 

the province but in the regions where we had 

underdevelopment in northern Saskatchewan.  They made sure 

that the asset was up in the North, that Northerners got their 

fair share.  And now we have to redo that again and build that 

up.  But we most certainly intend to continue to work to make 

sure that Northerners get their fair share. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I'm not going to say any more, but just 

to indicate that I am surprised at what I'm hearing over there, 

that they want to blame the New Democratic government for 

the mess we're in. 

 

I tell you, and the citizens of Saskatchewan know full well who 

created this problem in . . . who created the problem that we 

have in Saskatchewan, and it's that group across there who sold 

off all our assets including all the assets that SMDC had built 

up. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(2000) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 

pleased to rise today and join this debate.  I planned to say 

some of the things that the member for Athabasca said, but he 

so ably covered the topics that I would have chosen, that I want 

to stick strictly to Bill 25, which is an Act to repeal The 

Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation Act, that 

being the title. 

This Act has three sections. Section 1 that says: 

 

 This Act may be cited as The Saskatchewan Mining 

Development Corporation Repeal Act.  (That's the entire 

section.) 

 

Section 2 which says: 

 

 (1)  The Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation 

Act is repealed. 

 

 (2) On the day that this Act comes into force, the assets and 

liabilities of the corporation continued pursuant to 

The Saskatchewan Mining Development 

Corporation Act are transferred at their book value 

to the Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

That's section 2.  And section 3 which says: 

 

 This Act comes into force on a day to be fixed by 

proclamation of the Lieutenant Governor. 

 

That's the entire Bill, Mr. Speaker.  I have been listening to 

speeches all day about a Bill that does two things: it repeals the 

SMDC Act, and it moves assets at book value from SMDC, as 

it's wound up, to CIC Saskatchewan.  And that's all this Act 

does. 

 

This Bill does absolutely nothing about to mine uranium or not 

to mine, to generate power by a CANDU (Canadian deuterium 

uranium) nuclear power plant, or by hydro, or by coal, or wind, 

or solar, or demand management, or any other energy 

conservation measures.  This Bill does nothing about jobs; 

nothing with respect to health care; nothing with respect to 

education, highways, social programs, water supply or water 

diversion, as I heard a member opposite talking about a 

grandiose scheme of water diversion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am proud to say that other than the PC 

(Progressive Conservative) Party that doesn't deal with issues 

at their annual convention, the New Democratic Party deals 

with these issues and many other issues at our annual 

convention.  Year after year we discuss all sorts of issues, and 

we have some grandiose debates at our annual conventions -- 

debates that I am intensely proud of, Mr. Speaker.  We deal 

with these issues and then we come with our policies.  We talk 

to the people of Saskatchewan about what we believe in. 

 

I am, Mr. Speaker, pleased to say that I support Bill 25 which 

one, repeals the SMDC Act; two, moves the assets from SMDC 

at book value to Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan.  I will be supporting this Bill which does those 

two things. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 

appreciate the opportunity to become involved in this debate.  

Originally I was not -- I was like the member from Athabasca 

-- not going to get involved.  But for 



March 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 347 

an obvious reason, I'm still a home-grown country boy from the 

constituency of Rosthern and one of my bigger towns in 

Rosthern is of course the town of Warman.  And everybody 

knows that Warman was in the limelight a few years ago when 

the uranium issue was a very, very deep concern of many 

people in this province. 

 

So I do that with some trepidation.  But having gone through 

two elections where my constituents know where I stand on the 

issue, that I'm certainly not one to say we must bury our head 

in the sand, we must ignore the situation.  I'm always of the 

type that says, progress is progress.  We must continue to forge 

ahead.  We must do it in a very conservative fashion.  We must 

know what we're doing.  We have to have all the safeguards in 

place.  But certainly, Mr. Speaker, that is no reason to become 

paranoid about the situation and no reason not to go ahead. 

 

Now having said that, Mr. Speaker, I was very pleased to 

finally see a member from the North get up -- and I have a lot 

of respect for the member that just spoke from the constituency 

of Athabasca.  I know he speaks from his heart about some of 

the concerns that he was expressing. 

 

And I also know and I also appreciate the fact that he got up 

and, for all of Saskatchewan to hear and to see, very eloquently 

put forth from his mind the benefits that the uranium industry 

can have for the people of the North and indeed for all of the 

people of Saskatchewan.  And I concur with him on those 

benefits.  Essentially I think we are thinking the same. 

 

And I would also give the reason why I'm up here to talk 

briefly in this debate, and that is that I think the government is 

to be commended for the step that they are taking.  And I will 

certainly be going along with the member from Regina North 

when he said that he's going to be supporting this Bill.  And I 

will also, because I think it is a culmination or the coming to 

fruition, the process that we began where we try to devolve 

government from control as much as possible. 

 

Now what essentially this does, Mr. Speaker, is take an Act, 

that I understand from the minister, the Associate Minister of 

Finance, from his remarks earlier this afternoon . . . SMDC, 

according to him, was set up by an OC (order in council), and I 

was not aware of that, Mr. Speaker.  I thought it was a 

legislative Act of this legislature that had set up SMDC, but 

apparently it had not.  But all the more reason I would suggest, 

Mr. Speaker, to do away with something that the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council has set up. 

 

But we find now that the government is finally taking the 

ultimate step which we began, Mr. Speaker, when we set up 

Cameco.  Cameco was an amalgamation of Eldorado Nuclear 

with SMDC. 

 

Now for the government to say, we're going to take SMDC, 

repeal that Act, and put all of the assets of Cameco into CIC, 

the Crown Investments Corporation, is I think a step in the 

right direction. 

Because what it does, it once removes, removes a step further, 

this corporation and the mining industry from the direct control 

and the direct tentacles of government.  And I suggest to you, 

Mr. Speaker, that that is certainly the right direction to go. 

 

But just before everybody feels that I'm getting a little bit soft 

here, I must take issue with the member of Athabasca on some 

of the points that he raised. 

 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, the fact that government owns 

something does not mean that all of the control and so on and 

the benefits are vested in the people.  That, Mr. Speaker, with 

due respect, is a typical socialist way of observing the world, 

that if government controls things it's automatically better.  

More government control in your life, the better, because 

government is after all the wise, all-knowing institution out 

there that will do proper for you.  And, Mr. Speaker, I beg to 

differ from that. 

 

We have examples of where government has controlled 

industry.  We have an example of that vested interest that 

people had for example when government controlled PAPCO 

(Prince Albert Pulp Company).  Now is that a classical 

example of what governments can do for people?  Well if it is, 

Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to you that many people in the 

province of Saskatchewan are saying wow, do we really want 

that kind of control. 

 

We found out that PAPCO was losing $91,000 a day for the 

taxpayer of this province, Mr. Speaker -- $91,000 a day.  A 

drain.  A drain on the Consolidated Fund.  So we did a deal as a 

government, Mr. Speaker.  We did a deal with Weyerhaeuser.  

They came in.  They not only absorbed that loss and freed that 

burden from the Saskatchewan taxpayer, but part of the deal, 

Mr. Speaker, was that they would also increase their 

investment in the province of Saskatchewan.  They spent a 

quarter of a billion dollars -- $250 million I believe, if my 

memory serves me correct. 

 

They built a paper mill, a paper mill, Mr. Minister from 

Athabasca.  And you know the impact that that paper mill has 

had on the North.  Not only did they create -- and I hesitate to 

say how many hundreds of jobs because I can't remember, 

quite frankly -- but it created hundreds of new jobs, a quarter of 

a million . . . a quarter of a billion, $250 million investment. 

 

And we find now that the poplar trees in the North that used to 

be waste products, waste products because we only wanted the 

spruce because that's what you can use for pulp . . . And the 

result was that we don't have those trees being wasted any 

more.  We can harvest the hardwoods as well, bring them into 

Prince Albert, put them into the paper mill, and grind out 

top-quality paper like I'm holding in my hand right now -- 

top-notch paper that is going throughout the entire world. 

 

So from going from a government corporation, from a 

government-owned, from a people-owned industry that was 

losing us money every day in the tens of thousands of dollars, a 

deal was struck to get 



348 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1993 

Weyerhaeuser in.  And that has been to the benefit of the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now granted, because that was done by a Tory government, of 

course it was no good.  So this current government has 

renegotiated the deal.  Instead of having a long-term pay out 

coming in to the people of Saskatchewan, we find out now that 

the deal was struck where we took about a fifth of the money 

that we could have had, and we took it in immediately.  So we 

had some short-term gain, but over the long period it's going to 

cost the taxpayer money. 

 

But I mean that's the way that this government wants to do 

business, so I guess that's how it'll have to be.  But the point 

being, Mr. Speaker, that just because government owns things, 

and government runs things, does not make it better.  It is no . . 

. somehow a magical solution that things are going to be better 

and that the profits will necessarily accrue to the provincial 

taxpayer, because, I suggest to you, members opposite, that just 

because we have Weyerhaeuser running that deal now, while 

we have Cargill in the Plaine here with the fertilizer plants and 

Saferco, the benefits still accrue to this province.  The benefits 

still accrue to the taxpayers through royalties, through the 

spin-offs that are here.  And had this not happened, Mr. 

Speaker, I suggest to all members opposite, we wouldn't have 

that fertilizer plant now that is churning out fertilizer around 

the clock, going great guns, can hardly keep up, adding to the 

provincial treasury, which means that the Consolidated Fund 

will have more money in it now than it ever would have had. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I'm saying to you now that the mentality that 

we had in the '70s under SMDC was not necessarily . . . it may 

have done some good things that I'm not aware of, so I won't 

take that away from them entirely, but certainly when we have 

the mentality of a socialist government running around, buying 

dry holes in the ground, Mr. Speaker, spending literally billions 

of dollars, buying potash mines, dry holes in the ground . . . 

They were there already.  I mean it was nothing new.  There 

were no new jobs being created, gentlemen.  It didn't create a 

single new job.  There were no spin-off activities as a result of 

that expenditure, but I'll tell you what you did do.  You went to 

New York and you went to Toronto and you borrowed money.  

You borrowed money and we had to pay that interest rate for 

years and years and years.  That is a drawback, Mr. Speaker, 

that I think we have to make sure that we are aware of. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased that members on the 

opposite side are starting to get to their feet, they are starting to 

make their points known, and some of the points are certainly 

valid, but, Mr. Speaker, I think what we are ultimately doing 

here is we're looking at a Bill that's going to do away with 

SMDC.  SMDC we know is a uranium mining giant, and well 

it should be when we take a look at our natural assets.  It's 

something I think that we as Saskatchewan people can certainly 

be proud of, and I think, Mr. Speaker, that that is one of the 

reasons why we find that the Premier of this province, the 

Premier of this province has 

changed his mind. 

 

(2015) 

 

During the election, prior to the election, he was saying 

uranium is not for us, uranium was not for us.  Since the 

election, I think that what we have seen is that the pressure of 

the people who need jobs, the pressure from his own members, 

the pressure from his own back-benchers was such that he 

finally caved in to his philosophical bent which the NDP Party 

has traditionally held and that is, no uranium.  They were going 

to close them down.  He was prepared to close them down.  He 

was prepared to create unemployment.  He was prepared to 

shut down businesses. He was prepared to depress the economy 

in the North even further, even further, by saying that as the 

jobs were created in the North, the uranium ones would be 

phased out. 

 

Now he said that.  And he changed his mind.  And we're glad 

for that.  On behalf of all of the people and certainly on behalf 

of all of the members on the opposition benches here, are very 

glad that he has done that. 

 

I don't think some of his colleagues are necessarily very happy.  

I know there are a number of them that are not.  And what we 

on this side are disappointed in, is that they will not take their 

place, that they will not speak, that they will not make their 

views known publicly, in a public way, because I think that 

would contribute to the debate.  However, that is not to be the 

case. 

 

I know that we have the member from Regina Rosemont who 

has been known to be vocal on this topic.  Certainly the 

member from Saskatoon Broadway.  I would like to see these 

members stand in their places and bring forth their concerns.  

Because, Mr. Speaker, because, Mr. Speaker, I suppose we 

could call them environmentalists, that that is the basis of their 

concern.  I think that to a degree it's the concern of all of us.  

Certainly we cannot go into something like this without being 

absolutely sure of the consequences of any actions that we will 

be taking. 

 

The environmentalists are concerned that Cameco was selling 

uranium that ended up in weapons.  And of course we also 

know that Cameco has very vigorously denied that allegation.  

The allegations have even been made that Cameco was 

involved in the production of uranium bullets used in the 

Persian Gulf War. I've heard that version.  And of course, then 

Cameco has certainly come a long, long way from its 

inceptions, from a mere Saskatchewan Crown corporation to an 

arms producer as such. 

 

But we are certainly encouraged by the NDP's pro-mining 

stance. 

 

But we're not the only ones, Mr. Speaker, that are encouraged.  

I think Cameco itself is encouraged by this trend, this stance 

that are being proposed here -- and that is that Cameco is now 

talking about the next 



March 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 349 

step in this progression. And the next step is that about a safe 

disposal site in the province, a safe disposal site of uranium 

waste products. 

 

I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, right at the outset of a discussion 

on that topic, that that is something that is of concern, I think, 

to all of us, to go to that step.  And I'm certainly not suggesting 

that we're ready for something like that. But again, in the 

progression of this entire situation, is it something that should 

be looked at?  Is it something that should be prepared for? 

 

Or is that something that is so new for some people, so 

disgusting and revolting for some other people, that again we 

accept that philosophy of putting our heads in the sand and 

hoping that the situation will go away?  Or is it something that 

we stand up face to face and address, and see what the future 

will hold for us on that particular issue? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that this Bill is something that we can 

support.  I think this Bill is something that holds a future for 

Saskatchewan.  Cameco is going to survive.  Cameco is going 

to survive whether it's under SMDC or whether it's relegated to 

the CIC holding its shares and its profits. 

 

And I'm going to give you an example of that.  The uranium 

giant . . . and I'm quoting now, Mr. Speaker, from the 

Saskatoon Star-Phoenix of February 10, 1993 because I know 

that some are going to be saying, oh look at the situation 

Cameco has gotten itself into because this year it only made $8 

million profit, $8 million profit.  The year prior, it made almost 

$50 million profit.  So there's a big difference there.  It says: 

 

 Uranium giant Cameco Corporation reports net earnings of 

$8 million for 1992. 

 

 This compares with $47.9 million (I said 50) in 1991. 

 

Why is that?  The reason I bring this up, Mr. Speaker, is 

because of what the member from Athabasca said earlier in his 

remarks, earlier this month, and I quote again: 

 

 . . . Cameco sold its 20-per-cent interest in the Cluff Lake 

uranium mine for an $83.4- million loss. 

 

And it did that because it was rationalizing its operation.  It 

wanted to do that so that it was pinpointing all of its efforts into 

one area. So it was cognizant of the loss.  But, Mr. Speaker, if 

you say that it has an 83.4 million loss, what was its . . . on that 

one particular deal, the net result at the end of the year, Mr. 

Speaker, was that Cameco still had a net increase profit of $8 

million.  That, I think, underscores the strength of the company 

and the future that it can hold.  And my colleagues during the 

course of the day -- and I thought very adequately -- portrayed 

some of the potential, some of the areas into which uranium is 

going in these days. 

 

But I want to bring out a few other points now, Mr. 

Speaker.  And that is . . . and I'm looking at a headline here out 

of the Leader-Post, February 16, 1993.  And the title is, 

"Uranium sale completed"; "Sask. firms get seven-year Ontario 

contract" -- seven-year Ontario contract. 

 

 Ontario Hydro is ditching its high-priced local suppliers . . . 

 

Notice that: 

 

 Ontario Hydro is ditching its high-priced local suppliers in 

favor of buying uranium from Saskatchewan and overseas. 

 

Now I want you to note, Mr. Speaker, that we now have an 

NDP government in Saskatchewan that has admitted that it was 

wrong in the past, that there is a future for uranium, that there 

is a future for Saskatchewan uranium.  And we have a 

government in Ontario, an NDP government, that is now 

buying uranium from Saskatchewan.  There's a little bit of 

irony involved there, I would suppose, but it's certainly 

something that we would be endorsing and are very happy for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think what we have to have a look at, and 

without getting too negative, I find it disconcerting to some 

extent that we will have a government or an opposition -- when 

the government members were in opposition -- to say one thing 

and then do a flip-flop.  And we have scores of examples -- 

we'll be going through them during the series of the budget 

debates coming up -- where this government is doing exactly 

the opposite of what they always said that they would do, some 

of them bearing obviously very, very, dire consequences. 

 

This flip-flop we don't really mind.  We will accept some of 

them once in a while.  But the flip-flop is here because we have 

always been hearing about how bad uranium was.  And I have 

a June 9,'92 Leader-Post.  It says, "Cameco names offered."  

Who was going to sit on the board of Cameco, this uranium 

giant? 

 

Well certainly, it could not be any of the traditionalist NDP 

members who, philosophically, during their entire lives 

opposed the idea of nuclear development, nuclear energy -- 

anything that was nuked has got to be bad.  But notice, notice . 

. . And I quote now from that article June 9,'92, Leader-Post 

"Cameco names offered": 

 

 Former Saskatchewan premier Allan Blakeney and Kim 

Thorson, once a cabinet minister under the NDP, are among 

those in line for positions to the new board of Cameco Corp. 

 

Now we know of course that a lot of the NDP lead two lives -- 

one in their philosophical political life.  Once the political life 

is gone, the philosophical ideologies can evaporate, disappear, 

and they get into the hard, real world of what the world is all 

about.  And needless to say, was it Husky Oil which was a 

corporation that Tommy Douglas was a director on as soon as 

he quit his political NDP life? 



350 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1993 

Now I guess there is somewhat of that kind of nature in all of 

us.  We stand for our principles, and at times I guess we 

succumb to those kinds of things that we have not stood for in 

the previous part of our life.  But I think that what we're 

looking here . . . actually what I was thinking, what I hesitated 

there, is how we could handle this.  We have a particular 

situation here where the NDP are going to be voting on a Bill 

that is not in keeping with some of their philosophies. 

 

And I'm going to make a suggestion to the Premier and I'm 

going to make a suggestion to the minister -- Who's the 

minister involved in this one?  It was the Swift Current minister 

that presented the Bill, but it's not his.  I'm going to make a 

suggestion, Mr. Speaker, that, because of the paradox involved 

and because of the inner turmoil that many members of this 

legislature are feeling with this Bill, I'm going to suggest that 

we have a free vote on this. 

 

The Premier publicly claims that yes, we are an open party, we 

are a free party, that we will let our members vote the way our 

conscience dictates, so that if there are members back there that 

are uncomfortable with this flip-flop that the NDP is doing, let 

them be able to do so without fear of retribution on the part of 

the party solidarity.  So, Mr. Speaker, I just throw that out to 

members opposite so that indeed we have a true indication of 

what the NDP thinks about. 

 

And so once again, I will be supporting this Bill, Mr. Speaker, 

and I would encourage as many members as can see their 

conscience free to do the same.  Thank you for this 

opportunity, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's my 

pleasure to take a few moments as well to speak to Bill No. 25. 

Certainly, as one of the government members had mentioned, 

there may not appear to be a lot to the Bill, but I think in reality 

when we look at the significance of nuclear development in 

this province, there are many areas, as my colleagues have so 

infinitely shared with us today, and eloquently shared with us 

today, the fact that the development and the position the NDP 

have taken recently regarding the development of nuclear 

energy in Saskatchewan is something positive for this province. 

 

And I say that, Mr. Speaker, because of the fact that major 

industry in this province continues to be agriculture, and of 

course it's facing a significant downturn right now as we're in 

major competition throughout the world regarding price. 

 

And I think people across this province, and young people in 

general, are looking for opportunities where they can apply the 

education and the learning that they have taken over the past 

number of years, certainly to graduate from high school or even 

from university, and the development of nuclear energy in this 

province is a significant part of economic activity.  That's 

another area of diversification that Saskatchewan has the 

opportunity to go in. 

We're well aware, Mr. Speaker, of the role the former 

government took regarding diversification of this province; and 

the efforts that were made by the government of the 1980s to 

help people in Saskatchewan, whether they be small businesses 

in their homes or whether they have small businesses in the 

local communities, or large business sectors such as 

WESTBRIDGE or Saskferco or Weyerhaeuser, Mr. Speaker, 

and even the recent agreement that was signed just prior to the . 

. . or signed in 1991 with the federal government regarding 

Atomic Energy. 

 

The former government, under the leadership of the member 

from Estevan, did a number of things to really enhance this 

province and show the people of the world that Saskatchewan 

had more than just agriculture.  And we don't want to belittle 

the fact that agriculture is the main component of our province. 

 

(2030) 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I believe the member from Athabasca talked 

about the other aspects of economic activity in this province -- 

certainly the oil industry.  Saskatchewan has vast resources of 

oil, and certainly natural gas.  And it's unfortunate that the 

government of the day saw fit to discontinue the natural gas 

program to rural Saskatchewan as that in itself was a major 

economic spin-off to rural communities. 

 

None the less, Mr. Speaker, it just shows, and members 

opposite have been indicating too just through their speeches, 

the fact that they're beginning to realize that as a government 

they're going to have to look ahead to the future. 

 

And they're going to have to look ahead at ways in which they 

can develop industry or encourage industry, encourage 

economic activity, encourage companies to move to this 

province and create the opportunities, the job opportunities not 

only for our young people but, Mr. Speaker, we're all aware of 

the fact that so many corporations and companies and small 

companies are having difficulties these days. 

 

And there are men and women in all sectors of our society that 

are looking for opportunities, and the men and women and 

teenagers who really don't want to leave Saskatchewan.  I 

believe there are people who believe that Saskatchewan is a 

fine place to live, a fine place to raise a family.  They don't 

want to leave Saskatchewan. 

 

So the fact that by encouraging the development of the nuclear 

industry in Saskatchewan creates opportunities not only for 

young people, but it creates opportunities for middle-aged 

people who through no fault of their own find themselves 

working for a company who may have, because of the difficult 

economic times, have decided that they must downsize.  So, 

Mr. Speaker, as we look at the Bill we certainly, as my 

colleagues 



March 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 351 

have indicated, can be in agreement with the Bill. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, just by looking at a number of the 

articles that we've seen . . . and my colleagues have brought 

forward a number of articles regarding nuclear development in 

this province, regarding Atomic Energy of Canada 

development, and the agreement that was signed in September 

of 1991. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at that time the then premier suggested that 

Saskatchewan wouldn't commit to a reactor until an energy 

panel reported.  And at that time the suggestion was made that 

an energy panel would be put in place to raise the benefits of a 

reactor to this province and to look at the opportunities and the 

options and maybe the best locations for a reactor; maybe the 

size of a reactor.  It may not be a major reactor but I believe the 

University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon campus, certainly had 

an idea in mind regarding a small reactor that they could 

generate power and heating capacity for their university. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are so many things that can be done with 

nuclear energy.  Most people just take and believe nuclear 

energy, it's only use is for power generation.  But, Mr. Speaker, 

when you look at the technology that we have available today, 

certainly uranium can be taken and used to develop vast 

resources.  And we could have small uranium reactors, if you 

will, around the province.  We don't need one major reactor in 

a large centre.  You could have small reactors throughout the 

province developing energy and creating jobs and economic 

activity. 

 

I also realize, Mr. Speaker, when the former government, and 

now the government of the day, were talking about the 

possibility of a reactor, the possibility of an agreement with 

AECL, that many communities in this province were looking 

forward with anticipation to a contract that would bring some 

technology and some development to the province. 

 

And we saw the lobbying that was going forward by 

specifically the two large cities because, Mr. Speaker, as I've 

indicated earlier, by bringing an agreement, by looking at 

atomic energy development, our two major centres were 

certainly thinking of the job opportunities and not just jobs for 

the young people, but they're also looking at businesses that 

would spring up within their local communities because of the 

new jobs.  And I think Regina is a prime example of what can 

take place just by bringing new jobs to the city, by bringing 

Farm Credit to the city, by bringing Crown Life to the city. 

 

And certainly the development of Saskferco, just a few miles 

down the road, Mr. Speaker, has created a larger spin-off that 

I'm sure if you talked to any businessman or woman in the city, 

and even the elected representatives of this city, they would 

indicate, Mr. Speaker, that the spin-off has generated jobs in 

the construction industry.  It's generated jobs in the fact that 

new businesses have opened up -- they may be small 

businesses or large businesses -- or even large businesses have 

added employees.  All of these things have taken place.  And 

when you have major components come to an area, Mr. 

Speaker, it just shows what can be done and the spin-off that 

can take place. 

I'm sure that Saskatoon, when the former premier, the member 

from Estevan, had talked about a possible agreement with the 

Atomic Energy of Canada, Saskatoon was really . . . came alive 

in anticipation of the possibilities that could develop just from 

this agreement.  And it may seem that it was insignificant at the 

time. 

 

It may have seemed, Mr. Speaker, that it didn't mean a lot.  But 

I'm sure that the mayor of Saskatoon, Mayor Dayday, and his 

council and businessmen and women throughout the area of 

Saskatoon were really looking forward to not just an 

agreement, but the potential of doing some research in the 

Saskatoon as to areas in which they could develop and even 

develop into the technological age and processing of, and 

building and construction of, materials to go into a small, 

medium, even a large reactor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we're all aware of the fact that around the world 

many countries really do not have a major source of power 

generation outside of the atomic energy.  Many countries with 

the large populace basis just do not have the natural resources 

that we have at our disposal.  And we in Saskatchewan are 

certainly fortunate to have such a large flow of resources 

available to us. 

 

We can use coal for power generation.  We have a water 

resource for power generation.  We have oil that we can utilize 

for power generation.  And even today, Mr. Speaker, we now 

are looking at ways of taking excess heat and excess steam off 

of heating plants such as TransGas out at Moosomin, Mr. 

Speaker, where they're looking at utilizing that to form a 25 

megawatt power station, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There are endless opportunities for Saskatchewan people in 

power generation.  But I think we must also look beyond what 

we already have here naturally and realize that the development 

of uranium in this province is another significant area of 

development and economic activity. 

 

And I would think that the men and women of the North, our 

indigenous peoples, would be more than pleased and happy to 

see . . . and are more than happy to see the work Cameco has 

done in the area in development of uranium mines.  And 

certainly the possibility that expansion of uranium mining in 

northern Saskatchewan creates opportunities for many of our 

indigenous peoples as many of our native leaders are very 

concerned about the problems that people in their society face. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to . . . when I look at the debate that 

took place, I believe it was last fall, regarding atomic energy, 

and many of the government members talked about how open 

their party was and the fact that they allow for open debate at 

their conventions, I just want to also indicate that I don't know 

of any party in this province that doesn't allow its delegates to 

speak openly at their conventions. 



352 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1993 

But I think the debate that took place at the NDP convention 

was certainly indicative of the fact that there were many people 

on that side of the House who are very set in their ways -- 

many people who feel that the development of uranium is to 

the detriment of our society.  And also it's good to hear that 

there are many people who believe that the development of 

uranium can be a very positive impact on our society, create a 

very positive impact not only in the jobs and the economic 

spin-off. 

 

I was pleased to see at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, and I 

know many people in my constituency were also pleased to see 

that when everything was said and done, the NDP Party 

decided, even though it may not have been totally popular with 

all its members, it decided to go ahead and at least look into the 

possibilities of further research into uranium development. 

 

I believe it was one of the . . . a present cabinet minister 

mentioned, he says: I feel a sense of relief and I'll bet the 

majority of cabinet ministers feel the same way, said Provincial 

Secretary, a strong pro-development booster. 

 

Just reading through a number of the articles that were printed 

at that time regarding the convention, one can see the heated 

debate that took place on the floor of the Saskatoon Centre as 

the NDP debated their uranium stance. 

 

And I think you must give each one of the members who spoke 

credit for standing up and voicing their opinions.  Many people 

were voicing concerns.  Many people had major concerns on 

the issues regarding especially, specifically, the environmental 

aspects of problems that could be created. 

 

And I think when we look at nuclear development, Mr. 

Speaker, certainly the one area of concern, or the one thing that 

comes to most people's mind, is the accident at Chernobyl.  

And yes, Mr. Speaker, it did create a major problem for the 

people in Russia.  And it did create a major problem for people 

in that area of the world in that accident.  But at the same time, 

Mr. Speaker, I think we in Canada have one of the best and the 

most efficient reactors available. 

 

And there's no reason why Saskatchewan shouldn't become a 

part of the uranium industry, shouldn't become a part of atomic 

energy development, and shouldn't become a part of the work 

and the process that is taking place in developing new and safer 

ways of extracting uranium through mining and developing 

that resource so that we can build for the future. 

 

I'm sure as well, Mr. Speaker, that there are many companies 

that are more than happy with the decision that the government 

made to at least explore in greater depth, the development of 

uranium mining.  I believe in the January 19, '93 issue just this 

year, the government of the day had indicated that they would 

be making a decision as quickly as possible regarding allowing 

underground exploration at the proposed McArthur River 

uranium mine, and it was announced 

by the Environment minister, the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose.  And this, Mr. Speaker, we find was good 

news to Rita Mirwald, a spokesman for Cameco, the giant 

uranium company. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, the minister also went on to say, and 

I'm quoting here: 

 

 The panel's recommendations are not binding, but Wiens said 

Premier Roy Romanow has previously stated the government 

would be guided by the panel's recommendations on this and 

other proposed projects. 

 

When I think back to the agreement that was signed by the then 

premier, the member from Estevan, he indicated that a panel 

would be put in place and certainly as the government of the 

day rethought their decision on uranium development in this 

province and put a panel in place there, also asked the panel to 

research uranium mining and its potential and its possibilities 

and what it could do here in Saskatchewan.  Also, as I 

indicated earlier, Saskatoon city council should support 

proposed uranium mining. 

 

No doubt across this province there have been lines drawn over 

the years, lines that have been drawn that have placed people at 

odds.  But in the end, Mr. Speaker, I think the proper decision 

was made.  Certainly in my area of the province, in my 

constituency, people felt that the government made the right 

decision when they reconsidered their decision to cancel the 

original contract and the original deal signed by the member 

from Estevan and decided to revisit the issue. 

 

And certainly we were all aware of the debate that took place 

in this House last September when the member from Estevan 

was speaking with . . . when we had the minister responsible 

for Energy and Mines and his officials here in estimates.  At 

that time the member from Estevan, in his discussions and in 

his consultation and his perusal of the Department of Energy 

and Mines, brought forward a number of suggestions.  And at 

the end of the day we saw the member from Swift Current, the 

minister of Energy and Mines, agreeing that certainly there is a 

lot of potential for economic development in this province in 

the uranium industry. 

 

(2045) 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, as my colleagues have indicated, we have 

brought forward a number of ideas, a number of suggestions, 

and certainly we're not opposed to the Bill that is before us.  

We're in support of the Bill.  And we want to suggest that 

Saskatchewan has so much more it can offer and it can be. 

 

We want to commend the government, and we trust that the 

government will even go beyond where it is today and look at . 

. . become very serious in its perusal of the uranium industry in 

developing more . . . or allowing for greater development and 

greater enhancement of our industry in this province, not only 



March 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 353 

for job creation but so that we can build a province, build 

towards the year 2000. 

 

And in discussing our debt and the financing of this province, 

the more that we can manufacture and process in this province, 

Mr. Speaker, it goes a long ways to our development and to job 

creation for our young people and people across this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I certainly will be supporting the Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to have a 

few words to say regarding this Bill.  I believe that in essence 

this Bill will do away with the Saskatchewan Mining 

Development Corporation, SMDC.  The Act says that the 

money and the assets will be transferred to the Crown 

Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan.  And I believe that 

that's a proper way of dealing with it.  We will be supporting 

this motion. 

 

And I guess one of the things that my colleague from Rosthern 

mentioned that I thought was a reasonable suggestion and one 

that could demonstrate a reasonable amount of reform in this 

Assembly, and that would be that individuals would be given 

the right for a free vote, which means that individuals would 

have an opportunity to decide on their own merit whether they 

believed in this kind of a transfer of assets.  And I believe that 

it would be a demonstration of confidence in the people of this 

legislature -- that the Premier would give that option and make 

that option available to the members of this Assembly. 

 

I note too that there have been a number of debates that have 

gone on about what this Bill really has done through its tenure.  

There have been times in history when the NDP formulated the 

Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation.  They put it 

into place as a part of a development program in mining and 

uranium.  There are a number of areas that they dealt with.  

One of those areas was the salt plant at Chaplin.  They became 

involved with that one. 

 

And I noticed today as I drove by it on my way to Regina here, 

Mr. Speaker, that the salt plant there has been privatized.  The 

people there have expanded their business.  They have 

expanded their business, and they have done it on the basis of 

their own initiative and an initiative of the company that they 

are a part of. 

 

I also want to say that this company has also provided an 

expansion.  The mining system at Chaplin works on a residual.  

The salt is left on the top of the ground, and it slowly pushes 

itself up out of the ground.  And that layer of salt is skimmed 

off and put into a pile to be refined and put into place for a 

number of processes.  The original process that was used or the 

product was used, Mr. Speaker, was to make glass.  It made 

glass for . . . It was an ingredient used in making the glass, and 

it provided a good opportunity for the development to take 

place.  Through the years that transferred itself into various 

other things.  And now today, Mr. 

Speaker, the salt is used as a filler for detergents in the home, 

the powdered detergents like Tide.  These are the kinds of 

things that this salt is used for and becomes a filler in that 

component. 

 

What happened in this Assembly when the discussion was 

taking place about the privatization of that company?  That 

company was being privatized, and we had doom and gloom, 

and we had anger and irritation by everyone who was sitting at 

that time on this side of the House.  The opposition did nothing 

but run it down, rail on it.  And I think, Mr. Speaker, that is 

even being kind to them about what their attitude was for that 

privatization initiative. 

 

And what is it doing today, Mr. Speaker?  Today it is an 

energetic company that is growing in that community.  And I 

doubt, Mr. Speaker, if that opportunity would have been made 

available to them given the circumstances that these people are 

under today.  I don't believe it would have.  I don't believe that 

they would have had the imagination and the creativity to 

define a way to make that company expand.  And I believe that 

that's a fact. 

 

SMDC is now, or has been a part of a development of two 

companies, one was Eldorado.  It joined forces with Eldorado 

Nuclear plus that it gave the whole volume of a company called 

Cameco.  And in that company, the opportunity for expansion 

has been greatly enhanced. 

 

I want to think back too, Mr. Speaker, about some of the 

progress that we went through and the discussion and the 

debate that we went through in relation to that.  We had in this 

Assembly, as I was recalling earlier about the privatization of 

the sodium sulphate plant at Chaplin, we had the same thing 

occur on the discussion on privatizing the uranium industry.  

The uranium industry was going to fall right on its head, Mr. 

Speaker.  That's the doom and gloom that was said by the 

members opposite when they were in opposition.  And that 

hasn't come to pass, Mr. Speaker.  It actually has gone the other 

way. 

 

I'll tell you what has happened.  Opportunity has been given to 

people in Canada to make an investment, people in 

Saskatchewan to make an investment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have to come to the place in this Assembly 

where it isn't only tax dollars that generate revenue, Mr. 

Speaker, it has to do with the ability to invest and have profit 

that gives us an opportunity to make an investment.  And that is 

what we're talking about when we're doing away with this Bill, 

Mr. Speaker, it's being . . . it's a symbol.  It's a symbol of an 

opportunity for people in the province of Saskatchewan to once 

again be able to invest their money in something that it is here. 

 

And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, it's an excellent opportunity for 

people to make an investment.  We have today an opportunity 

to make an investment in a uranium mine in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  I as an individual do and every one in this 

province does. 



354 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1993 

But what did we have before?  Mr. Speaker, we didn't have that 

opportunity before.  But with the involvement of privatizing 

the uranium industry, we now have an opportunity to make an 

investment, Mr. Speaker, and that can be done at any time.  

And that is as important today as it was at any time in our 

history. 

 

It's a symbol, Mr. Speaker, it's a symbol of freedom.  It's a 

symbol of an opportunity to exercise that freedom that we 

have, not only in what we do on a daily basis but where we 

invest our money.  That is, Mr. Speaker, the object of the 

symbolism of this Bill.  And I believe that is very important for 

the people of Saskatchewan.  It's important for the people in 

this Assembly. 

 

And I say to the members opposite, if you don't believe in this 

kind of thing, ask your Premier for a free vote.  Ask your 

Premier for a free vote if you don't believe in this.  Have the 

courage to stand here and vote no.  Have the courage to vote 

no.  I challenge you, if you really have a conscience about this 

and it bothers it to vote yes about cancelling the SMDC Act 

here, repealing it, vote no. 

 

I challenge the Premier to allow his members to vote no.  

Allow them.  Give them the freedom to do that. And that, Mr. 

Speaker, will demonstrate some parliamentary reform.  It will 

bring to the forefront individuals who will say, yes I want to . . 

. I believe in this sort of thing; and no, I do not.  Allow that 

freedom, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, as the member for Shaunavon indicates, 

he'd be probably strung up for voting no.  And that's the kind of 

thing that I've always believed that would happen there.  If the 

Premier says yes, then those back-benchers, just to a man, will 

stand up and say, fine, we'll go with what the Premier says.  

That's the kind of thing that I think will be demonstrated here 

this evening as we vote on this later on. 

 

I want . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the men and the 

women can have their choice as to whether they want to vote 

yes or no too, and so it's open to all.  I think we should have a 

free vote in this.  It would be the beginning of a tradition, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I want to point out some things that I really believe in that this 

is symbolic of.  This is symbolic of an agreement that was 

reached with the former administration with Atomic Energy.  I 

believe this is a symbol of the kinds of things that we can do 

with government involvement and with the private sector.  I 

believe it's an important part of it. 

 

What have we got in the agreement with Atomic Energy?  We 

have an agreement with Atomic Energy that will provide an 

opportunity for research in atomic energy.  Atomic energy 

comes about by mining uranium, processing uranium, and all 

of the things related to it. 

 

We have, Mr. Speaker, an opportunity here to do what I believe 

is set a stage for job opportunities for the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan.  I think we 

have that in place, and it will be enhanced by having the people 

in this province being able to invest their money in the uranium 

industry and also, Mr. Speaker, being able to invest it in 

research as it relates to atomic energy.  I think, Mr. Speaker, 

that we have only begun to touch the tip of the iceberg in this 

uranium industry.  We have only begun because it's almost a 

new menu for the kinds of things that can happen in energy and 

research. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have traditionally in this province done a 

number of things, and we've done them well.  We have been 

involved in agriculture, and we have grown the kinds of 

products here that are recognized the world over.  We have, in 

this province, got the oil industry in a position where they 

understand and they know about what they're doing.  We have 

in this province, as I just read earlier about, diamonds in the 

North.  We have people who are exploring for diamonds in the 

North. 

 

We have people all over this province who are capable of 

understanding and developing the product for the international 

market.  But what we have traditionally done -- whether it's 

uranium, whether it's oil, whether it's potash or any of these 

products -- we have traditionally developed them by taking 

them out of the ground and selling them to somebody else to 

process.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is not utilizing the facilities of 

the people and the capacity they have to develop the kinds of 

things that we have. 

 

And uranium is typical of that capacity that we have to expand 

ourselves.  We can expand ourselves in research.  We can 

expand ourselves in development of various kinds of things 

even as it relates to uranium, to AECL, and to agriculture.  And 

as my colleague said earlier, if we just would begin to be able 

to maximize the potential of irradiation in agriculture products, 

we would be setting the standard way ahead for food that 

would not deteriorate.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason 

why we need to have research. 

 

I want to point out to this Assembly too that this province is 

rich in the capacity of individuals to do this.  We have in this 

province people who are extremely intelligent, people who are 

aggressive, who will take an opportunity like this and move 

with it.  I believe that we need that sort of thing to keep on 

happening.  And by having the symbolism of this Bill and its 

direction that it takes, it provides an opportunity for that 

intellectual property to be expanded. 

 

And how do we market that, Mr. Speaker?  We don't have to 

take a train load of that intellectual property and move it into 

China, or move it into Korea, or move it into France.  No, Mr. 

Speaker, all we have to do is set up a computer that will 

transfer that directly to those individuals. 

 

And who gets the benefit, Mr. Speaker?  When we copyright 

and market that opportunity, Mr. Speaker, it's the people of 

Saskatchewan who will get the benefit.  That's the kind of thing 

that we're talking about, and that's the kind of thing that we 

need to 



March 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 355 

develop in this province. 

 

(2100) 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill has everything to do with symbolism.  

This is symbolic of the things that we believed in when we 

were government, and it's a conclusion to the kinds of things 

that we believed in.  And, Mr. Speaker, they were right then 

and they are right today.  And I challenge the members 

opposite to really assess themselves, whether they really 

believe this within themselves -- that they believe this. 

 

Because I can recall, Mr. Speaker, individuals from that side of 

the House standing in these seats over here telling us how bad 

we were when we privatized this.  We were really, really, 

really wrong.  And now, Mr. Speaker, these people are moving 

this into the Crown Investments Corporation. They're repealing 

this Act.  And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that if they really had 

the intentions that motivated them in previous years when they 

were in opposition on this side of the House, I believe that they 

would have the courage to say no to this Bill. But I don't think 

they will, Mr. Speaker, because they're going to be told what to 

do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill is important.  It tells us what we should 

be doing and it's symbolic of the things that we should be 

doing.  What else will this Bill be a symbol of?  It will be a 

symbol of an opportunity for jobs.  Mr. Speaker, the northern 

part of this province is going to be built, if it's ever going to be 

built, it's going to be built on mining.  If there is nothing else 

that can be done there, mining will generate the income that 

people in the North will have.  They will have an opportunity 

for jobs. 

 

They will also, Mr. Speaker, have an opportunity for research.  

Why do we want to exclude an opportunity for research in the 

kinds of things that we're doing through various agencies, 

whether it's university or whether it's private research, whether 

it's Atomic Energy, or whoever?  The opportunity for research 

is absolutely necessary.  It will provide jobs for every one of 

the people in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the opportunity is necessary for us and I believe 

this Bill symbolizes that opportunity.  It symbolizes that 

opportunity in the North.  It symbolizes the opportunity for 

investment.  I'm going to put this question to you too, Mr. 

Speaker.  The symbolism is that the people in the southern part 

of this province have an opportunity to make an investment 

with the people in the North. 

 

The people in the North will provide an opportunity to do the 

mining, whereas the opportunity for the investment comes from 

the people in the South.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is symbolized 

by this Bill and the things that it will do.  It's a symbol of an 

opportunity, Mr. Speaker, and that's what I want to express for 

the public of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Saskatoon has traditionally been known as the uranium capital 

of the North because services are provided out of the city of 

Saskatoon for the North. 

P.A. (Prince Albert) has had that reputation.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, in a time as we look at the job loss in this province, is 

symbolic of an opportunity to move in those kinds of areas. 

 

We need to have this kind of wealth-generating opportunity in 

the province of Saskatchewan in order to develop the kinds of 

things that we need to have, whether it's jobs, whether it's 

research, whatever it is. It's an opportunity for investment by 

the people from within themselves and from the money that 

they earn and that they have.  That is what this is talking about.  

That's why this is important.  That's why it's necessary to pass 

this. 

 

And I say to the members opposite who loudly condemned 

every one of the actions over here, stand up and be counted if 

you don't believe in it.  Stand up and be counted and say no to 

this Bill. 

 

My challenge to each one of you is to say no to research. Say 

no to jobs.  Say no to economic opportunity for investment in 

the province of Saskatchewan.  And, Mr. Speaker, if they 

would have had the same attitude on that side of the House as 

they have over here, it would be no question that there would 

be not a single yes vote on that side of the House. 

 

That's the kind of change of values that we have had in the last 

two or three years from those members opposite.  And it's 

typical of say one thing and do another, say one thing and do 

another.  And this, Mr. Speaker, is symbolic of an excellent 

opportunity for the people in the province of Saskatchewan.  

And that's why, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting this Bill 

when it comes to the vote. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to be 

very brief, but I could not stand by and listen to the words from 

the opposition today in regard to An Act to repeal the 

Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation, which should 

be a non-controversial Bill demanding very little debate, and to 

listen to the rhetoric and misinformation passed on today by the 

official opposition, cannot pass without at least some comment. 

 

As the minister in charge of Saskatchewan Mining 

Development Corporation, I presided over my first and last 

board meeting this week.  And I want to assure the members 

opposite that we feel, based on all the information available to 

us, that the repeal of The Saskatchewan Mining Development 

Corporation Act is the right thing to do. 

 

If the members opposite, when they were in government, had 

not decimated the corporation, there may still be a very 

meaningful role for it to play in the policy and the finances of 

the provincial government.  But nevertheless, when they sold 

off the Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation and 

amalgamated it with the Eldorado Nuclear to form Cameco, it's 

a done deal.  And I'm not sure that it was 



356 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1993 

the right deal at that time, but nevertheless Cameco today is a 

very profitable corporation of which the province of 

Saskatchewan still holds substantial shares. 

 

I would want to point out that the assets that went into forming 

Cameco did not come from Eldorado Nuclear.  The great, great 

majority of the assets that formed Cameco came from the 

Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation, which was a 

company that made very good rewards and very handsome 

profits for the province of Saskatchewan to deliver adequate 

programs in social programs, in health care, in education, and 

finance a substantial part of the activities of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

That was not the case under the administration of the 

Progressive Conservative government between the period 1982 

until 1991, when the roller-coaster actually did finally run over 

the top of them. 

 

And I find some of the comments today just a little bit 

hypocritical.  The debate ranged from talking about losing 

money at PAPCO to all kinds of assertions and statements 

which are totally unfounded in fact.  And I couldn't resist, 

while listening to the member from Morse, it was the final 

straw for me to want to get up and say something about the 

credibility of the arguments they put forward today. 

 

And this relates to an incident which I think shows something 

about the credibility of the members of the Progressive 

Conservative Party.  And this goes back to a question asked by 

the member from Morse in question period a few days ago, 

about interference by the government in bingo associations 

across the province. 

 

And I just want to read for the record, Mr. Speaker, the letter 

that has been circulated to all members.  And it is from the 

Highway East Bingo Association.  And it says in it . . . And I 

quote to you the letter, Mr. Speaker.  And the point I'm making 

is to show that the argument put forward by the members of the 

opposition are totally unfounded.  And I use this as an example 

to very graphically demonstrate the lack of credibility in the 

arguments they make. 

 

This individual writes: 

 

 It has recently been brought to my attention that Mr. Harold 

Martens, Progressive Conservative MLA for Morse, has 

implicated myself, and that of the Highway East Bingo 

Association, as being associates of Mr. Reg Gross. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  What's the member . . . Order, order.  

What's the member's point of order? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my understanding that we're 

talking about the repeal of SMDC.  The lotteries that are being 

talked about now, Mr. Speaker, I think you would find, Mr. 

Speaker, are totally . . . Mr. Speaker, I would think that you 

would find that his comments right now are totally irrelevant to 

the matter at hand.  And I would ask you to bring the member 

back to order. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I've been sitting 

here all evening and most of the afternoon and listening to the 

range of debate in this.  And I know that Mr. Speaker has 

allowed wide latitude.  And we were here and sat here very, 

very patiently listening to their debate.  And I would be very 

interested in listening to a corresponding response from the 

government member. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I have listened very carefully all 

afternoon and it was a very wide-ranging debate this afternoon.  

And the Speaker is put in a very difficult position because he 

doesn't know what's in the Bill itself, and therefore you have to 

allow some breadth of discussion, and I did that this afternoon.  

And the member can proceed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I wish to start 

the quote so people can listen to the entire text at one point 

without any interruptions in it.  The letter, and I quote: 

 

 It has recently been brought to my attention that Mr. Harold 

Martens, Progressive Conservative M.L.A. for Morse, has 

implicated myself, and that of the Highway East Bingo 

Association, as being associates of Mr. Reg Gross. 

 

 Let the record indicate that I have never had the opportunity 

to even meet Mr. Gross or communicate with him in written 

or verbal form.  The statement also applies to the Highway 

East Bingo Association, and to suggest such a relationship is 

totally unfounded. 

 

 As President of the Highway East Bingo Association, I wish 

to inform the legislative assembly that the formation of the 

Highway East Bingo Association was the result of a well 

researched and structured presentation to the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Commission.  Our proposal clearly indicated a 

demand for a new bingo hall facility for the Regina area, and 

the number of charities now fund raising in the facility will 

attest to this fact.  Mr. Martens' irresponsible conduct has 

drawn a large number of charitable organizations into the 

political arena, which serves no purpose but that of political 

expediency. 

 

 In closing, I respectfully request that Mr. Martens retract his 

politically motivated statements and cease his misleading, 

inaccurate and false statements regarding our Association. 

 

 Thank you for your consideration.  Sincerely, Virgil Cairns, 

Chairperson, H.E.B.A. 



March 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 357 

Mr. Speaker, I draw this to the attention of the Assembly and 

the people who might want to listen tonight, in that you cannot 

take with any credibility the words of the members opposite.  I 

think what we've seen today is a shameful filibuster in this 

House. 

 

The Bill is a very to-the-point Bill.  The Bill is An Act to repeal 

the Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation -- a 

conscious decision made by the government -- from what I 

understand will be supported by all members of the Legislative 

Assembly.  And I ask that if the members would go to a vote, 

we would have a free vote of all our members in this Assembly 

because we support this legislation. 

 

And I want to point out to the members who are viewing 

tonight and who will read this in Hansard, that be very wary of 

the arguments and the falsehoods that the Progressive 

Conservative Party puts forward in this Assembly because they 

have no basis in fact. 

 

And I suggest, Mr. Speaker, we proceed forthwith to get on 

with the business of this Assembly, to dealing with issues of 

the financial situation of the province, with education, with 

health care, with the Bills and the Acts of this Legislative 

Assembly that will serve all people of the province to some 

benefit, and not the ramblings of the Progressive Conservative 

Party.   No one knows why they do the filibuster today other 

than to not want to get on with the serious business of the 

people of this province. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 9:15 p.m. until 9:20 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Van Mulligen Cline 

Thompson Scott 

Tchorzewski McPherson 

Shillington Stanger 

Anguish Kluz 

Goulet Renaud 

Atkinson Langford 

Kowalsky Jess 

Carson Swenson 

Mitchell Martens 

Upshall Neudorf 

Lautermilch Boyd 

Calvert Toth 

Johnson Britton 

Trew D'Autremont 

Flavel Goohsen 

Roy t  

-- 33 

Nays 

-- Nil 

 

The Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee of the 

Whole at the next sitting. 

Bill No. 26 -- An Act to repeal The Saskatchewan Computer 

Utility Corporation Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much.  Mr. Speaker, 

the brevity of the comments of the members opposite caught 

the minister in charge of CIC short and he's unable to be here to 

deliver this, so I will deliver this speech on his behalf. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the conclusion of my comments, I will move 

second reading of An Act to repeal The Saskatchewan 

Computer Utility Corporation Act.  I don't know, Mr. Speaker, 

if this will inspire such eloquence from members opposite or 

not. 

 

In any event, it was enacted in 1973 to establish the 

Saskatchewan Computer Utility Corporation known as 

SaskCOMP.  It was designed to provide computer data and 

processing services to the Government of Saskatchewan, its 

Crown corporations and agencies. 

 

I might add, Mr. Speaker, at the time SaskCOMP was 

established, mainframes were the mainstay, if you can forgive 

that alliteration, of computers.  Today mainframes are playing a 

smaller and smaller role in the computer business as laptops 

and desktops become ever more powerful. 

 

We probably, even if it weren't for the machinations of 

members opposite when they were in office, we probably 

wouldn't recreate the Saskatchewan Computer Utility 

Corporation now.  The nature of the technology's changed. 

 

In February 1988, the previous administration privatized all the 

assets and liabilities of SaskCOMP into the WESTBRIDGE 

Computer Corporation.  Eventually these assets were part of 

the assets that formed ISM (Information Systems Management) 

Corporation.  Since that time SaskCOMP has remained 

inactive, has had no financial transactions to report. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, because The Saskatchewan Computer 

Utility Corporation Act no longer governs an active 

corporation, I move second reading of Bill No. 26, An Act to 

repeal The Saskatchewan Computer Utility Corporation Act. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I just 

want to thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak again 

in this Assembly, speaking to this Bill No. 26.  Certainly I can 

appreciate the fact that the member from Regina Churchill 

Downs would like to call the question but I think it's imperative 

that we take a moment to at least peruse the Bill and make 

some comments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill before us, as well, has a great deal in 

common with the previous Bill that we have been discussing 

today and I think you will find that at the end of the day, the 

members on this side of the House and my colleagues in most 

part will be in agreement with this Bill.  It is appropriate, Mr. 

Speaker, and appropriate in my view, that we are proceeding 

first to repeal the SMDC Act and now, Mr. Speaker, in 



358 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1993 

tandem we are moving to repeal the government computer 

company Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government and its previous incarnation 

when the member from Riversdale was the minister of 

communications as well as the minister of nationalization, are 

today writing off some of the worst aspects of their tragic 

legacy in this province.  The concept of the government 

creating and operating a computer service business had some 

very Orwellian aspects to it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And lest anyone forget exactly how far the now Premier was 

prepared to go in making use of technology for narrowly 

partisan purposes, I remind everyone that while he was 

building up a government computer corporation to monitor 

government records, in tandem he was trying to build a 

government-owned and operated cable television system that 

would distribute his political message to those he was tracking 

with his centralized computer agency. 

 

Let me quote a cabinet document, Mr. Speaker, in which the 

plans of the member from Riversdale were made public, now 

long since forgotten by the media but very much a case of big 

brother watching over the people who could not be trusted to 

make their own decisions.  Now, Mr. Speaker, I am going to 

quote a memo signed by two people on the now Premier's 

planning bureau.  The memo is dated September 22, 1980 and 

it's signed by Sheldon Zelitt and a Marvin Blauer, and we have 

never been successful . . . And I quote.  And we have never 

been successful in having the member from Riversdale called 

to account for this memo.  But let me read it into the record as 

we discuss repealing this Bill because, Mr. Speaker, repealing 

the Bill does not repeal the attitude that gave rise to the Bill.  

And I'd like to quote the memo: 

 

 The principle cause of concern is that the technology 

planning has far outstripped utilization planning.  The 

political opportunity side of the BBN is a chance to grossly 

expand access to cultural, educational, entertainment and 

service programing, at a time when cultural policy is a public 

issue, and in a province where the Premier has a strong 

interest in solidifying and promulgating the Saskatchewan 

identity. 

 

The memo continues, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 The problem side is that with or without government 

intervention, in policy and control, the expanded network will 

still be utilized.  Two developmental potholes to watch for 

are, first that we will forego an unparalleled opportunity to 

influence media, leaving established and aggressive media 

firms to fill the gap with less desirable programing. 

 

(2130) 

 

Now listen to the next part, Mr. Speaker.  It is critical, and I 

continue quoting: 

A hush tri-ministerial committee has been struck with 

Romanow, Cody and Cowley, to handle control of the BBN. 

 

 They have produced a limited distribution report which 

suggests as potential control devices another Crown 

corporation. 

 

 They have good conceptual skills, but have been kept 

unapprised of the control-gaining process, the 

control-acquisition moves. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker I'd like to skip a paragraph just to wrap up 

the quote with the final paragraph of the memo: 

 

 BBN will pervade every members constituency, and in that, 

in the near term, what goes out over it and how, is politically 

vulnerable in the extreme. 

 

That's the end of my quoting of that memo, Mr. Speaker, but 

look at the emphasis of this hushed tri-ministerial committee 

which the now Premier was party to.  The key focus was to 

gain control, and the use of a new Crown corporation would be 

used to ensure full political exploitation. 

 

And that Crown corporation could very well have been the 

Saskatchewan computer utility, Mr. Speaker.  Because the 

policy was being written by the same people who designed the 

computer utility. 

 

Now imagine, Mr. Speaker, combining a centralized 

government computer operation with a secretive, in the words 

of the memo, a hush-hush effort to control communications in 

this province.  I suggest, Mr. Speaker, it doesn't get much more 

reprehensible than that. 

 

Just look at the memo, Mr. Speaker, and you will see repeated 

references to control, control, control.  Political opportunity 

represented in the chance to control what the people hear and 

see, and perhaps to design that through a computer utility that 

tracks who knows what kind of information. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, given this Premier's history on the matter, I 

have to say and I'm very pleased indeed that the old computer 

corporation legislation will not be used to give birth to a new 

version of these plans. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government has no business in the computer 

business.  And the fact that this Premier so avidly wanted the 

government in the computer business is reflected throughout 

his career. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, related to this Bill, I'd like to observe that 

when the NDP members talk about GigaText, I ask them to at 

the same time talk about Nabu. 

 

You know, Nabu, Mr. Speaker, was not a Saskatchewan firm 

and had no plans to invest in Saskatchewan.  Nabu was an 

Ontario computer 



March 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 359 

manufacturer that the member from Riversdale invested $5 

million in the 1980s; 1980 dollars into and lost lock, stock, and 

barrel.  In current dollar terms, the member from Riversdale 

lost a great deal more money investing in Nabu than the 

previous government did investing in GigaText. 

 

And certainly, Mr. Speaker, we could have a long, raging 

debate just discussing those two computer utilities.  Both were 

unfortunate losses for the taxpayer, Mr. Speaker.  But at least 

the previous government did deliver a major victory for the 

people when it created WESTBRIDGE, which is what gives 

rise to the Bill we have before us today.  WESTBRIDGE, now 

ISM, Mr. Speaker, has already contributed dramatically to our 

provincial economy and to our opportunities. 

 

The switch from a government computer bureau to a major 

private sector computer services firm has witnessed major 

increases in employment, new global partnerships, and 

technological development for the province of Saskatchewan 

that is the envy of jurisdictions around the world.  And that, 

Mr. Speaker, is exactly what should be happening. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the law being repealed today should never have 

ever existed.  If the NDP government of the 1970s had used the 

tremendous resources available to it to grow a private sector 

computer industry instead of pathologically trying to create 

another government empire -- if they had done that, Mr. 

Speaker -- we would be light-years ahead today. 

 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, I think of the recent trip that Mr. 

McKnight, the federal Minister of Energy and Mines, took over 

to China.  And I'm sure the technology that would be available 

today . . . that Saskatchewan could be a major player in this 

technology and distribution of computer technology around the 

globe. 

 

Even in the face of the failure of the NDP government to 

husband the province's resources wisely and to generate our 

own local, high technology sector, in spite of that, Mr. Speaker, 

we still managed to transform SaskCOMP -- as the member 

from Riversdale liked to call it -- we managed to transform 

SaskCOMP into a major success story. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, there are many members sitting 

on the government benches that just cannot stand the thought 

that now in Saskatchewan we have a major corporation that is a 

partnership involving a true multinational, one of the world's 

great corporations: IBM.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me 

that many members find it difficult to realize, that as we look 

around Saskatchewan, we have more than one major 

multinational corporation involved in this province creating 

jobs.  And certainly it is an attribute to this province to see 

IBM involved in the computer technology.  IBM now calls 

Saskatchewan home for the headquarters of one of its most 

significant business interests. 

 

And that is why this Bill is on the blues today, Mr. Speaker.  It 

is there because SaskCOMP is no longer 

relevant and probably will only warrant a footnote in the 

history books as one of those things in which the NDP 

government of the '70s wasted the public treasury -- absolutely 

wasted, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what a sight it is to see the NDP members embracing IBM 

-- International Business Machines.  And I want to tell you, Mr. 

Speaker, that ISM-WESTBRIDGE is in fact a highly 

significant component of IBM's corporate plan. 

 

IBM has recognized that the future is not in its hardware 

business, not in selling the actual machines.  The future, Mr. 

Speaker, is in providing computer services.  And I believe the 

minister acknowledged that.  And you see, Mr. Speaker, the 

successor to SaskCOMP, ISM-WESTBRIDGE, being 

expanded by its private owners while at the same time those 

owners are downsizing their other businesses.  IBM finds itself 

in the difficult position of laying off several thousand people 

around the world in its mainline business of manufacturing, 

while at the same time it is expanding its new firm 

headquartered here in Regina.  And we can be proud of it. 

 

And while that restructuring is very difficult and even tragic for 

those families around the world who are experiencing the loss 

of their employment, it is a mark of the wisdom of the previous 

government; that is, it is one instance where international 

restructuring is benefiting this province and its people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this would not and could not have been possible if 

SaskCOMP was still the creature of government, used to 

control information resources as the former government or the 

government of the '70s once intended. 

 

But I believe the facts are before us, Mr. Speaker.  The facts 

are that restructuring is going on and will continue to go on.  

And certainly as we go into the late 1990s and into the year 

2000, we will continue to see major restructuring going on in 

the computer business.  And with a little foresight and a little 

wisdom and a willingness to let the market be the main 

determinant in which direction development will go, with those 

things, restructuring can in fact be a major benefit to this 

province, much more so than others. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in considering this Bill to erase the error 

that was SaskCOMP, to erase that error from the law books, we 

should learn the lessons that are so clearly being provided to 

us.  The lessons of this repeal Act are not difficult to 

understand if one only wants to learn them, Mr. Speaker.  And 

I believe it is incumbent on me and my colleagues to try to help 

members opposite learn those lessons. 

 

The fact that under the NDP government of the '70s this 

province saw no diversification, which has been the primary 

harm to our people -- and I talked about diversification earlier 

on, Mr. Speaker, as well -- the fact that we must . . . and we 

must continue to diversify our economy in order to build for 

our young people and to build for our children and to build for 

the future. 



360 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1993 

But, Mr. Speaker, there was always a silver cloud, as they say.  

And the silver cloud and the NDP's mismanagement to our 

economy is a fact that we have few or no factories left to fall 

victim to restructuring.  Indeed the industrial efforts of the 

government of the '70s never even survived that decade, so it 

was a kind of made-in-Saskatchewan restructuring where 

government ownership wreaked its own havoc.  And then in 

the '80s, as a new government laid down a policy foundation 

that was responsive to change and sensitive to technological 

advance, Mr. Speaker, it was able to privatize WESTBRIDGE 

and out of that came ISM. 

 

And now the lesson is that if we are wise, if we are observant, 

we can ensure that we have policies in place that make 

Saskatchewan an attractive place to invest, a good place for 

new businesses fleeing the business terrorism of governments 

in other parts of our country.  And certainly we know of the 

difficulties and the businesses that want to leave places like 

Ontario and British Columbia.  And why not come and settle in 

this province. 

 

So I say to members opposite, take the lessons of this Bill and 

recognize that as firms are forced to close in Ontario they will 

be looking for new places to invest.  Let's build a climate for 

them to invest in this province.  I believe we can make 

Saskatchewan one of those places. 

 

The opportunities, Mr. Speaker, are real, as is demonstrated by 

WESTBRIDGE-ISM.  I believe, Mr. Speaker, the NDP would 

never have believed that it would be possible to have IBM join 

in a partnership in Saskatchewan headquartered in Regina on 

our own university campus.  They would never have believed 

and they would have been shocked to even contemplate the 

concept.  And I believe the introduction of the previous Bill is a 

good indication of where the NDP find themselves changing in 

the mid-stream and deciding that certainly there is nothing 

wrong with technological advancement. 

 

But the fact is, Mr. Speaker, that it was true, and is true and the 

proof is the Bill before us now.  We can attract the biggest and 

the best in the world to share their investment, their 

technology, their knowledge, their marketing systems, their 

economic growth skills.  We can attract them here, Mr. 

Speaker, and we are debating the proof of the pudding. 

 

And why would the government not accept this Bill of proof of 

that simple principle?  Now, Mr. Speaker, you see 

self-contradictory arguments coming out of the NDP on this 

issue of SaskCOMP and WESTBRIDGE.  On the one hand, 

when right after the shares were issued, the share price 

increased, the NDP, and in particular the member from 

Riversdale, shouted that this was proof that the shares were 

offered at too low a price and that the privatization amounted to 

a give away. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, remember the debate when the share 

value fell?  You had the very same NDP 

members arguing quite loudly that that was proof that it was a 

bad deal and people were being ripped off. 

 

So it's shows the kind of schizophrenia that exists in the 

government benches, Mr. Speaker.  It's no good if share prices 

go up and it's no good if share prices go down.  I'm confident 

that if share prices had stayed exactly the same they would 

have shouted that that was no good either. 

 

So it would be interesting, Mr. Speaker, if tonight we might 

hear whether the government has come to a conclusion about 

share prices for the former SaskCOMP.  Have they decided 

whether they would like those prices moving up or down, and 

which means what to this government.  What's good or bad, or 

do they even understand the question, Mr. Speaker?  I suspect 

they do not understand the question.  I suspect not. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased that this Bill is coming 

forward early in the session and very pleased to have an 

opportunity to expound on the benefits that a major, private 

sector computer firm holds for our people.  There can be no 

disputing that the future of the world economy does in fact lay 

with computer systems and information -- what they call the 

information economy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as the world moves increasingly into the information age, 

here in Saskatchewan we will stand as one of the great 

beneficiaries through the value our economy achieves with 

ISM-WESTBRIDGE, and it is truly an exciting industry. 

 

(2145) 

 

When you go over to the University of Regina and have a look 

at what is going on in this major firm, you see that they have 

very, very talented people working with them, people with a 

sense of the future -- even a vision, Mr. Speaker.  They see 

great opportunities in improving the collection, processing, and 

retrieval of information in major systems that are almost 

entirely dependent on information for the success.  And of 

course, they are extremely active in serving the 

telecommunications market, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do not have a list of all the telephone 

corporations with which they have contracts, but I do believe 

that the British Columbia telephone system is one of their 

customers, and I believe that so too are Alberta and Manitoba 

phone companies. 

 

Now I stand to be corrected on that, Mr. Speaker, but whatever 

the detail, I do know that the firm has a number of service 

contracts with major telecommunications corporations, and 

these are stable, secure clients based on the very high quality of 

work that the firm does on their behalf.  They're not simply 

little patronage assignments such as always went to the 

companies owned by the government.  They are genuine, 

private sector, competitive contracts. 

 

If ISM does not successfully deliver the services their 



March 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 361 

clients require and expect, they will lose the business.  And so 

it is a highly competitive, highly service-oriented firm and it is 

recognized as one of the very best in the world, right here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I think that, Mr. Speaker, is a credit to every employee of 

ISM-WESTBRIDGE.  I know that those employees are 

interested in the emerging technologies in computer software in 

telecommunications. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a great deal going on, even at the level of 

computer operating systems.  The move is on away from 

mainframes and minis to personal computers and workstations, 

to local area networks and wide area networks connecting 

smaller computers.  And those smaller computers, Mr. Speaker, 

have nearly the same power as the mainframes today. 

 

I am told, Mr. Speaker, that the University of Saskatchewan in 

the 1960s operated its entire system on a computer with 16K of 

RAM (random-access memory), Mr. Speaker.  A "K" is 1,000 

bytes or about 1,000 characters of information, so at one time 

the entire university operated on 16K.  Today, Mr. Speaker, 

you cannot even buy a toy computer with that little memory.  

Now the average computer sold for home use has 4 megabytes, 

which is 4 million characters-worth of memory. 

 

That's what is going into the homes of people today -- 

machines dramatically, almost unimaginably more powerful 

than what was used to run an entire university two short 

decades ago.  And ISM-WESTBRIDGE is on the cutting edge 

of squeezing the greatest performance out of these 

technological enhancements, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Because the hardware keeps getting more and more powerful, 

and more and more sophisticated, it is up to people like the 

employees at ISM-WESTBRIDGE to write the software that 

will take advantage of that power and sophistication.  And it is 

apparent, Mr. Speaker, that they are well able to do so or they 

would not be continually obtaining new contracts and new 

clients. 

 

So while we applaud the end of the SaskCOMP law, we should 

also applaud the employees of the firm that replaced it, for it is 

those employees who have made the great success of this firm 

possible.  Naturally they could not have done this had the NDP 

managed to have their way and forced SaskCOMP to continue 

as a government agency.  All of the successes we have been 

discussing would not have happened, could not have happened 

if the NDP Party had had its way. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, as this Bill so eloquently shows, the 

government did not have its way and ISM-WESTBRIDGE is a 

reality -- a reality, Mr. Speaker, that contributes to the 

provincial economy every day.  Rather than simply consuming 

tax resources as the Saskatchewan Computer Utility did, 

WESTBRIDGE contributes taxes and resources to the 

government and the economy as a whole. 

Surely the government can see this as a role model.  Surely the 

government can see the implications for repeating these 

successes through making a public share offering in 

SaskEnergy and SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance).  

Why wouldn't the government do that, Mr. Speaker?  Why 

wouldn't they make a public share offering in SaskEnergy and 

SGI? 

 

Surely as we discuss this Bill, we should be discussing the 

principle it embraces, which is the principle of getting the 

government out of the way of development and diversification, 

and letting the people themselves make a go of the 

opportunities that present themselves. 

 

And just as this Bill is a testament to the success of 

WESTBRIDGE, Mr. Speaker, so too we could be discussing 

the success of a private sector SaskEnergy.  Just as the 

privatization of SaskCOMP saw the firm diversify and move 

onto the cutting edge, so too could SaskEnergy in the private 

sector move into marketing environmentally friendly 

appliances and all manner of things that we cannot now 

imagine, because that is how the market works. 

 

Creativity is rewarded.  Innovation brings profits.  Private 

incentive leads to diversification.  I believe that is the reality of 

what this Bill is proclaiming, Mr. Speaker.  And it is a lesson 

that current government would do well to apply in many other 

areas as it tries to wake itself up and get some job creation 

going in this province.  And we're all aware of the demand by 

the public and the expectations for job creation. 

 

And as I've been speaking about ISM-WESTBRIDGE, Mr. 

Speaker, it is a good example of the type of job creation that 

has been created in this province with the technological 

abilities and advancements that have taken place and the 

availability of people in this province applying the learning and 

applying their gifts and abilities in developing technology. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is why I've so proudly stood in support 

of computer technology and ISM-WESTBRIDGE.  And that is 

why, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the Bill as it's presented 

to this House today. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that my colleagues have also 

further comments to bring to the floor before we bring this Bill 

to committee.  So at this time, I just want to thank you for your 

indulgence. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I hope 

that I can be as convincing speaking to Bill 26 as I was earlier 

this evening speaking to Bill 25.  I want to assure the 

Legislative Assembly that I will not be recycling old 

ministerial speeches, but rather I will be dealing with 1993 

issues, that being the year that we're in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill 26, An Act to repeal The Saskatchewan 

Computer Utility Corporation Act, is 



362 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1993 

very similar to Bill 25 in that it has three sections.  Section 1 

which says: 

 

 This Act may be cited as The Saskatchewan Computer Utility 

Corporation Repeal Act. 

 

Section 2 which says: 

 

 The Saskatchewan Computer Utility Corporation Act is 

repealed. 

 

 On the day that this Act comes into force, the assets and 

liabilities of the Saskatchewan Computer Utility Corporation 

are transferred at their book value to the Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan. 

 

And section 3 -- now this is a real long Bill -- section 3 says: 

 

 This Act comes into force on a day to be fixed by 

proclamation of the Lieutenant Governor. 

 

End of Bill 26. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill has nothing to do with Orwell's book, 

1984.  It does nothing to change the course of history.  It is not 

about GigaText or Nabu or George Armstrong being the first 

man to set foot on the moon. 

 

This Bill does two things: it repeals the SaskCOMP Utility 

Corporation Act, and it transfers the assets of SaskCOMP at 

book value to Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

This Bill is done, Mr. Speaker, to clean up some of the carnage 

that has taken place by the PC Conservative Party over the past 

nine and a half years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: -- And by their former leader who said, 

Saskatchewan has so much going for it, you can afford to 

mismanage it and still break even -- he said that.  We're now 

witnessing the proof. 

 

Previously, Mr. Speaker, in 1978, SaskCOMP was set up -- 

why? -- because the government of the day believed that we in 

Saskatchewan could control some of the dealings of the 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: -- We could run a computer operation to take care 

of some of the computer needs of the government and of the 

Crown corporations, not IBM, a multinational.  We could do it 

here in Saskatchewan ourselves, and we could do it at 

significant savings to Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this particular Bill that we're talking about 

tonight has nothing to do with one party's faith in the people of 

Saskatchewan and another party's lack of faith in the people of 

Saskatchewan.  It has everything to do with two things: 

repealing the Saskatchewan Comp Utility Corporation Act 

repeal 

and at the same time transfers the remaining, the residual assets 

after the give-aways of the former government.  It deals with 

the residual assets, transfers them to Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan, full stop, period.  That's what 

Bill 26 does and it does nothing more, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I will be supporting Bill 26 because it's the only logical thing to 

do and I urge members to quit filibustering, let's get on and talk 

about the important things that affect people in this legislature.  

Mr. Speaker, I support Bill 26. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a pleasure 

to be able to speak on this Bill today because the story behind 

the repeal of the Saskatchewan Computer Utility Corporation is 

truly a Saskatchewan success story -- not only the success story 

of a computer company but a perfect example of how well 

public participation works. 

 

The privatization of this corporation, the allowing of people as 

individuals to participate in the corporation is indeed a 1993 

concept.  This is an example of what the people of 

Saskatchewan wish to be able to do in this province.  They 

wish to be able to participate as individuals in the economic 

activities of this province. 

 

The member from Regina Albert North brings forward a very 

simplistic view of what this corporation is all about. 

 

It's very important, we believe, Mr. Speaker, that people have 

the ability to be part of the corporation; to be part of the direct 

ownership of the corporation, not simply through a tax base. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- People believe in the privatization of the 

public corporations and their own personal ownership of that 

because it does work, Mr. Speaker.  Bill 26 is proof that public 

participation works because it is dissolving what was once the 

Crown-owned SaskCOMP. 

 

In 1988, SaskCOMP became WESTBRIDGE Computers 

through a merger involving two public sector and two private 

sector companies -- the merger between Saskatchewan 

Computer Utility Corporation, Mercury Graphics, and 

Leasecorp Western which formed WESTBRIDGE Computers.  

They showed a profit of $5.5 million on revenues of 127.5 

million in its first year of operation.  In just two years, the 

company had expanded to the United States and to eastern 

Canada.  Saskatchewan had the leading edge in Air Canada 

high-tech ticket sales, NFL tickets, computer leasing to Gulf 

and Shell oil companies, and with North America automobile 

dealership programs. 

 

SaskCOMP employed about 300 people before the merger.  

Today WESTBRIDGE is named ISM -- Information Systems 

Management Corporation -- and employs over 3,000 people 

across Canada, Mr. 



March 15, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 363 

Speaker.  What is notable, Mr. Speaker, is that the rapid growth 

of the employee base benefits many. This benefits many people 

in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  And I'm not talking about just 

the owners and the employees who own shares in 

WESTBRIDGE.  I am talking about Regina and Saskatchewan 

as a whole.  ISM contributes to children and families by 

supporting the Saskatchewan Science Centre, the Regina 

General Hospital neonatal unit, and Jeux Canada Games . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  It now being 10 o'clock this 

House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 2 p.m. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 

 

 


