




















































Hansard: April 01, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 793 

 April 1, 1993 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Interim Supply 

 

The Chair: — Order. The House should come to order. Before 

the Committee of Finance is the resolution moved by the 

Minister of Finance: 

 

 That a sum not exceeding $340,881,000 be granted to Her 

Majesty on account for the twelve months ending March 31, 

1994. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I 

notice in the budget document the Department of Finance has 

allocated a significant sum of money to deal with budget 

analysis. Now the minister yesterday told me that advertising 

was included in this Appropriation Bill, that indeed there was a 

twelfth allocated that would cover off advertising. 

 

So what I'd like to know from the minister is that in this 

twelfth, this 430 million-plus that we're dealing with here in 

this Appropriation Bill, if that would include the budget 

analysis that they budgeted for this year. 

 

We've been asking a lot of questions about studies and impacts 

and what would happen with increases in sales tax and that sort 

of thing. I would presume with that much money allocated — 

4.3 million for budget analysis — that some of this twelfth 

would be dedicated toward that, and I wonder if the minister 

could identify that for us. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Yes. A portion of the advertising is 

included in the $4.6 million, the one-twelfth portion. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Now that we know 

that you advertise, what I'd like to know is, of the four million 

three hundred — not four million six hundred — four million 

three hundred that is budget analysis, how much of that 

analysis obviously would be being dealt with in this $430 

million. You've just brought your budget down, and I would 

presume that you're doing some impact studies and that type of 

thing. Would you tell us what portion of this is . . . is it 

one-twelfth of the four million three or is it larger? Is it 

smaller? Could you tell us what's going on there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, of the 4.6 million that 

we're voting today, 4.616 million which is . . . represents 

one-twelfth of the amount to be voted, the 55 million, a portion 

of that will be used for advertising, or was used for advertising 

and was also used to print the vision statements. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — And I appreciate that, Mr. Minister. You've 

been forthcoming on this advertising thing. I'm talking about 

budget analysis. There's an item that talks about budget 

analysis, okay? And that budget analysis is ongoing as I 

understand, by the Department of Finance on a yearly basis. 

And you 

must be doing some now and you must be paying for it. I'm 

wondering what portion we've got. Is it a twelfth or is it more 

or is it less? Tell us what portion we're at and then we'll get into 

the details of what exactly you're doing there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, of the one-twelfth portion 

. . . and I understand what the member is talking about. He's 

talking, I believe, on page 57. I believe you're on the item 

number 6 where it talks about analysis. 

 

Now that doesn't necessarily mean that one-twelfth of this 

analysis is used in the month of April. It could be more or it 

could be less, but it's a portion of the 4.3 you were talking 

about. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Would you like to share with us tonight who 

would be undertaking that analysis, given that we now have 

established that you are into the process, that you are spending 

money out of this appropriation on it? And would you tell us 

who is doing what for you and in what forms, what things they 

might be looking at in the way of analysis? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — The budget analysis, Mr. Chairman, is 

done by the officials at the Department of Finance. And as to 

the nature of the analysis, that will be dealt with in Committee 

of Finance. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we're running up 

against the reluctance again of this minister to answer for the 

money that's being asked for. 

 

We've established that there's budget analysis going on. There's 

advertising attached to that analysis. There could be polling 

attached to it. There could be all sorts of things. But anyway, 

it's ongoing and the money is coming out of this $430.811 

million that we're dealing with, okay. So we've established all 

of those things but then when we ask the minister exactly what 

is going on, he doesn't want to talk about it. He wants to shove 

it off. 

 

And that's the problem we're having here, Mr. Chairman, is that 

it is quite legitimate. Given my review of Hansard over the last 

10 years and the types of questions that have been answered in 

this Assembly . . . even last year the member from Dewdney 

was more forthcoming than what we're getting here today. And 

it's quite legitimate I think that in this twelfth the taxpayers are 

having to come up with to pay, that this Department of Finance 

— not anyone else, the minister says it's only his department — 

is conducting this budget analysis. 

 

And I suspect that that analysis, Mr. Chairman, has to do with 

some of the questions that we've asked previously. I mean all 

the minister has to do is stand up and say the Department of 

Finance is doing some analysis on the impact of 9 per cent 

sales tax versus 8 per cent or versus 7 per cent and what it's 

doing to things like cross-border shopping and what it's doing 

to the retail sector in the province. And is this analysis showing 

that their projected revenues are going to be 



794 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1993 

in place so that we can meet the other eleven-twelfths of the 

year? 

 

And I don't know what the reluctance is of the minister to 

indicate that they're out in the field at least and doing that. I 

mean if he says that he won't share that data with us until a 

later date we may have to be satisfied with that. But we want to 

know that he's out doing that. Or if he's not doing that, is he 

studying the raise in the gasoline taxes or is he studying 

corporate capital taxes? 

 

Is he studying the fuel tax on diesel locomotives in the 

province for CPR (Canadian Pacific Railway)? People in 

Moose Jaw asked me about the costs of diesel locomotive fuel 

and how it impacts on our community. Now if this analysis is 

touching those kind of things, I think it behoves the minister, 

seeing as he's asking for the money to spend on it, that he 

would want to fill in the Assembly and the taxpayers of this 

province what he is doing. If he's trying to tell me the 

Department of Finance is in the budget analysis and there's no 

goals in mind, then I think we've got a serious problem here 

that we would spend $4.3 million on analysis with no goals. So 

we just want the minister to assure the House and the taxpayers 

what those goals are, what projects he's working on, and so that 

at a later date maybe we can ask questions on the results. 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, the minister refuses to even answer that. 

 

An Hon. Member: — There was no question. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — I asked the minister specifically before what 

budget analysis his department was undertaking with the 

portion of the $4.3 million dedicated to budget analysis. And 

he has said there is advertising and there is ongoing work by 

his department. I have now asked the minister exactly what is 

the nature of that ongoing work that he is dedicating this 

money from this Appropriation Bill toward. Would he care to 

share that with the House? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I answered the 

question as to the advertising. I've answered the question as to 

who does the analysis, and that's the Department of Finance. 

I've answered the question whether it's just temporary or 

ongoing, and it's an ongoing analysis. As to the details of that 

analysis, Mr. Chairman, I will repeat for the umpteenth time, 

that that is a matter for the Committee of Finance, and we will 

not discuss that here tonight. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Chairman, I'm not asking for details. I 

don't really care about what they find out on next Thursday. All 

I'm asking the minister is, are you studying the global impact 

— okay, global — of sales tax increases on the population of 

Saskatchewan? Are you studying other areas that affect 

government revenue? Nothing specific. I don't want to know 

about my neighbour down the street and how much he's paying. 

 

I'd like to know what the Department of Finance is 

doing with the money that they're asking for. They have 

budgeted a significant sum of money for analysis. Is it polling? 

That's very broad. Polling covers the entire province. What 

exactly are the Department of Finance involved in when they're 

spending our money that they're here asking for in this 

legislature tonight? Not specifically, globally if you wish, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, globally I think I have 

answered it. Unfortunately, maybe I haven't answered to the 

satisfaction of the Leader of the Opposition, but the 

Department of Finance is studying all areas of the budget and 

all the implications. And as far as the specifics are concerned, I 

will stay with my answer, Mr. Chairman, that we will deal with 

that in Committee of Finance. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Minister, that's not good enough. 

It's not good enough. You cannot deny Saskatchewan taxpayers 

the right to know that as you come in here and spend their 

money that there aren't certain things going on in your 

department that you would think would be beneficial to them. 

 

There's a lot of people out there on Main Street, Saskatchewan, 

are saying that these things have very significant impact on me. 

I would think they would want to know from their Minister of 

Finance or their Associate Minister of Finance that his 

department was out studying some areas of taxation, that he 

was studying things like our GDP (gross domestic product) and 

how it grows or recedes with exports. 

 

We've had the Wheat Pool and other companies marketing 

directly in the United States for the very first time. It must be 

affecting the GDP of the province, okay. There are things with 

fuel tax occurring because of the large movement of grain by 

truck. 

 

Mr. Minister, are you studying those things. I mean, give us 

some indication that as we provide supply here, some 

indication exactly what you're up to when you're spending the 

money, not just simply come in here and say well, we're 

spending it, trust us. That's not good enough. There are a lot of 

issues out there on the minds of the public, and I think it's 

appropriate that you categorize those issues in the minds of the 

public and be a little more forthcoming as to what you're 

analysing in Department of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, the Leader of the 

Opposition talks about us denying the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan information. Well I'd like to say to the Leader of 

the Opposition that if we don't get interim supply passed within 

a reasonable length of time, then they will be denying some 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan some income. So I think he has to 

be careful of who is denying the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 

anything. 

 

There are lots of issues on the minds of the people of 

Saskatchewan, all kinds of issues. The biggest issue that is on 

the minds of the people of Saskatchewan is the horrendous debt 

that the people opposite left us. That's the biggest issue on their 

minds and they have entrusted us with the responsibility to try 

and 



April 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 795 

eliminate that. That's what's on the minds of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan understand, I think far better than 

the members opposite, that what we're dealing with here is an 

interim supply Bill, a supply Bill which simply says that we 

need one-twelfth of the estimated amount, the amount to be 

voted. We need one-twelfth of that in order to operate for the 

month of April so that we can get through the month of April. 

And during the course of the month of April we will have 

plenty of time to discuss the details of the budget and all other 

details that members opposite would like to talk about. 

 

(1915) 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I say to the Finance 

minister that if you're simply going to accept the advice of the 

Government House Leader, the member from Elphinstone, as 

to how you're going to handle this debate, it's going to be a 

long, long, frosty debate. The Government House Leader had 

ample opportunity to bring this interim supply Bill in days ago 

and chose not to, chose not to. 

 

So if there's somebody out in our province tomorrow or the 

next day that goes without, there's only one person to blame, 

Mr. Finance Minister, Mr. Associate Minister of Finance, and 

that's the member from Elphinstone. He's the guy that controls 

the flow in here. So if you want to keep talking to him and 

getting advice from him, it's going to be a long, long time 

before people maybe get their pay cheques. Because he's the 

last guy in the world you should be talking to, believe me, the 

last guy in the world. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I think it is very, very legitimate to explain 

to people in a broad way if you wish, in a global way if you 

wish, some of the issues that you're doing your budget analysis 

on. I mean you have had the budget down for several weeks 

now and we're seeing a very broad-based reaction across the 

province of Saskatchewan to a lot of the initiatives. 

 

And yes, people are concerned about the debt. But they're also 

very concerned, Mr. Minister, of how they are going to keep 

themselves whole long enough to keep contributing to the 

society they live in to pay off that debt. And they're very 

concerned that you're shoving them very close to the edge, that 

they may not be able to contribute any more. And that's why 

they're asking us . . . They're phoning in. They phoned in 

between 5 and 7 o'clock tonight and they said ask the Minister 

of Finance exactly what he is studying. Are they serious about 

looking at the impact of some of these tax increases on our 

ability to function? 

 

I'm not asking you for specifics, Mr. Minister. You come in 

here, you ask for a certain amount of money to do budget 

analysis. Why don't you run through the list and tell the folks 

out there exactly what you're analysing, how you're analysing 

it. Give them some feeling of security that you're on top of the 

game, that you're not abdicating your responsibility. 

So once again, Mr. Minister, forget about the political advice of 

your House Leader and just stand in your place and tell the 

folks exactly what your department's up to. And do it in a 

global sense. I mean if you want to go from Lloydminster to 

Swift Current to Estevan, I mean there's lots of room out there 

for you to work, Mr. Minister. Just tell the folks what this 

analysis that they're paying for tonight is up to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to 

refer the Leader of the Opposition to the budget address, the 

booklet Securing Our Future. And on page 26, from page 26 

to page 41, there's a fairly detailed description as to how we 

propose to balance the budget, showing our fiscal plan for not 

only this year but for the next four years. 

 

And if they would turn to page 40 of the same document, we 

show very clearly what we believe is the Saskatchewan 

economic forecast, indicating the numbers that we think that 

we're going to be dealing with in the period from '93 to '96. The 

information is there. If the member opposite wants to look at 

that information and needs it, it's there for him to see. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — I appreciate that, Mr. Minister, and I 

appreciate the answer. We're getting somewhere now. We've 

got a number of areas here. Now you've already spent the 

money to come up with these numbers. Now what you have 

done is you have budgeted for further money. You've said, over 

the next year I got to have X number of dollars in order to 

continue this process on in all of these line items here. See how 

close you're going to get to what you've projected back here on 

page 26. I presume that's the process that . . . the outline on 

page 26 gets us to page 40. And you're going to track those 

things. 

 

Now you've come in here and asked for a sum of money to do 

that tracking, to be involved in determining whether these 

numbers are false or true. Now, Mr. Minister, would you mind 

going through here and telling us right now because obviously 

you're spending money; you've admitted that. And you're 

advertising; you're doing things. Would you go through here 

now and tell us which of those items you're presently involved 

in, which ones you're working on because I don't think you've 

got the manpower to work on them all at the same time. I mean 

go through here and . . . we got sales tax. You know, these 

various sectors here, we got to know what exactly is shaken 

out. 

 

So maybe you could stand up and go through these sectors here 

and tell us exactly where you're spending the money you're 

asking for tonight and tell us how it's going. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I believe that 

the Leader of the Opposition probably underestimates the 

capabilities of the Department of Finance, the officials over 

there. The Department of Finance is doing exactly what you 

will see in the blue book on page 57, item 6. The Department 

of Finance, it says there: 



796 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1993 

Develops and analyzes revenue, expenditure, economic 

and compensation policies to assist Treasury Board and 

Cabinet in developing and implementing the Government's 

fiscal plan. 

 

Page 57, item 6. And these are ongoing and the Department of 

Finance is involved in all of them simultaneously. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well that's nice to know, Mr. Minister, that 

your department is that efficient. I think the taxpayers 

appreciate that. But I don't think any one of us are so naïve to 

expect that some particular one or other in the short time frame 

since the budget isn't drawing a little bit more attention than the 

other. I mean Treasury Board's got decisions to make. That's 

the way Treasury Board operates. I've been around the 

Treasury Board table the odd time, Mr. Minister; understand 

the process quite well. 

 

Since your budget came down I suspect you're doing some 

tracking. I mean we gave the provincial seal carrier here 

another 800,000 bucks to handle the polling and the advertising 

and the politics. I mean either the seal is weighing a lot more 

these days than it used to, or else something else has been 

added to the mix, so I suspect there's some tracking going on 

and you've said there's advertising. And I suspect that you're 

tracking one, two, three major areas. 

 

As I said last night or yesterday, your officials always have 

options for you. There's that law of diminishing returns on 

booze and cigarettes and those types of things and I would 

think that you'd be watching your laws of diminishing returns 

in certain areas. 

 

So why don't you, Mr. Minister, now come clean with the folks 

and say that we're doing some analysis. Maybe you're going to 

fool me. Maybe it isn't on something that I've mentioned 

already. Maybe you're analysing something entirely different. 

But why don't you, in a global sense, talk about the work that's 

ongoing now. Pick out of the whole bunch and tell us about a 

few that you're spending our money on. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, the items I listed before 

for the Leader of the Opposition still hold true and I'll go 

through these again and then I'll give him a little different 

information that he may be looking for. 

 

That we develop an analysis of revenue which is fairly broad, 

expenditures, economic and compensation policies, and I won't 

read the rest. The things that are not listed here that maybe 

would help the member in his understanding of this is, we're 

always studying federal-provincial relations. We're obviously 

tracking the federal budget when it comes forward. We've been 

tracking provincial budgets from other provinces and we've had 

several of them now. And we're certainly tracking the federal 

offloading to see how it affects us. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — I appreciate that, Mr. Minister. It sounds like 

that there's a number of operations ongoing at once and 

certainly I can see where the federal budget and other 

provincial budgets would 

have an impact on what we might . . . what might happen here. 

 

There's a particular item that is of interest, Mr. Minister, that is 

affected all across the piece, I would suspect, and it's the whole 

area of federal transfer payments. And in your main budget 

document there was an item there with about a $106 million, I 

believe, that was overpayments — transfer payments that were 

overpayments — that because of the change in your accounting 

methods, you didn't have to start paying on immediately. 

Would that be one of the items that you would currently be 

tracking and be concerned about, given the federal budget? 

Would that be a type of item that you would be dealing with? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, the answer is yes; we 

certainly are tracking that one in dealing with that item. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Would you explain to me then what the 

process will be with that $106 million? Because there is some 

difficulty with the way the accounting methods have changed 

here from last year to this year in the way that that is dealt with. 

 

And would you mind explaining to the House how the province 

of Saskatchewan then is dealing with that $106 million and 

what the time lines are? It has a different connotation attached 

to it now than it had before. Would you mind doing that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — If I could refer the member probably to 

the budget address again on page 67 where it talks about 

accrual accounting, and there's several pages there that talk 

about the accrual accounting, but on page 69 where you have 

the "impact of accrual accounting on the accumulated deficit" 

and the fourth item — I believe it is — down the row there 

where it says "Equalization": $106.4 million. What that does 

. . . it simply has an impact on the accumulated deficit of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Would you mind 

informing the House what the presumed payment schedule will 

be on that? Does the federal budget that's coming down 

influence that payment schedule in any way? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — There are two questions there, Mr. 

Chairman. The first one, I think, was whether the federal 

budget had an impact on this. The answer is no, and our 

repayment schedule would start 1994-95 and it's five years. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Am I to presume, Mr. Minister, that those 

payments will all be in equal parts over that five-year period of 

time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — The answer to that is the payments will 

be approximately equal but there's no reason to believe that 

they'll be exactly the same — close. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Did that number change, Mr. 



April 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 797 

Minister, or is there interest accruing to that as it's spread over 

a period of time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, this amount is interest 

free. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — So we're to understand in the '93-94 figures 

there's no money allocated at all to this repayment schedule? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — In the "to be voted" on the sheet or the 

"statutory," the answer is no, nothing in the '93-94. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Okay, Mr. Minister, now that we've 

established that equalization is not part of this particular vote, I 

wonder if you might be forthcoming on some of the other items 

that you talked about that you are currently engaged in. 

Obviously this was an area of involvement with the federal 

government. You mentioned to me compensation policy, 

revenue projections. You said you were tracking other 

budgetary movements around the country. I presume that 

would mean the B.C. (British Columbia) budget, the budget in 

New Brunswick, and that type of thing. 

 

Would you be sharing, Mr. Minister, information for instance 

with the province of B.C.? Would you be sharing any tracking 

information or anything like that with them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, the Leader of the 

Opposition is right. We are tracking other provinces and — I 

think I mentioned that earlier — that we were looking at other 

provincial budgets. Are we sharing this tracking? The answer is 

no. 

 

(1930) 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Back to the revenue side, Mr. Minister, 

which obviously is very important part of your financial 

picture. I wonder if you might tell us on the revenue side — 

and I presume that you're talking once again about your 

projections here that you've made for '93; you run through 

about 10 items there — I wonder if you might tell the House 

now which ones of those items you're currently most involved 

with. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — I think, Mr. Chairman, I mentioned this 

earlier, that we were involved in the revenue side and that we 

were working on all of them simultaneously. It's not that you 

work on a couple this month and a couple next month. You 

work on them on a continuous basis for the entire year. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — I wonder, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, 

given that you're tracking all of them, would you — and you've 

allocated some significant money here to do this — I wonder if 

you might tell us . . . I'll just give you a for instance, and then 

you can tell us how you managed that. 

 

Let's go to personal income here. How would your department 

go about tracking that particular item on an ongoing basis? 

How would you track personal income? 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, the answer to that 

question is we would be tracking this by checking the orderly 

receipts that we receive from Ottawa based on the income tax. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, could you further explain 

orderly receipts. I mean the majority of the people in our part 

of the world only pay their income tax — for instance in the 

farm sector — once a year, usually at the end of April. How do 

you know that you're not getting a skewed number because we 

haven't hit the end of tax time sort of for rural Saskatchewan? 

What do you mean by that, and what's further to the process? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Just to elaborate a little bit on the orderly 

receipts, Mr. Chairman, Ottawa issues a schedule to the 

province, a forecast schedule, and what we do is we track the 

actual receipts against that forecast. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Would that, that schedule you get from 

Ottawa, Mr. Minister, would that be considered public 

information or is that something that only would be viewed by 

cabinet? Is that the kind of thing that you could share with the 

House, table so that the opposition could have a look at it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, the only way this could 

be shared is with Ottawa's permission and we would have to 

consult with them, and if they grant permission to share it, we 

would have no trouble sharing it. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I would 

respectfully request that you ask Ottawa if they would share 

that with us. I think that would be a very interesting document. 

 

I notice another area that is here, Mr. Minister, and I'm 

wondering if it deals with my area. I'm a farmer by profession, 

and I notice one of the things that you track in here and it has a 

real minus attached to it, and it's called real machinery and 

equipment investment. I'm wondering if that's simply the 

industrial sector or if that includes my sector which is the 

farming business because it has a negative 5.8. It obviously 

must be an area that you would have some concern about if it 

has dropped off that dramatically. I wonder if you could tell us 

exactly how you track that particular item. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, we certainly have the 

farm machinery included in this. As the words imply, it's real 

machinery and equipment investment, and that's all machinery 

and equipment sold in Saskatchewan. And we use Statistics 

Canada information. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, does Stats Can do this on a 

monthly basis, or quarterly, or how do they report that? How 

would your department be tracking that on a . . . Where they 

would be using money, say from this allocation? How would 

they be doing that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, we're finding 



798 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1993 

now that we're getting much more detail in the questions here 

than we have the information here for the . . . tonight for the 

interim supply. I would suggest that the member opposite, the 

Leader of the Opposition, if he wants these answers, if he 

would give us written notice, we'd be prepared to send him the 

answers. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well I appreciate that, Mr. Minister, but we 

were doing so well here, Mr. Chairman, I thought there was 

going to be some real progress, because we had determined a 

number of things. We'd determined that there was some money 

being allocated out of interim supply for this type of thing. We 

know that the government's engaged in a very broad-based 

technical analysis of all sectors of our economy and the 

minister has been forthcoming about a couple of them. 

 

And it's been fairly enlightening to understand this process that 

the government's currently going through as they verify the 

figures put out in the budget document. And I think that's the 

kind of thing people are really interested in; that these 

projections here are in fact legitimate, that the money being 

allocated by the Assembly in interim supply is going to a 

worthwhile endeavour. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I think given that you seem to have a fair 

wealth of information in most of these areas here and we know 

you've established that your people are working hard and 

they're doing this on a daily basis and you've got the waterfront 

covered, that perhaps we could go to an item on here which is a 

real, a real big item, we know, on the Saskatchewan economy, 

and that says retail sales. Now that's a big item. I understand 

from your budget projections here that you're talking about . . . 

out of the $190 million increase in taxes that approximately 

120, 130 million are coming out of retail sales. 

 

Now I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could tell us, on this 

projection here for 1993 of 4.2 per cent, if you could tell us 

what the process is that your people go through to determine 

and watch this. Like how do they . . . what's the . . . I don't want 

the . . . maybe the numbers; I want to know what the technical 

process is that your people go through and how they determine 

the ebb and the flow of retail sales. If you could do that for us, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, I certainly can do that for 

the Leader of the Opposition. We use StatsCanada statistics, 

and these come out on a monthly basis. The numbers are 

available on a monthly basis which shows the retail trade in 

Saskatchewan as well as retail trade in other provinces. And 

that's how we track those. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — All due respect, Mr. Minister, we're spending 

$4.3 million on analysis and I understand and appreciate that 

StatsCanada does good work and they probably pay their 

people well too. 

 

But you have some fairly well-paid folks that you tell me are 

— the deputy minister, I can appreciate, works 

hard for his money — you have folks that you just told me and 

told this Assembly and told everybody, you were covering the 

waterfront. These people were all working hard doing this 

analysis, okay, and you're . . . you got a big chunk of money 

here, Mr. Minister, to work with and you're doing it all the 

time. 

 

Now you can't tell me that StatsCanada is having to do all the 

work on retail sales. Mr. Minister, if you want the folks out 

there to believe that none of your officials do anything except 

offload on StatsCanada, then you're going to have to look at 

your complement that you've budgeted for in PYs 

(person-years) here, Mr. Minister. 

 

Could you please explain to me the process that your people 

do, beyond StatsCanada, to track retail sales in the province of 

Saskatchewan to meet the projection that you've done here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — I'm sure that the members of the Finance 

department appreciate the commendation from the Leader of 

the Opposition that they work hard, and I think it's evident here 

that they're working very hard again this evening and I'm sure 

there are others as well. 

 

Let me just explain; maybe I didn't say it very clearly before. 

The information, the source of the data that we have, comes 

from StatsCanada. They gather the data. What the Department 

of Finance does is the analysis, and the analysis takes time to 

come up with the correct conclusion. So we get the source, the 

source of the information is StatsCan, and the Finance people 

do the analysis. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — A couple of questions, Mr. Minister. Do you 

. . . First of all, is there any remuneration goes back to 

StatsCanada by the Government of Saskatchewan out of this 

vote that we have here as far as gathering that analysis? 

 

And . . . Well I'll let you answer that one and then we can get 

on to another one here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — No, the information from StatsCanada is 

published data and it's not only available to Finance 

departments but it's available to anybody, so there's no direct 

cost to us to get that information. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Are you saying to me, Mr. Minister, that you 

don't use any polling information? Your department does no 

polling or interaction with private sector groups, like the 

chamber of commerce or the independent business association 

or any of those people, when you put together your projections, 

an analysis to come up with a retail sales figure of 4.2 per cent 

for 1993, that you don't do any of that besides StatsCanada? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — That is correct. We do not survey 

retailers in Saskatchewan; we rely on the StatsCanada figures. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — That almost makes one wonder, Mr. 



April 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 799 

Chairman, if the entire analysis and sort of watchdog role for 

the small-business community in Saskatchewan, the retail 

community, is sort of all exclusively handled by the federal 

Department of Finance, that we might not be really worthwhile 

to let them collect all the taxes in the province of Saskatchewan 

and simply integrate our tax system with theirs and we could 

save the taxpayer even more money because it seems that we 

rely on them exclusively to fulfil that function, Mr. Minister. 

 

Have you ever . . . maybe do you think that's a bad idea that we 

should carry that integration even further, seeing as that you 

don't actually do any of that analysis yourself? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, I think I answered this 

question earlier, but I will . . . Just to make sure that I did, I will 

say it again. 

 

StatsCanada gathers the data; that's their job. And they have 

huge departments that do nothing but gather information. The 

analysis of that information — and it's a pretty large volume of 

information — is done by the Department of Finance. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, in your budget you have an 

initiative in a particular area, and that's the area of 

manufacturing or processing. It's very broad based, I 

understand, across the province. It's an initiative where you are 

rebating to the manufacturer any of his provincial sales taxes 

that he might accrue in that process from April 1 until the end 

of December of 1993. 

 

Is it StatsCanada that will garner all the information from that 

particular initiative to see how well it panned out? Because I 

presume you put a sunset on it of December 31 because you 

might terminate the program at that point and say it didn't work 

out or it didn't do what we expected or something like that. Is 

that the reason, Mr. Minister? And will the federal people be 

the ones that monitor that or will it be you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, on this question, 

Revenue Canada will supply the data for this and we will do 

the analysis. And I'm sure I caught this correctly, is that you're 

talking about the 8 per cent rebate on manufacturing, new 

manufacture, new initiatives. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well I understand from your budget 

document, Mr. Minister, that it's at the rate of the provincial 

sales tax or that was my understanding. If I'm wrong, correct 

me. And that anyone doing something different in the 

manufacturing and processing sector would be eligible to have 

their input cost, vis-a-vis the provincial sales tax, rebated to 

them from the time of April till December? 

 

(1945) 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — On page 57, on page 58 of the budget 

speech, I think this is clearly outlined here, that this is a rebate. 

And I read on the second bullet on page 57, near the bottom of 

the page there, it says: 

. . . Saskatchewan will introduce a temporary credit, the 

Manufacturing & Processing Tax Credit, equal to 8.0% . . . 

 

and so on. I don't think I need to read the rest. I think the 

member understands it. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Okay. Mr. Minister, I'm glad you corrected 

me, but when I look at this, I find this a little strange why your 

analysis would show that you should give them a 

manufacturing and processing tax credit equal to 8 per cent and 

still then you're having to go out and collect 1 per cent. I mean, 

isn't that rather . . . you must have a terrible administrative cost 

there, Mr. Minister, involved with . . . I mean they're paying 9 

per cent on their sales tax and you're giving them a tax credit 

for 8 per cent which leaves 1 per cent. Isn't that a little time 

consuming and exhaustive, Mr. Minister, that you would leave 

1 per cent hanging out there? Is it that valuable to you in this 

situation, that you would want to burn up administration for 1 

per cent? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, the way this works is that 

the person will pay the 9 per cent sales tax, we'll collect the 9 

per cent sales tax and then we will give them an 8 per cent 

credit. So I don't think that's got any relationship to the sales 

tax. It's basically a credit of 8 per cent based on a purchase of 

material, as it says here, for manufacturing and processing. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — I understand that, Mr. Minister. That's the 

way I do my GST (goods and services tax) on the farm. We 

pay the GST and then we send in our forms and then they 

rebate it back again to us. And as a business person I guess . . . 

I actually have a processing licence. I'm a registered seed 

grower who has a certified plant. I suppose if I want to take it 

one step further, I could maybe be eligible for this 8 per cent, if 

I create a new job or two and start processing a product that 

I've never processed before. Is that the type of thing that you're 

aiming at here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, I'll say to the Leader of 

the Opposition that now we're getting too specific for interim 

supply. Up to this point we were willing to go along with it, but 

now he's getting too specific and he's getting into a very 

particular area here which he will have to deal with in the 

Committee of Finance. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Hey, I didn't want to get into the specifics 

here, Mr. Chairman. I think it's important though that we 

understand the process of how this is being tracked, because 

that's the issue that we're dealing with here. The minister's 

department is spending the money on doing the tracking. And I 

wanted to understand the process very carefully here because I 

want to know, as he tracks with this $4.3 million, how when we 

get to the end of December here on this eight-month initiative 

where the government is going to issue tax credits worth 8 per 

cent, how it's all going to shake out. Okay? 

 

He's upped the sales tax from 8 per cent to 9 per cent 



800 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1993 

for the manufacturing and processing sector. They pay one 

more per cent of provincial sales tax — okay? — and for eight 

months the provincial government is going to give them a tax 

credit on those initiatives. Okay? So you pay in nine, you get 

eight back. 

 

And they're tracking this and they're analysing it, and the 

minister tells me that StatsCanada does that for them. Now he 

also tells me that StatsCanada are slow. StatsCanada don't 

come up with the information very fast so, Mr. Minister, let's 

envision the process going down the road and it is now 

December 31, 1993 and everybody out there that is ascribed to 

this process of yours has hired some more people; and I've 

gone out and I bought some more machinery; and I'm into this 

mode here for eight months because you told me to go out and 

create some jobs. Now bang — December 31st comes and 

you're telling me that StatsCanada is where you get your 

information from but they're slow. 

 

Now I've gone out and made a big capital investment and I've 

done some things. How do I know, Mr. Minister, that you aren't 

just going to slam the door in my face and leave me high and 

dry? I mean what . . . surely, Mr. Minister, you're not going to 

have a process that's that slow that you're not going to be able 

to tell these people what's going to happen here. So I think, Mr. 

Minister, you need to enlighten people here because I suspect 

there's people out there already planning to do this. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Well certainly we would be hoping that 

people would be taking advantage of this opportunity. Two 

things I would want to just say to the Leader of the Opposition. 

Just to clarify the 8 per cent . . . I mentioned we collect the 9 

per cent. The rebate would be 8 per cent of $1.09, if I use that 

analogy, so that in essence the person will get back 8.72 per 

cent of $1.09. Just to clarify that process. So it will get the 8 

per cent of the purchase of the product plus the 9 per cent tax 

that he pays. 

 

Revenue Canada administers this at a minimal cost to the 

province. And on December 31st, or after December 31st, 

Revenue Canada will report to the province the income tax that 

was payable, that they collected. And on that basis we will do 

the analysis and have a handle on how much it cost us and what 

manufacturing actually took place. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Okay, Mr. Minister, they are . . . they do this 

for you and they're going to report to you. But that report won't 

be available till you've got all the results in, right? Because 

your people don't do that. You rely on others to do that. You 

only analyse what they give you. So obviously what . . . I guess 

what you're saying then that, that this thing has a definitive end 

come December 31st. That there's no chance of this proceeding 

on into the future. Is that what you're telling me today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, the current plan of this 

government is to have this expire on December 31, 1993. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Will that analysis that the federal 

government does for you, Mr. Minister, also include . . . you 

have a number of items on page 40 that obviously are affected 

by this. We're talking about employment with your projections 

there, real GDP, real consumption, of course the machinery and 

equipment investment. There's a whole number of those areas 

that will be affected by this initiative potentially. And just to 

make sure, Mr. Minister, the federal government will be doing 

all of that analysis for you and then your people will throw it 

all in the hopper and sort of come up with whether you're on 

these numbers or not? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, Revenue Canada will do 

the collection of the data and some of the analysis. Most of the 

analysis is going to be done by the Department of Finance in 

Regina. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — I'm sorry, Mr. Minister, there was a bit of 

noise. You were saying that the federal government does part 

of the analysis but you do some in some of these areas that I 

outlined here, because there's a real impact across the piece 

here because of this type of a program. Now which parts then 

do you do without assistance from the federal government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Revenue Canada collects the data and 

tabulates it, puts it in a proper form. And that's their analysis. 

And then we pick it up from there and we do the analysis as it 

affects Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — And Revenue Canada is collecting the 8.79 

per cent of $1.09 for you again. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — I'll just run through the process again, 

and I think this may clarify it for the Leader of the Opposition. 

On this particular tax credit, Revenue Canada administers the 

credit, Revenue Canada pays the credit. Revenue Canada does 

the audits, collects the data, and we do the analysis in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Okay so as I understand this then, this isn't 

like a regular part of the PST (provincial sales tax), this is an 

agreement totally with . . . I mean the federal government 

appears to be doing everything related to this program. You 

just said the federal government collects the tax, they pay the 

tax credit, they do the audit, and they will compile the data and 

then you will do the analysis on it. Is that what I understand 

you saying? And the federal government does this all for you 

for nothing? Is that . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, we're a long ways into 

the questioning here. And I think earlier I said that there was a 

minimum cost from Revenue Canada and I'll just repeat that 

again, that Revenue Canada does charge us a minimum charge 

for doing this. It's like an income tax credit. As Revenue 

Canada collects the income tax from the people in 

Saskatchewan, this is just going to be part of that process. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Are you telling me, Mr. Minister, that the 

correlation between the level of provincial sales tax and what is 

being collected for you by the federal government have no 

relationship? Because I 



April 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 801 

remember distinctly the Minister of Economic Development 

here talking about his dealings with the people at IPSCO and 

his dealings with the people at Sears and others where he was 

tying the level of provincial sales tax directly to the ability to 

garner a tax credit of equivalent amounts for those 

organizations so that they weren't faced with the problem of 

PST. Are you telling me that this is an entirely separate deal 

from these other ones that are happening out there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — The answer is yes, Mr. Chairman, this is 

a separate deal. This is an income tax credit. This is not related 

to the sales tax. I believe the member's referring to some other 

tax initiative. This is not a sales tax. This is an income tax 

credit. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well that's very interesting, Mr. Minister, 

because as we've established here, these numbers in a number 

of areas are potentially affected one way or the other by the 

success or failure of this particular program. 

 

If you are getting analysis on this then, because of its potential 

effect on the federal government, would you not be getting 

analysis on the increase from 8 per cent to 9 per cent in the 

provincial sales tax as to how it will impact this particular 

program and others? 

 

(2000) 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — It seems to me, Mr. Chairman, we're 

getting much of the same question that we've already gone 

through once, but I'll try and answer this question again. That 

in this case, Ottawa collects the data and we do the analysis. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — I understand that, Mr. Minister. You've been 

very helpful to me in explaining this process involved with this 

particular sequence of events. What I want to know though is 

as part and parcel of that, obviously because it impacts so many 

areas here in your projections, that wouldn't there be some 

analysis — I don't care if you get it from StatsCanada or 

federal revenue or whoever — on the effect of going from 8 to 

9 per cent with the provincial sales tax and its possibility of 

affecting these figures. 

 

I mean you've got real consumption here at 2.8, you've got 

employment at 442, real GDP at 2.8. I would suspect . . . 

exports at one. I mean all of these things potentially are 

affected by the impact of this program. For eight months you 

have a very significant part of our sector potentially influenced 

that people jump in with both feet. 

 

And obviously some of these numbers are predicated on the 

success of that or you wouldn't have done it. You wouldn't 

announce that in the budget if you didn't think it was a 

worthwhile venture. Okay? You're hoping to do certain things 

to the Saskatchewan economy by putting it in there. You didn't 

put it in there just to fool anybody. 

 

You say that this is a positive economic indicator for the 

province of Saskatchewan, and your analysis and 

your tracking will be attuned to it whether you use all federal 

resources or some of your own. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, what I want to know is because we're into 

that, applications . . . I mean people must be doing things. Now 

that we're into that, I want to know who is going to provide you 

the analysis that shows the jump from 8 to 9 per cent in the 

provincial sales tax. I mean there will be some of that. Who 

will show you that so you can justify the viability of the 

program at the end of December? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the Leader of the 

Opposition is now starting to mix sales tax with an income tax 

credit. They're two entirely separate and different things, and 

you cannot compare apples to oranges. They're not the same 

thing. 

 

I have answered his questions concerning the manufacturing 

incentive tax. And we hope, as a Government of Saskatchewan, 

that many people will take advantage of this; that's why we put 

it there. We want people to take advantage of it. And if a lot of 

people take an advantage of this, it will obviously have some 

impact on our numbers. We're prepared for that. But we also 

believe that if many people take advantage of this that it will 

also have a significant impact on the income level of people in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So many of these things are going to be analysed once the 

program is done. All of these things will be analysed once the 

program is done because we do not have any figures. The 

program started today, so obviously we don't have any 

numbers, and we will not have any numbers until the end of the 

year, till December 31st, till the program is finished. 

 

But we cannot mix the 8 per cent credit with the sales tax. 

They're two entirely different and separate things. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I can appreciate the 

minister's reluctance to mention anything in the way about 

sales tax that might be construed with — we'll use the kind 

word — integration with other tax systems so that he doesn't 

have a visceral reaction that would not allow him to answer any 

more questions in this House now. 

 

Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, on page 58 of your budget 

address you talk about E&H (education and health) taxes and 

their phasing out and how this phasing out over a period of 

time on . . . How do you phrase it here? 

 

 Direct agents are those materials consumed or used for the 

transformation or manufacture of a product by contact or 

temporary incorporation into the raw materials being 

manufactured or processed. 

 

You must have, Mr. Minister, had somebody with a very large 

dictionary to get all of that in there so that you wouldn't have to 

use the word harmonization. But anyway in here you have a 

schedule of phasing out PST in the manufacturing process, if I 

can put it 



802 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1993 

bluntly. And you have combined that with your manufacturing 

and processing tax credit of 8 per cent and you will ensure the 

Saskatchewan manufacturing and process industry is in a 

stronger position to take advantage of the province's economic 

recovery. 

 

Well I can appreciate that, Mr. Minister. It seems to me seeing 

some analysis several years ago that talked about this same 

type of thing. But anyway . . . You have some very specific 

numbers there, Mr. Minister, in your budget address: 6.9. The 

phase-out of E&H when implemented will be 11.3 million per 

year for Saskatchewan's manufacturing and processing 

industry. 

 

Mr. Minister, you are doing some very, very good tracking, I 

would say, to project . . . I mean you're going here from the 

summer of 1992 to the end of 1994, I believe. And you've got 

some pretty darn good data here on what eliminating the sales 

tax, the PST, on manufacturing and processing will do, that 

along with your 8.79 per cent. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, if you're that accurate, you must be able to 

tell me what the effect on that sector is of moving the sales tax 

from 8 to 9 per cent. I mean we're getting into some pretty tight 

time lines and money lines here, Mr. Minister, and you're 

phasing it out, and you're combining it and you're doing lots of 

things. 

 

Now with those kind of numbers which obviously affect these 

ones on page 40, you should have some analysis that tells me 

what the potential is between 8 and 9 per cent or 7 and 9 per 

cent. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Again I must say, Mr. Chairman, the 

Leader of the Opposition is mixing the two different tax 

incentives. The first one is a rebate or phase-out of the direct 

agents, and the phase-out of the E&H. And it's an entirely 

different structure than the 8 per cent credit which is an income 

tax credit. 

 

The numbers that were used, that he was reading from the 

budget address, are numbers that are based on past history. 

Those numbers can obviously vary somewhat but they are 

projections and they're based on past history. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well I can appreciate, Mr. Minister, you 

projected a whole bunch of things here. You took great pride in 

it that you went out into 1996 and said this is the way it's going 

to unfold. And you're saying that a combination of these things 

is going to make it unfold like that. Right? 

 

But you did say this initiative, combined with the introduction 

of the manufacturing and processing tax credit, will help ensure 

that my projections are on line? That's what you're saying in 

the budget address here, that a combination of phasing out of 

E&H tax on direct agents occurring over the next three years 

bumps the numbers around in your favour. That's what you're 

saying in it, that with selective integration in certain industries 

you are able to achieve certain results, and those results are 

outlined here, Mr. Minister. 

Now what I would like to know, if you can be exacting enough 

to show the employment in this province going from 442,550 

or 452,000 in the next four years, that you should be able to tell 

me what the difference would have been on sales tax between 8 

and 9 per cent or between 7 and 9 per cent, that the impact . . . 

there has to be an impact, Mr. Minister. 

 

You can't sit there and tell me that all of this tracking that 

StatsCanada does for you and all of the analysis that this 

Department of Finance does for you and spends $4.3 million 

doing it don't have those kind of numbers, Mr. Minister. Come 

on now, we've gone a long way down the road here, and we've 

established a lot of things. You must have that kind of analysis. 

It's got to be ongoing, or you can't come up with this number. 

You can't project it out at four years. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, this is a fairly lengthy 

answer probably to also a lengthy question. 

 

First of all, let me assure the member that there's no integration. 

It's not there. No integration. 

 

An individual analysis on the various budget components is 

obviously done, and we had to undertake that individual 

analysis on some of these components but we don't do it on all 

of them. 

 

What we do is we take the totality of the various components, 

and we have the estimates, we have the Canadian dollar, we 

have international prices, we have inflation and we have 

interest rates. And when you take that in total, then you come 

up with the numbers that we have on page 40. 

 

And I think it has to be noted very clearly that these are 

forecasts and forecasts can change as circumstances change. 

But these are the forecasts that we have based on the things that 

I have mentioned, the Canadian dollar, international prices, the 

inflation and the interest rates. And this is the combination or 

the totality of that analysis. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well I can appreciate that, Mr. Minister, 

because you're pretty darn definitive. In page 59 of your budget 

address, in this particular area, you're saying 118.1 million 

extra revenue on sales tax, okay. I mean, we're not just 118 

million, we're 118.1. I would say that the sharp pencils were 

out over there and they've got her screwed down here to the last 

$100,000, okay. Now what that tells me is that you feel pretty 

confident in the analytical stuff that's coming back from 

StatsCanada for you to analyse in order to get down to the 

nearest $100,000, okay. 

 

Now as I would look at this, Mr. Minister, when I changed 

from 8 to 9 per cent, there's more than $100,000 involved on 

the total sales tax volume in the province of Saskatchewan. I 

think it's a little bit more than that. 

 

Given that it is such a large number and you are capable of 

crunching down to a very small number when setting your 

projections here, all I asked you 



April 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 803 

was what your analysis showed as far as the effect on . . . and I 

mean if you don't want to talk about anything except the 

manufacturing and processing industry, I'd be quite happy to 

just leave it there. We don't have to get into retail or other 

areas. I mean just the effect of increasing from 8 to 9 per cent 

in that sector because it's a very large number. Your analysis 

obviously gives you that capability because you've shown it 

here. 

 

(2015) 

 

And I'd just like you to enlighten us about that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, I think the hon. member 

from Thunder Creek is wandering a long ways from interim 

supply and I think we've been pretty lenient in letting him 

wander and giving him the information, but we're getting into 

far too much detail here. And if he wants to get the exact 

numbers and the specifics, he's going to have to wait for the 

Committee of Finance. 

 

I will however give him the answers to this question: 118.1 

million is the best estimate that we could get, the best estimate 

possible. And as I say, I'm sure he understands that this is an 

estimate. If he wants it broken down, I'll give you some rough 

numbers to break it down. And again, these are estimates and 

it's 70 million on the E&H and 48 with the addition of adult 

clothing. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, for those 

numbers. I was quite content to just get it on the manufacturing 

and processing industries, not the entire amount because I 

didn't want to deviate from our discussion because we were 

moving down this track in this one particular area and it dealt 

with a number of things that obviously have fairly detailed 

analysis. So I appreciate that answer. 

 

You don't have much leeway, Mr. Minister, unfortunately, 

when you make your projections with some people that rate 

you and can cost you a lot of money. And I suspect that's why 

the people in your department have got it down to the nearest 

hundred thousand. They feel that they need to show the folks in 

the bond-rating agencies that they're dead on the money and 

they don't want to be out by several dozen million dollars 

because that does terrible things to your rating and the interest 

rate that you may potentially pay. So you want to be pretty well 

on the money. 

 

Given that, Mr. Minister, that you want to be on the money and 

you've signed . . . you told me $70 million generally and there 

was 48 on clothing, I believe. That 70 million, what portion of 

that accrues to the area that we've been discussing which was 

that manufacturing and processing area which is where you do 

your analysis? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, none of the 70 million 

would accrue to that. I'd just like to comment on some of the 

things the member mentioned regarding the rating agencies and 

so on. I think the member will agree, if he takes a look at page 

30 of the 

budget address and reads through some key assumptions, and I 

think he will agree that the assumptions we've taken there is a 

very cautious, realistic approach to the price of oil, for instance, 

and the price of potash. And a cautious approach to the interest 

rates, who are at short-term 7 and long-term 9 per cent. 

Obviously these are not definitive. These are assumptions we 

make and we base our budget on those assumptions. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well I can appreciate that, Mr. Minister, that 

you want to be fairly small c conservative when you're dealing 

with people that lend you money. There's no doubt about that. 

And I might take issue with some of the numbers here but I 

guess we'll just have to let them shake out. 

 

But I think the point that I've been getting at is that you have 

made some very definitive projections here over a four-year 

period of time — 1993, '94, '95, '96. And you have a fair chunk 

of money tied up in analysing how you get there. 

 

You've asked for $4.3 million to do that. You've explained the 

relationship that you have with the federal government in a 

number of areas now: that they do a lot of your analytical work 

for you; that they collect taxes for you; that they do rebates for 

you. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I ask you one more time in this particular 

area. You have attached a number here to retail sales — 4.2 per 

cent growth in 1993. Given your analysis that the federal 

government has provided to you for 1992 when the sales tax 

rate was at 8 per cent, surely to goodness you could tell me 

what going to 9 per cent does on this number. 

 

At 8 per cent would it have been at 4.2, would it have been at 

4.3, would it have been at 3.9? I mean there's that law of 

diminishing returns in there some place, Mr. Minister, that 

somebody came in and said: you can't go there because you'll 

get stepped on. Okay? 

 

You've had that analysis and I just would like you to share that 

with us because we've come so far and it would be such a 

shame for us to stop now when you're so close to telling the 

taxpayers of this province some of things that they're very 

inquisitive about. Very, very inquisitive about. 

 

There's all sorts of people ask me the question all the time, you 

know. I mean what would the difference have been if I'd left it 

at 8 or at 7 and I done some other things? That's what we want 

to know from you, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite is 

referring to page 40, the retail sales of 4.2 per cent. That 4.2 per 

cent includes the 9 per cent sales tax: 8 per cent for three 

months and 9 per cent for the balance of the year. I must 

correct the member opposite again, as I've had to several times 

now. The federal government collects the data. They do not do 

the analysis. We do the analysis. They collect the data. 

 

I believe that yesterday the Leader of the Opposition 



804 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1993 

asked for some people that we had consulted on external 

forecasts and so on, and I'll just read these into the record so 

that it'll be known as to whom we have consulted in preparation 

of the provincial forecasts. 

 

On the international outlook, Mr. Chairman, we consulted the 

International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook. 

We've consulted the Organization for Economic Co-operation 

and Development, also for an economic outlook. On the North 

American outlook, we've consulted the Conference Board of 

Canada, the U.S. Conference Board, Data Resources 

Incorporated, the Wharton Econometric Forecasting Agencies, 

the Royal Bank of Canada. On the Saskatchewan outlook, we 

have consulted again the Conference Board of Canada, Data 

Resources Incorporated, the Wharton Group and also the Royal 

Bank of Canada. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That was an even 

better list than what your associate gave us yesterday as far as 

your ability to forecast. So that's good information to have. 

 

There's one other sector or one other component of this that 

obviously would have a great deal to do with the numbers that 

you've projected here on page 40 that you would be involved in 

tracking with and spending this $4.3 million. 

 

That on the "Saskatchewan's Small Business Climate" you 

once again on page 57 are talking about, and fairly definitively, 

about lowering the tax rate from 9 to 8.5 and then to 8 per cent 

in subsequent years. And you're saying that taken together, 

these things will lower the small business tax rate by 20 per 

cent. Okay? So it's a combination of things. Obviously we've 

got a reduction in the PST and then we've got the 8.79 per cent 

potentially for eight months on the tax credit, and then we've 

got this lowering going on here. 

 

So what we've done here is we have come up with a basic 

package that's going to lower their business tax rates by 20 per 

cent. And surely when you're going through all these 

machinations and you're cooperating with the federal 

government that you would have some analytical results, Mr. 

Minister, that would show the difference between 9 and 8 or 7 

and 8, 7 and 9, that type of thing. I mean I know you track 

other provinces because you just told me a while ago you did. 

You watch their budgets. You know what the income tax rate 

is. You know what the sales tax rate is in British Columbia, and 

you know what it is in Newfoundland and New Brunswick, so 

you're tracking all that stuff. 

 

And you're spending a lot of money on correlating the data that 

the federal government collects for you. You just said that. 

They collect it; you analyse it. You put your spin on it. You 

very definitely put your spin on the data that they collect for 

you, okay. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, you must have some data given all of this 

other stuff that you're doing, showing what the 

changes would be between 7 and 8, between 8 and 9, or 

between 9 and 7. I know that you've got that, Mr. Minister, 

because you've shown me that you are correlating an awful pile 

of stuff that the federal government collects for you, and you're 

putting your spin on it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 

referred to the page 57, Saskatchewan's small-business climate, 

and obviously what we're trying to do here — and I think it's 

fairly clearly outlined here — is to give the small-business 

people in Saskatchewan a break. We've reduced the corporate 

income tax from 10 to 8 per cent over a three-year period. It's 

10 to 9 to 8.5 to 8. That's a 20 per cent reduction, and that's no 

small feat when you can reduce somebody's corporate income 

tax by 20 per cent. 

 

As I mentioned to the member before, we do not do an 

individual analysis of every item, but we do show in totality 

what the impact of all these incentives will be on page 40. And 

I think it's fairly clearly indicated what we think the projected 

forecasts are going to be. In '93, if we do the retail sales, and 

that's the one we seem to be hung up on right now, 4.2 per cent; 

'94, 3 per cent; '95, 2.9 per cent; and '96 there's an expectation 

— and this is a forecast — going up to 4.4 per cent. And this is 

in totality; this is not giving you the individual ones, because as 

I indicated earlier, we do not track the individual ones. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, you 

have said in your . . . the Minister of Finance has said on page 

57 and page 58 that your objective was to improve the 

competitiveness of small business. This will, and I quote: this 

will improve the competitiveness of the Saskatchewan 

manufacturing and processing industry by reducing the sales 

tax. 

 

And you've said that you were . . . you've just finished saying 

that if you could cut their taxes by 20 cents . . . 20 per cent, it 

would really make them more competitive. And that's no small 

thing, 20 per cent. 

 

Now what we find in the province of Saskatchewan is two 

things, Mr. Minister. The general public is concerned with the 

29 per cent increase in sales tax — from 7 to 9. That's just the 

general consuming public. And as we talked about this 

afternoon, people in Moose Jaw or Swift Current are saying, 

that's a big jump — 29 per cent in sales tax. 

 

At the same time the business community is echoing what the 

consumers are saying, and saying look, we think it's rather silly 

that you'd increase sales tax from 7 to 9 and have this partial 

break when in fact you could have had 7 cents across the board 

fully rebated. Business would have been much happier and so 

would the consumers. 

 

In other words, Mr. Minister, have you done any analysis to 

show how your 9 per cent sales tax is: (1) better for the 

consumer; and (2) better for the business community than a 7 

cents harmonized sales tax where obviously it's lower for the 

consumer and obviously 



April 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 805 

it's 100 per cent rebated for the business community? Do you 

have any analysis to show why your system is better than the 7 

cents harmonized? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think we have to 

correct one thing again — I know the member from Estevan 

was out when I was answering the questions of the Leader of 

the Opposition — that the manufacturing and processing 

incentive tax credit as outlined on page 57 is not a sales tax 

credit; it's an income tax credit. And we cannot mix the two. 

We cannot put the two together. One is an income tax credit 

and has nothing to do with sales tax. So I just want to make 

sure that that's clearly understood. 

 

(2030) 

 

I want to just comment on one other thing. The member talks 

about the 29 per cent increase in sales tax, from 8 to 9 per cent, 

and he's asking me if I am concerned about what people say 

and what people are thinking and how it affects people. Well I 

think it's almost obvious that everybody's concerned how any 

tax affects people. 

 

I would just like to remind the member opposite that when he 

was premier of the province in 1987, he jumped the sales tax 

from 5 to 7 per cent, which was a 40 per cent increase. And I'm 

sure he was concerned about how that would affect people in 

the province, as we were, as everybody else was. So it's not a 

matter of whether we're concerned or not; it's a matter of 

having to get the deficit down and get a balanced budget. And 

we think that this is the way to go. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Mr. Minister, maybe you weren't listening 

when I went through the question. You've complimented 

yourself on the 20 per cent reduction with this income tax 

credit and then you went on to say on page 58 that the removal 

of the sales tax was a big benefit to business. 

 

What I'm pointing out to you is that the consumers are saying 

the 29 per cent jump in sales tax from 7 to 9, number one 

wasn't promised; you said you'd never do it, but it hurts. And 

number two, the business community says that's pretty silly 

when you could have harmonized the 7 cents across the board 

and got 100 per cent reduction in sales tax and a much lower 

sales tax for consumers. 

 

Now what I'm asking you is, why is your system better or why 

do you think it's making the consumers happier and the 

business people happier than a lower rate generally across the 

board, completely in cooperation with the federal government, 

having them administer it, having them collecting it, so that 

there's a lower general rate for everybody, and indeed 100 per 

cent rebate for business? 

 

So if you think it's a good idea, when you eventually say here 

finally, you're going to phase it out altogether in manufacturing 

and processing. That's a good idea, so you must know that it's a 

good idea. Why didn't you just complete the job and do it 

across the board so you would have major economic incentive 

in the 

province of Saskatchewan plus lower sales tax? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — I'd like to comment to the member from 

Estevan on the direct agents, and he, I think, referred to that on 

page 58 where we're phasing out the E&H tax on direct agents. 

It's a very targeted phase-out of a tax and that is to provide an 

incentive for people who are buying these products to improve 

their productivity in manufacturing. That's why it's targeted 

specifically to that group and we make no apologies for that. 

We think that's the right way to go and we've phased that one 

out completely and it will be gone in 1994, July 1, 1994. 

 

When the member from Estevan talks about promises, to say 

that we would never do these kind of things, I must remind the 

member that I was around in 1982 and I paid attention to what 

was happening in 1982. And I recall the member from Estevan 

then camped out on the campaign trail saying to Saskatchewan 

people: I will reduce your income tax by 10 per cent. And the 

people of Saskatchewan found out that that 10 per cent 

reduction ended up with a substantial increase plus a flat tax 

that was added. 

 

I also recall the member from Estevan on his platform in 1982 

saying to the people of Saskatchewan: elect me and I will 

eliminate your sales tax. Didn't happen. He kept the sales tax at 

5 per cent until 1987 and increased it to 7 per cent. I also 

remember the member from Estevan saying in 1982 that: elect 

me and you'll never pay gas tax again. Well we had a short 

reprieve on the gas tax and then it came on higher than ever. 

 

So when we say never, I want to remind the member that he 

also said never many times and didn't live up to it. What you 

project at one point may not be possible at another point. What 

we did not know, how bad the financial situation of 

Saskatchewan was. It was not obvious until after we had 

opened the books and the Gass Commission reported. And 

once that was obvious, it became very obvious to the members 

of this government that we had to take some drastic measures 

to get the deficit under control so that we would remain 

financially viable in this province rather than become strictly a 

basket case in Canada. 

 

And we are on that track. And if members opposite would take 

the time to read the budget address, I think they will find that 

this is a very forward-looking budget which will target 

expenditures and revenue on a four-year tracking which the 

people of Saskatchewan are telling me is one of the most 

important things that they think that any government's ever 

done in Canada. We have given them a four-year outline. We 

have put numbers on this and we are prepared to live by those 

numbers. 

 

I can remember Finance ministers from the previous 

government promising balanced budgets — every one of them. 

You had three different Finance ministers; every one of them 

promised a balanced budget but none of them ever had the 

courage to put numbers on it. It says, trust me, we'll do it. We 

have put numbers on this. 



806 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1993 

We have also indicated that the difficult times that we've had in 

the first year and in the second year are going to stand us in 

good stead in years three, four, and five. We're looking four 

years down the road. They will stand us in good stead because 

the savings you make early in your term help you in the out 

years of your term so that you don't have to put taxes on people 

and you don't have to cut programs because it will track itself. 

 

These are the kinds of things I think that the member from 

Estevan ought to remember when he accuses us of saying never 

would we raise a sales tax. The word "never" comes back to 

haunt people, and in this case I think it's come back to haunt 

them. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Minister, what we've asked you is to 

explain, if you're so proud of the fact that you can reduce the 

sales tax on these agents to zero, these manufacturing and 

processing agents, and you think that's logical, why wouldn't 

you think it's logical to reduce them in other industries so that 

in fact you could have economic development? Why is it only 

logical in one sector and not other sectors of value added 

because that's the whole logic behind all the chambers of 

commerce and the boards of trade from 1991 on and still today 

who say, for heaven's sakes cooperate with the federal 

government and balance your budget, provide the tax breaks 

for business — small business, manufacturing, processing and 

services — and at the same time provide lower interest rates 

and sales tax for the consumer. 

 

So I ask the hon. member again: you said you wouldn't have to 

raise taxes. Now you've raised them. We said why didn't you 

just . . . If you wanted money and you wanted incentive which 

you say you want here and you want consumers protected and 

you live close to Alberta, why is it better to have 9 cents sales 

tax when Alberta none, than 7 cents when 7 is lower for the 

consumer and harmonized would provide a 100 per cent rebate 

for business? Could you have any analysis that you could 

provide us that would say . . . 

 

Well I'll just start with this. On page 58 you say this is a very 

good idea; 100 per cent reduction on the agents of processing 

and manufacturing stimulates value added. If that's true, could 

you show us the analysis to that state and that statement? Could 

you show us that? And if we do and if you can, then we'll look 

at the rest of it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, just in response to the 

comments and also the question of the member from Estevan, I 

want to remind him that the direct agents with phase-out came 

last year already. We started this last year so that's not a new 

incentive for this year, it's just a continuation of that incentive. 

 

The reason we targeted specific things in our elimination of the 

E&H, and also the income tax rebate of 8 per cent on the 

manufacturing, is because number one, that's all that's 

affordable in Saskatchewan right now. We just don't feel that 

we can afford any more of those. We think that doing these are 

administratively feasible, and we think that 

by targeting them specifically to those areas we will get the 

maximum stimulus to get the manufacturing sector of our 

province going. Those are basically the three reasons: it's 

affordability; it's the administrative feasibility; and we think 

we're going to get the maximum stimulus by doing those taxes. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Well in terms of affordability, Mr. Minister, 

would you tell us then why it's more affordable to generate 

your taxes this way as opposed to harmonization? Would you 

tell us which way you'd make more money, harmonizing at 7 

per cent, or raising your sales tax to 9 and going through this 

exercise, this convoluted mishmash of targeting? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, I think I have tried to 

answer the member from Estevan's questions as carefully as I 

can as they relate to interim supply. What we're getting into 

now, Mr. Chairman, is into Committee of Finance and we're 

not going to get into that. I'm not going to be led down that 

garden path. I think we've answered this as far as we're going 

to answer those particular questions here tonight. 

 

If he wants to talk about the costs of a 9 per cent sales tax 

versus an 8 per cent versus a 7 per cent versus all kinds of 

different options, he'll have to take those to Committee of 

Finance, and I respectfully submit that to the member from 

Estevan. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, you'll recall — and we can look 

up in the record — last year when we did this, and we were 

cooperative past interim supply, we got into the Committee of 

Finance, the minister didn't answer them anyway. He 

absolutely refused to answer and he just stonewalled. So you're 

not going to get off the hook. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan have now seen the sales tax go up 

29 per cent and they're paying through the teeth. They see their 

income tax go up, their utilities go up, and business has said it's 

no big break for them; it's doom and gloom, and you say you're 

not going to answer. 

 

Well it's not good enough, Mr. Minister. Why can't you simply 

give us the analysis why your system is evidently smarter than 

7 cents or 6 cents across the board that balances the budget 

because it generates more income . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . And the hon. member from Prince Albert says that you 

can't do it that way. Well let him speak up and explain to the 

House why a lower tax rate, harmonized across the piece, 

would not be better than raising the rate 29 per cent. Taking 

away the senior citizens' heritage program, taking away the 

drug program protection on prescription drugs, taking away the 

GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) program, closing 

hospitals, closing nursing homes, raising utilities, why is all 

that smarter than just 7 cents harmonized across the board and 

balance the budget? Why wouldn't he explain that to this 

House? 

 

If he's done analysis, and he said he's done it, that shows that 

this provides major economic incentives to the business 

community, by removing the E&H on 



April 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 807 

agents of processing and manufacturing, why wouldn't it make 

sense for agriculture, mining, processing, services, and all of 

those things combined. He's got to be able to explain that to 

this legislature and to the public in Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, I indicated earlier that 

I'm not going to get into the details of this because I think that 

should be for the Committee of Finance, and I think the 

chairman has ruled on that earlier, that this type of questions 

are not to be specific. So I will take the chairman's ruling on 

that. 

 

The member opposite however wants to insist on getting into 

the rhetoric here about which is better and which is worse, and 

sometimes I get the feeling that the member opposite has some 

rather simplistic solutions to some rather complicated 

problems. And the rhetoric doesn't solve the problems, and 

we've heard a lot of rhetoric. But in the nine and a half years 

that he was premier of this province, we didn't see too many 

solutions. We had a lot of talk and we had a lot of rhetoric, but 

the people of Saskatchewan in 1991, in October 1991, rejected 

your solutions. They said they're not the right ones. And they 

saw the impact of those solutions that you were suggesting so 

they rejected those. 

 

And I believe, as the people on this side of the House believe, 

that the people of Saskatchewan are always right. They're 

always right. They were right in '82. And I won't deny that. 

They were right in '82. They were right in '91. 

 

They rejected the policies and the projections that our party put 

forward in 1982, for whatever reason. But they had their 

reasons. And they rejected those. And they rejected yours in 

'91. We're embarked on a different path. But I think we're 

embarked on the right path, the right path. We're going to have 

a balanced budget in four years and it is clearly outlined how 

we're going to get there. We have put numbers on it. And we 

say to the people of Saskatchewan, and we say to the people 

sitting opposite, that judge us not by what we say but judge us 

by what we do in the next three years. And that's going to be 

the true test of whether we're successful or whether we're not. 

 

(2045) 

 

Mr. Devine: — Mr. Minister, what you say today and what 

you said in '91 are two completely different things. You say the 

people are always right. The people believed you when you 

said: no PST; no more taxes; no raising of utility rates; we'll 

put more money in health and more money in education; and 

we'll protect seniors. That's what you said. Now you aren't 

doing that. So people are asking me and my colleagues here to 

say: what did you do? 

 

Mr. Minister, the reason we're going through this is that the 

people think that you didn't tell the truth. Because the Gass 

Commission and other commissions have all said: yes the 

deficit was approximately $14 billion; yes you have to have 

some cuts; and yes you have to have some taxes to balance 

the budget. 

 

We proposed in '91, 7 cents across the board and balance the 

budget. You said no, we don't need to do that; we got a smarter 

way; you can cut taxes. That's what you said. And you 

campaigned on the $14 billion deficit. The whole province 

knew it was 14 billion and Gass said it was 14 billion. And 

now you come on and you say: well we were wrong; you got to 

do it differently. We've got to raise the sales tax from 7 to 9; 

raise the utilities way up; raise sales tax for business without 

any tax breaks — and then you identify a small one here. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Minister? You've added a billion and 

a half to the debt. You went from a $800 million deficit, then a 

$580 million deficit, now almost a $300 million deficit. You've 

added 1.5 billion to the debt and you still have a deficit. And 

you've raised taxes. And you've raised utility rates. And you 

promised that you would balance the budget and you wouldn't 

have to raise taxes. 

 

So people are asking the question: why are you closing my 

nursing home? Why are you closing my hospital? Why did you 

cancel GRIP? Why is there no more pension plan? Why do 

seniors have to pay $800 every two quarters for prescription 

drugs? You didn't promise that. And the debt is no different 

from the day that we closed the election to the day that you 

opened it up afterwards. And the Gass Commission has said 

that. 

 

All I'm asking you here tonight is, why is your fancy system 

and all this pain smarter than the 7 cents that you campaigned 

against? And you know what the truth is? It isn't. If you had to 

take this to the people in '91 — what you're doing compared to 

the 7 cents cooperating with the federal government — there'd 

be no comparison. That's the truce. You make more money. It's 

more incentive for business. 

 

We've got lists of businesses and chambers of commerce and 

boards of trade who said, cooperate with the federal 

government, balance the budget, harmonize this way because 

we have no sales tax; we're sales tax free for all economic 

activity in Saskatchewan. Now you can compete with Alberta, 

compete with the United States, and compete with the others. 

You said, no we won't need to do that; we'll do it our way. 

 

Well your way doesn't make sense for any business 

organizations I talked to, in Swift Current or Regina or Prince 

Albert or any place else, for the potash industry, pulp, paper, 

livestock, anybody else. So we're asking you, where do you get 

your numbers? Where do you get the numbers that justify that 

your way — which still has deficit, still adds to the debt, that 

has resulted in a BBB credit rating on the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) shoulders — why is your way smarter than 

the 7 cents? Harmonized, it's lower; it's across the board. 

 

And if you can't answer that — and you didn't last year — then 

obviously the answer is you're doing this for 



808 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1993 

just political reasons. You promised you'd do it differently, so 

it's going to be different whether you pay through the nose or 

not. And the people are going to know that. The senior citizens, 

the public that is watching Saskatchewan television tonight, 

they're going to know that the NDP is going by no plan at all, 

just raise rates, cut programs, and cancel. And they've got a 

bigger deficit than we had, and it's growing because the 1991 

budget says we would balance in '93-94, harmonized, and still 

maintain the senior citizens' heritage program and the pension 

legislation for seniors and maintain health care. So there's some 

legitimate questions going on. 

 

You can read headlines like this across the provinces, towns 

uniting against your legislation. They're asking, they're asking, 

why are you choosing it to do it this way? Why don't you just 

explain to the public — and that's what we're asking you here 

— but why don't you explain to the public why this system you 

have forecasts more revenue and is better for business than 

what was proposed in 1991, because it was lower rates for 

consumers and better for business? 

 

So, Mr. Minister, I don't need, we don't need a political lecture 

from you on what you left us in '82. You lost in '82 because 

you're doing the same things you're doing now. You're hitting 

people. And if there was an election today, you'd suffer the 

same consequence. You have no compassion for people. Ten 

years ago tonight, the interest rates were 22 per cent. You've 

got them at five and three-quarters right now. You've got an 

exchange rate that's excellent. You've got no inflation, and 

you're hitting people between the eyes because you said there 

was a deficit and you campaigned against it. Big surprise. 

 

Ten years ago tonight we said we're going protect people 

against interest rates, we're going to protect them from the 

gouging, and from the Saskatchewan family of Crown 

corporations that were ripping them off like you're doing now. 

Look at the utility rates. Look what you're doing in utility rates. 

So it's the same thing all over again. 

 

We got $3.5 billion of your debt and we ran it at 23 per cent 

interest rates. You take it at 15 per cent and you end up with 

$14 billion in debt that you dumped on the province of 

Saskatchewan, hidden in Crown corporations. That's what we 

had, and you've got yourself a little over 5 per cent interest 

rates. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Fantasy figures. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Well some members over here, Mr. Minister, 

say fantasy figures. Your Minister of Finance told us that. 

That's what you had, 3.5 billion. You try that at 15 per cent for 

10 years and see what you get. You get $14 billion in debt. 

Even if you balance the current account every year, that's what 

you left here. That's what you left. And they laugh. Well you 

can't laugh because that's the figures. And the interest rates 

were 22 per cent. 

 

Now what we're asking today is, if given those difficult 

circumstances in the 1980s, at the end of that 

day we say, and the end of that decade, we can balance the 

budget and provide the kind of services you like here in terms 

of health care and agriculture, why haven't you got any analysis 

to show that your plan of raising sales tax to 9 and raising 

income tax and raising utilities and still ending up with an 

almost $300 million deficit is smarter than cooperating with the 

largest government in the country, which is the national 

government, and balancing the budget? 

 

Are you saying tonight, Mr. Minister, you have no analysis to 

justify what you've done compared to what consumers and the 

business community is asking for today, which is lower and 

harmonized rates? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm not going to 

answer the last question, but I will respond to some of the 

things that the member from Estevan has said. I won't get quite 

as excited about it, however, as he did. 

 

I want to remind the member from Estevan, it was his tax 

policies during the 1980s that got us into this trouble. It wasn't 

the tax policies of the '70s or the '60s. It was the tax policies of 

the '80s. It's the way they managed the government, the way 

they mismanaged the financial situation and the fiscal situation 

in this province that got us into this problem. 

 

It's interesting to hear the member from Estevan say that the 

$800 million deficit in 1990 . . . '91-92 is ours. It was based on 

his budget. It was based on his projections. And this is a deficit 

that we do not accept and the people of Saskatchewan do not 

accept. This was your deficit. It was just one more part of the 

legacy that you left our children and our grandchildren. And 

our children and grandchildren will not easily forget the legacy 

that you left us. 

 

The credit rating downgrade is not ours. It was based on the 

$800 million deficit that you left in 1991-92. It didn't come 

after we put our first budget out; it came before the first budget 

came out. And it was based on the legacy of deficits that you 

left us. So I think we have to keep that in proper context. 

 

The member from Estevan says that in 1991 the people 

believed us. They did. And I think they did the right thing. In 

1982 — and I've already gone through this once tonight — the 

people believed you. And they made a mistake. And we're 

going to pay for it for the next 50 or 60 years, a mistake that 

they made in 1982 in electing you and allowing you to run up 

deficits and a debt that is insurmountable. 

 

It is almost mission impossible to ever get that debt under 

control. And the member from Estevan and the Leader of the 

Opposition know that, that it is almost mission impossible to 

get that debt under control. That's the legacy we're faced with. 

 

The people believed us. The people believe us now, that we've 

got a four-year plan to balance the budget. And we have laid it 

out clearly for everyone to see, for the whole of Canada and 

whoever else wants to look at this. This is for them to see that 

we have a plan for 



April 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 809 

four years and we are going to balance the budget. 

 

And we are not just saying this; we have put numbers on it. 

And I said . . . And I'll say again as I said before: judge us not 

by what we say, but judge us by what we do. We will 

accomplish this. 

 

I said this earlier and I'll repeat again: we had three Finance 

ministers in the '80s, and every last one of them promised a 

balanced budget. Trust me. At one point when they promised a 

balanced budget, they came in with a deficit of $1.2 billion — 

300 per cent higher than it was projected. 

 

The next time they said they would balance the budget, it was a 

deficit of over $800 million, another almost 300 per cent 

under-projection. These are the kind of things that the people of 

Saskatchewan remember. 

 

And when you say you'll balance the budget, there's no 

credibility, none. There was no credibility in your Finance 

ministers when they said they'd balance the budget, and there's 

no credibility when you, sir, say that you're going to balance 

the budget. The rhetoric that we've been hearing now since 

1991 about this wonderful way you're going to balance the 

budget by taxing people to death and your prospect of saying 

that the 7 per cent harmonization that you keep talking about is 

not a tax, people don't buy that. 

 

Why don't you talk to the people that ran restaurants? Why 

don't you talk to the kids that went and bought ice cream, the 

kids that went to McDonald's or to A&W? Why don't you talk 

to these people and see what they thought of that 7 per cent 

tax? Why haven't you talked to the people that bought used 

cars? Used car tax seemed to be one of your favourite targets 

there for a while. You gave it up because the people forced you 

to back down on that one. 

 

Your policies, sir, have brought this province to its knees. And 

for you to stand there and lecture us, to lecture anyone, on how 

to run the affairs of this province is bordering on the ludicrous. 

Nobody on this side of the House believes that. Nobody in 

Saskatchewan believes that. And in 1991 the people said in 

spades that we do not want the policies of the Conservative 

Party, and we do not want the policies that the member from 

Estevan was proposing. 

 

He said, we're going to get rid of those policies, and we are 

going to embark on a new path, a new path where they can see 

the end to the deficits, and we're going to see some prospects of 

some growth for the future. That's what the people voted for. 

We'd love to have that $850 million that we're putting out in 

interest payments every year. We'd love to put that into 

hospitals. We'd love to put that into schools. We'd love to put 

that into agriculture and farm programs, manufacturing 

programs. 

 

But when you have to pay 18 to 20 per cent of your budget to 

the bond dealers of this world, you are strapped to the ground. 

You have absolutely no leeway. The member opposite knows 

very well that 

our largest expenditures come from health, education, and 

social services. Those are our three largest expenditures. He 

knows that very well. If we're going to have to make cuts to 

pay for that $850 million, that's where you have to cut. 

 

As the Premier mentioned in one of the question periods, you 

could do away with all of government, with all of government, 

and you'd only save enough money to pay the interest for a 

couple of days. The only place we can cut in this province is in 

the major areas where we have the high expenditures. 

 

This government takes no great pleasure in raising taxes for 

people, but we have to do this because of the legacy that you 

left us and because of the economic policies that you followed. 

And the people of Saskatchewan will never forget that. 

 

And I suggest that we get off this topic and we get on to 

something that deals with interim supply. 

 

(2100) 

 

Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Minister, you have talked at length 

about what you're going to do and you say, just watch us. Well 

we are watching, and what you have is larger deficits. 

Accumulated debt is growing. You abandon a plan that would 

have balanced the budget in '93-94. And I'll go back and I'll 

point out to the hon. member . . . back up to the hon. member. 

 

We forecast a $365 million deficit in 1990, and would the 

minister check and see if we met that forecast. Yes, we did. 

Then we forecast 265 with harmonization, which was even 

tougher. And as the minister likes to say, we had figures and it 

was written down, 265, which is a tough measure, 7 cents 

across the board. 

 

And do you know what? This is what you had in economic 

analysis — Saskatchewan gets an A for economic growth with 

that budget. Provincial debt level not considered alarming 

because you had the capacity to balance a budget with 

harmonization and a big stimulus to the business sector. That's 

what the rating institutions are saying. That's what they said. 

 

And you came along and you said: no, we'll do it simpler. 

That's what you said: we'll do it simpler. And we've looked and 

we talked to the business community and they said . . . And this 

is the Canadian hoteliers association, the Canadian Federation 

of Independent Business, chambers of commerce, boards of 

trade, and others. They said the best way to do it is to 

harmonize because you'll encourage economic growth, you can 

balance your budget, and you can provide protection for the 

consumers because you won't have to raise sales tax to 9 or 10 

per cent. 

 

That was the rating institutions at the time, consumers at the 

time, the economic indicators at the time said our provincial 

debt level was not considered alarming by the rate institutions 

because we had a strategy to meet the needs of the province 

plus the stimulus — not the doom and gloom — the stimulus to 

provide 



810 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1993 

economic incentives here so we could grow. 

 

And the minister said well . . . the minister said well but we 

ended up with an $800 million deficit. I'll tell you, Mr. 

Minister, we forecast 265 which was with harmonization — 

with harmonization, with dividends. And you know what you 

did, Mr. Minister? You said no we won't do that. We'll just let 

it all go. We won't implement any of it and I wonder what'll 

happen. Well guess what'll happen? You won't have the 

revenue. And then you can say to everybody, oh we opened the 

books, we didn't do any of this stuff, and look what's here. 

 

And you know what happened to you? The rating institution 

says well that was pretty silly. You just took the province from 

an A down to a BBB credit rating because you failed to even 

do anything. And then you blame somebody else. Then the 

year later you say well we're going to have to raise taxes; we're 

going to have to do this. And it was all a political exercise. It 

was a bloody sham. Just a sham . . . 

 

The Chair: — Order. I just want to remind the member that 

the language we use should be appropriate for the House. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It was an awful 

sham. You've ended up now with an $800 million deficit, 

which is 500 million more than was forecast with 

harmonization. Then another 500 million-plus. Now another 

almost $300 million. So you got about a billion and a half 

you've added to the deficit with your plan. And you said watch 

our numbers. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, the public are watching your numbers. And 

you know what they see? They see a mess. They see the credit 

rating going down, and the debt going up, and taxes going up. 

People leaving the province. Doom and gloom in the business 

community. The construction association in here and suing 

you. Farmers suing you. Pensioners upset. Indian and native 

people upset. Farmers upset. 

 

We're watching the results all right. We're watching the 

numbers. We watch the political numbers, the economic 

numbers, the number of rural hospitals, the number of farmers, 

and the number of businesses, and the number of cars going 

west and going south. 

 

So you say watch our numbers. Well, read my lips. We're 

watching your numbers and people don't like your numbers 

because: one, they don't make any economic sense; two, your 

forecasts are out of line. You're not going to make these 

forecasts. You have no analysis to say you can raise taxes this 

high and expect to gain economic activity. 

 

An Hon. Member: — He's got it. He just don't want to share 

it. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Well if he's got it, he should share it. If he 

doesn't have it, then you are just playing a dangerous, 

dangerous political and economic game with the province. 

Either share the numbers or admit 

that you don't have any, and it's just a political agenda. 

 

No, you can't get away in here by saying, well, you've got a 

magic plan where your deficit's going down. The debt and 

deficit is going up. Three years ago it was 265, and now you've 

got it down to 290; plus you've added a billion and a half to the 

debt. 

 

You should tell the seniors that and the farmers and anybody 

watching television tonight. The NDP have added 1.5 billion to 

the debt, and they're raised taxes and raised utility rates, and 

they tell us that they've got a plan. And their credit rating is 

down to a BBB. 

 

I think maybe you could remind us again why this plan with 

your analysis is the right thing to do. And if you have no 

analysis to show — as my colleague from Thunder Creek said 

— if you have no analysis to show that your package of raising 

these kinds of sales tax rates to 9 per cent, a 29 per cent 

increase in the sales tax rate, is better than what was there, then 

obviously it's just political because you said, well, I guess we 

can't do it the way they did because we promised not to. And 

even though the business community and consumers are saying 

that that would be the right thing to do, we'll have to do it 

differently. What my colleagues and I are asking, is do you 

have any more analysis to show that a 29 per cent increase in 

sales tax will not hurt the business community and will not 

drive consumers into the province of Alberta. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member from 

Estevan keeps talking about analysis. We have published our 

analysis on page 40. We have published an analysis which 

gives an economic forecast for Saskatchewan from 1993 to 

1996. So I don't think that we're short of an analysis. That's 

what we think is going to happen with the taxes and the cuts 

that we have made in the budget of last year and the budget of 

this year. 

 

The member from Estevan shows these news clippings, and he 

doesn't show the date on them, so obviously I suspect that 

they're fairly old. He's living in the past, living in the past. 

We're looking to the future. That's the difference between you 

and us. You're living in the past. You're trying to relive what 

you thought might be a success story, and it was a desperate 

failure. We're looking to the future, and we're optimistic about 

the future. 

 

In '91-92 you brought in a deficit of $842 million. The member 

from Estevan obviously has quite a bit of trouble with his 

arithmetic. He says that our deficit is going up from 600 to 300 

— in his estimation that's going up. That's why he was in 

trouble all the way through the '80s. He said our deficit's going 

down and it's going down from 400 million to 1.2 billion. The 

mathematics and the analysis of the member from Estevan are 

absolutely wrong. We find here a bunch of rhetoric, like I said 

before, no substance. People don't believe him. And I think, 

Mr. Chairman, we'd like to get on with interim supply. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 



April 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 811 

Minister, earlier on in the discussion you were talking about the 

volume of dollars in equalization that the federal government 

had overpaid the province. And I was wondering just in what 

area that was. Was that in the area of an overpayment on what 

they had assumed to be paid with income tax or was that an 

overpayment on health payments that should come to the 

province or was it social services or education? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — In answer to the member from Morse's 

question is that the 106 million — I think that's what he's 

referring to — the overpayment was on equalization based on 

population. And we'd be pleased to send over — we're just 

looking for it over here — we'd be pleased to send over Mr. 

Mazankowski's statement. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Minister, that equalization payment was 

an overpayment based on the population, on the curve down of 

the population moving out is what was contrary to the trend 

that would have been set by the federal government in its 

analysis on saying the trend is upwards or flat. This volume of 

money is due to the people moving out of the province and 

equalization based on the reduction in population. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — I'd just like to explain how this 

population works. In 1991 the federal government adopted a 

new methodology of calculating the population. It's not just a 

matter of raw numbers. It's a ratio and if one province grows 

very rapidly and another one remains stagnant or grows more 

slowly, the ratios change. And as a result of those changes in 

ratios, we have had an overpayment in two years of $106 

million. 

 

This 106 million is for '91-92 and '92-93. It's a two-year 

overpayment and it's because of the methodology. It's not raw 

numbers. If it was straight raw numbers it would probably be 

an entirely different equalization payment, but it's a ratio of the 

population in the various provinces of Canada. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Minister, is this a common occurrence or 

is this the first time that's ever happened where this 

overpayment has occurred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, this change in ratios 

occurs during census time obviously and '91 was a census year. 

That's why it goes back to '91. So it happened in '81, it 

happened in '86 and again in '91. I have the numbers here for 

all the provinces that were overpaid. And in Newfoundland, 

and I'll give you totals here because I don't want to do it on a 

per capita basis, but the totals: Newfoundland was 31.2 million; 

P.E.I. (Prince Edward Island), 25.4; Nova Scotia, 77.6; 

Quebec, 230.2; Manitoba, 139; and Saskatchewan, 106.4. On a 

per capita basis, P.E.I. (Prince Edward Island) got the biggest 

hit, Manitoba got the second, Saskatchewan was third. So this 

happens after a census year, and those ratios will change again, 

I assume, after the next census in '96. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Minister, you said that 1981 was the 

other year that it had adjusted itself. Would you be 

able to provide those numbers for us? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, I want to repeat again 

we're dealing with interim supply. We don't have those 

numbers here. We just don't have them. 

 

(2115) 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I recall that 

number, and I believe it was 130 million. We had to make that 

same adjustment in 1982 that you are making in 1981. Am I 

correct on that number or am I . . . Is it 100 million, or was it 

120 or $130 million? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — My assistant here has just told me the 

1981 figures were roughly 120 million, and the overpayment 

was due to two things: and one was the census and the other 

was on the new tax data. There was a new way of tabulating 

this, and it was repaid over a five-year period at $24 million a 

year. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I thought I recalled 

that as a part of that equalization, and I also recall that . . . I 

believe I'm accurate, that you mentioned the population but 

there were other things added into the formula that changed the 

way the formula worked on the basis of natural resources, and 

it's not the volume of production out of those natural resources 

but out of the content of the full volume of those natural 

resources like the full volume of uranium, all of the oil. It 

changed the formula because it didn't deal with a use factor. Is 

that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, I will try to answer this 

question, and then, Mr. Chairman, I'm going to ask you if your 

ruling that you made earlier this afternoon still applies and 

whether we should limit our questions to interim supply or 

whether we're allowed to go far afield right now. I will answer 

the question. 

 

I answered part of it before and said that there were two 

components to census and new tax data. And the member is 

partially correct on the information that he offered here, but 

basically it was on the strength of the economy. 

Saskatchewan's economy in 1981 was stronger than the federal 

government had anticipated or forecast and as a result there 

was an overpayment. 

 

I'd ask you to rule, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The Chair: — The Chair has been asked to rule with respect to 

the questions that are put with respect to interim supply. I will 

remind members of rulings that had been made over the years. 

And I quote in this case from a ruling of May 10, 1990: 

 

 And the purpose of interim supply is to grant money for the 

operation of the government departments and programs on an 

interim basis while reserving to the Legislative Assembly the 

right to complete the detailed review of estimates at a later 

time. For this reason members must reserve their detailed 

questions on estimates and government financial policy for 

the regular review of the main estimates. 



812 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1993 

Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Chairman, I guess this would be on a 

point of order, pursuant to the request by the Associate Finance 

Minister. I've been very carefully listening over the course of 

the evening, the discussions by our leader and by the member 

from Estevan. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the discussion leaves no doubt but that it was 

wide-ranging and that it was detailed. It was detailed such as 

talking about page 57, for example, item 6; page 57, item 4. 

The minister opposite was discussing in detail these items that I 

can recall just on the spur of the moment. Now if the minister 

chooses to answer detailed questions when it is in his favour 

and when it is in his political judgement expedient to do so, 

then, Mr. Speaker, why, when he suddenly gets himself into a 

corner, he can call upon the Chairman to bail him out? 

 

There has to be, Mr. Chairman, I would suggest to you, some 

consistency here. And if we're going to be delving into 

generalizations and into specifics from time to time, that is the 

precedent that has been well established, well established over 

the years in interim supply, ranging in wide-ranging debate 

over the years, and we have ample evidence in the material that 

we have collected on that basis. 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, I would ask you to rule that, although there 

must be a semblance of order that follows precedent, then we 

are still well within those regulations and with those guidelines 

that precedent has built up in this House. 

 

The Chair: — Order. I want to respond to the new point of 

order raised by the member for Rosthern. The Chair does not 

determine whether a question is in order. It is up to the minister 

to decide which question the minister wishes to answer. When 

the Chair is called upon or asked to rule as to the purpose of the 

committee and generally as to what sorts of questions are in 

order, the Chair will make that ruling. 

 

But again it's up to the minister to decide which questions the 

minister chooses to answer. So the point of order is not well 

taken. 

 

Mr. Martens: — I would just make a response to the 

Chairman's ruling, if I may, and that would be to . . . 

 

The Chair: — Order. Members should not debate the rulings 

of the Chair. I accepted the new point of order from the 

member for Rosthern. I did not view his comments as debating 

the previous ruling of the Chair and accepted it as a new point 

of order. And the Chair has made his ruling and the Chair will 

not accept any debate or questions on that ruling. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, when you 

ask the Chair the next time to make a ruling, I'm going to ask 

for the Chair to rule you out of order for the very fact that you 

did not ask for a point of order to ask the Chairman to make 

that point of order. 

 

And so, Mr. Minister, when you ask for a ruling from the 

Chair, you needed to do it on a basis of point of 

order. And if the Chairman on his own volition responds to 

that, then I will raise a point of order. 

 

I want to just ask a question, and the reason that I ask the 

questions about the equalization payment, Mr. Minister, is, on 

the accrual accounting basis, should the 100 . . . Well the 

portion of debt accruing to the 1991 year, '91-92, should that 

have accrued to the year under review? And should the deficit 

have gone up by that amount in that period of time rather than 

under the period of time that it is scheduled to come under 

accrual accounting for this year? The second year, should that 

accrual accounting have been designated to the previous year 

rather than to this year as a part of your accrual accounting 

method? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, on the advice that we 

have received that the amounts of money are properly accrued 

to the accumulated deficit, and it is a one time charge to the 

accumulated deficit. That's the advice we have received, and 

that's what we've done. 

 

Mr. Martens: — So, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, that 

applies to the accumulated deficit but does not apply to the 

deficit for 1993-94. Am I to assume that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the member 

would maybe clarify that question a little bit. There seems to be 

a little confusion as to what he's asking. 

 

Mr. Martens: — The accumulated deficit would get the thrust 

of the $106 million, but it would not accrue to your cash-in, 

cash-out on an accrual basis for '93-94. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — I think we have the question right, and if 

we haven't the member will certainly ask again. What happens 

to this money, it goes to the accumulated deficit. It is not on the 

'93-94 deficit; it's the accumulated deficit. Is that the answer 

you were looking for? 

 

Mr. Martens: — So it's everything up to '92-93, March 31, 

yesterday. That's all in . . . that 106 million goes into that 

accumulated deficit to that point; '93-94 does not have the 

accumulated deficit and nor does it appear anywhere in your 

sheet here for the '93-94 fiscal year. 

 

(2130) 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, that's correct. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you. One other item on that that I'd 

like to talk about a little bit, and that's the one on page 69. The 

item just above that is grants, 153 million. Can you tell me 

whether all of these numbers accrue to the '92-93 year and 

don't appear in this calendar year. They will all be accumulated 

to the previous history of the province's financial accumulated 

debt and from 1993-94, April 1, we start a new accumulated 

deficit. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, the answer again is yes 

on that. 



April 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 813 

Mr. Martens: — I have another question that I wanted to ask 

you about the interest on the public debt. You have . . . at no 

point is it to be voted — and I'm going to ask you some 

questions about that yet too — but there does not appear to be 

any money that we have on interim supply appearing for 

interest on that debt and I'd like to know why. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, the interest on the public 

debt, the $847.5 million over here, as I indicated earlier in the 

day, this is statutory by law and these payments are made as 

they come due. They're not on a one-twelfth basis because 

these payments don't come due on a monthly basis. So as those 

payments come due, we make them. 

 

Mr. Martens: — So I take it, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, 

that in April there are no payments due from the statutory 

payment on interim supply for April of 1993. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, the fact that there is 

nothing shown here doesn't mean that none of them come due 

in April. They're just not voted. That's statutory by law and 

some of them could very well come due in April and we'll pay 

them as they come due. But they're not voted and that's why 

they don't show. They simply show as a lump sum figure, an 

estimate of 847.5 million, and as they come due we'll pay them. 

And what portion we're paying in each month, I don't have 

those numbers for you. But they're not voted and that's why it 

doesn't show. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. On the 847 million, 

that is 112 million more than your estimate of spending for last 

year. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — That's right. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Okay. Your anticipated expense is $112 

million on interest for the current year that is over and above 

what was last year. Your volume of debt increase is $300 

million. In the book that you gave us, you said your long-term 

debt was at 9 per cent and your short-term debt was at 7. 

 

Can you tell me what the debt cost on an accrual basis of that 

112 million, what that accrues to in relation to the $300 million 

that you anticipated as the increased volume of debt for the 

province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, I'd say to the member 

from Morse, on page 55, if he would turn to that page, at the 

bottom of the page there's a footnote which explains how the 

interest is calculated — the bottom of the page there. I won't 

take time to read it into the record. I'm sure the member will 

read that. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, I'll go through that 

later on. So, just for . . . as you understand it and as the deputy 

understands it, is that summarized into $112 million of interest 

payments that are going to accrue on an accrual basis for 

1993-94, based on that 300 or $296 million. 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — This may help with the explanation in 

order to get this clarified. In 1993-94 we show 847.5. The 

comparable figure in '92-93, using accrual accounting, would 

have been 776.6. So 735 is a modified cash. The comparable 

figure to compare to 847 would be 776. It's a difference of 

about $71 million, roughly. 

 

The 1992-93 deficit is 592 million, which we've announced. 

And roughly at 9 to 10 per cent, in that range, runs you 

anywhere from 55 to $60 million. And we've taken for 1993-94 

the $300 million deficit, half of that, and that would run you 

another $15 million. When you add the 55 . . . 56 million to the 

15, you get the 70 million. 

 

So we can't quite use the 735 figure in comparison to the 847 

because it's a different accounting method. But the equivalent 

accounting method for '92-93 would have given you 776, a 

difference of $71 million. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Okay, that's helped a lot. On page 69, Mr. 

Minister, you have a $273 million interest costs in accrual 

accounting. That is a part of what you just described to me in 

the whole change in the method of cash accounting to accrual 

accounting. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, I understand from my 

officials that this is a rather complex thing to explain here 

tonight. And I say to the members opposite that an invitation 

was sent out to them on March 11, I believe it was, to attend 

the seminar with Finance people and they would go through 

this. This is not something we can do in a few minutes, this is a 

fairly complicated explanation. And my officials say that if 

you're interested in having an explanation, they'd be willing to 

have a meeting with you and explain that particular number to 

you at a time when it's convenient to you. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you. The chairman of our Public 

Accounts is the member from Thunder Creek, was invited to 

attend and we had a meeting that was going on at the same time 

that he was not able to be there. However, if you have an 

opportunity to do that or could you send an explanation more 

than just what appears on the bottom of page 55 to go through 

that. Or do you want your deputy, Mr. Wright, to visit with us 

about how that works and then explain it to us, and would it be 

in place, Mr. Minister, for us to communicate that with him? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — The deputy of Finance tells me that he 

and the controllers would be pleased to meet with you or with 

any number of your people to explain this. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. On dealing with 

the public debt on $847 million, I want to just talk about that a 

bit, a bit more as it relates and I see it under the "Authorized by 

Law." Can you give me a definition of what that is? That isn't a 

statute. That's your agreements that you have with your 

agencies and your creditors to make these payments on 



814 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1993 

agreements. Can you give me a definition of what that means? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — What the authorized by law means, it 

simply means it's authorized by statute. That's in a law. There's 

a statute; we believe it's under The Financial Administration 

Act where this is authorized. It was passed in the legislature, so 

this isn't something that somebody makes up. I could probably 

compare this to the payments that we make to the Wascana 

Park, to the Meewasin Valley, to Wakamow, and to the 

Chinook Park in Swift Current. These are authorized, and 

they're simply paid out on a regular basis. The interest 

payments, as we mentioned earlier, are paid as they come due. 

The payments to the urban parks are not paid on that basis. 

They're probably paid on a semi-annual basis; I'm not sure how 

they're paid. 

 

Mr. Martens: — The financial Act gives you the authority to 

borrow. Does it give . . . We don't pass, for every borrowing 

that you have, a Bill in this Assembly to provide for financing 

for the government. So my question then becomes: is it an 

agreement that you've reached with whoever you have the 

money borrowed from that, at that point in time, that agreement 

under the financial Act, whatever you call it, that comes due 

and payable on those accounts on the basis of authority given 

under the financial and planning Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, the answer to the 

question. New borrowings are done by OC, by order in council. 

We don't have to come to the legislature for new borrowing. 

But once the borrowing is done, obviously there's a repayment 

schedule set up. And the interest is simply paid on the dates 

that fall on that repayment schedule. And that's by statute. 

 

(2145) 

 

Mr. Martens: — Okay, I think I understand that. I want to go 

back to the discussion the member from Thunder Creek had on 

the agents for — and I just can't find the page here now that it 

relates to, page 58 — where the direct agents . . . I wonder if 

the deputy minister and the minister would be able to send over 

a list of those items that are excluded from taxation. I wonder if 

that would be available and if he would be able to provide that 

for us? Maybe not today but send it over. Page 58. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, in response to that 

question to the member from Morse, I've got last year's budget 

speech here. I don't know, you may not have yours with you, 

but on page 34 of last year's budget speech. I will read them to 

you just for the record, but I'm sure you can find them. 

 

 Direct agents include (but are not restricted to): 

 

 - dies, jigs, moulds, patterns and stencils; 

 

 - chemicals which come into direct contact with the product 

being manufactured; and, 

 

 - typeset products, negatives, engravings, artwork and other 

items consumed in the 

printing industry. 

 

That's page 34 of the '92, and the member may want to check 

that. 

 

Mr. Martens: — I'm going to make an observation and have a 

response on page 57 on the manufacturing and processing tax 

credit initiative that you've provided. 

 

In meeting with the agencies who very likely would be 

involved in this — in the construction and the small business, 

federation of independent business, these people throughout the 

province, chamber of commerce — they are viewing the 

changes in the labour laws and the anticipated changes in the 

labour laws in such areas as deeming to be far more detrimental 

to the employers than anything that you could provide either in 

this kind of a tax credit or in any other kind of a tax credit or a 

moving of the items off of the taxes payable portion for 

industry. 

 

And so I'd like to have the minister respond to that because I 

think that we have to take this industry incentive to provide 

manufacturing and secondary manufacturing and processing in 

the province, we have to take that and build the framework for 

this business initiative all into one complete package, and I'd 

like to have you respond to that or comment on that, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, I respectfully suggest that 

this goes under the field of labour legislation and it's really too 

far afield. I will respond only on the one aspect of it, that this 

item that he's referring to on page 57 is a manufacturing and 

processing tax credit. It would not apply to construction, it 

would not apply to small businesses unless they were 

specifically in the manufacturing and the processing business. 

So in general, construction would not be included in that. But I 

will not range into the labour aspect of this. It's too far afield on 

interim supply. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Okay. Can I ask you what kind of areas are 

included in the benefits, or who will be having an opportunity 

to get a benefit under the manufacturing and processing tax 

credit? Will it be agriculture people who are building a hog 

barn, or will it be people who are building an alfalfa plant, or 

will it be people who are building a seed-cleaning plant, or any 

of those kinds of things? Would they be able to participate in 

this sort of venture? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, I would just answer that 

question by saying it's manufacturing and process and that can 

have a fairly wide range. We will be tabling a Bill in the next 

few days to give the details of this, but at this time I don't have 

the details. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Well I definitely will be looking forward to 

the details of that because I think that the people of the 

province need to know exactly what it is that they're involved 

with there. 

 

I have a question as it relates to reorganization in your first 

line, and that's Agriculture and Food, on the basis 



April 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 815 

of reorganization in Crop Insurance and Ag Credit Corporation 

and in the Department of Agriculture as a whole. How has the 

apportionment of funding in relation to those entities, how is 

that going to be delivered in the future? The Department of 

Finance has the initiative to manage the financing in each of 

those areas where you have had the amalgamation of those 

Crown corporations. 

 

The reason I ask the question is this: you take one-twelfth of 

the payments in crop insurance, and this isn't the period of time 

generally when crop insurance payments are made. So are you 

going to move the money into the Department of Agriculture to 

leave it sit there until the requirements later on some time? Are 

there payments that are going to be made out of this $26 

million to the farmers? Is that what's going to happen? 

 

Because there's two sorts of things that you have to think about, 

Mr. Minister. One is the payments by the department and the 

payments by the corporation. And if the corporation doesn't 

exist any longer as a corporation but as a Department of 

Agriculture, a branch in Department of Agriculture, then I'd 

like to know how you plan on doing that. And can you give me 

an explanation of that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, the member is ranging 

into the agriculture field in too much detail, and I'm not 

prepared to talk about the details. But on page 26 of the blue 

book, the breakdown for the Department of Agriculture and 

Food, voted number, $319.4 million is listed over there and 

we're asking one-twelfth. And how the Department of 

Agriculture allocates this is not something that Finance is going 

to determine. It's something that the Agriculture and Food 

Department will determine. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Yes, Mr. Minister, I understand that. 

However there are certain functions that occur in relation to the 

Department of Agriculture that are not an administrative 

function. They are a payment function similar to what you 

would apply to payments to municipalities, payments to other 

agencies in third-party grants. Is the Department of Finance 

providing to Department of Agriculture the volume of dollars 

required to make payments in crop insurance on the same basis 

as they would be in payments to municipalities, urban and rural 

municipalities. Is that the process that you're going to use? And 

that's what I wanted to know. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Any payments that are required by 

Agriculture and Food are either included in this one-twelfth, 

the 26 million — 26.6 million — or else they're statutory in 

nature. 

 

Now when we allocate one-twelfth to the Department of 

Agriculture and Food that doesn't necessarily mean they're 

going to spend that in the month of April. That is the maximum 

amount that they will get during the month of April. Once the 

budget is passed, obviously the whole $319.4 million is 

available to them to make payments as they have obligations to 

do. 

Mr. Martens: — So then I would assume that under GRIP '92 

that there are no payments going to be made in April for 

farmers who would normally qualify for this payment. Farmers 

are not going to receive any money in April for payments under 

the crop insurance '92, GRIP '92. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, those questions will have 

to be directed to the Minister of Agriculture. We're not 

prepared to answer those on interim supply. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Well, Mr. Minister, the Department of 

Finance, as I understand the Department of Finance and have 

worked with the Department of Finance for quite a few years, 

have management control over all of these decisions. And I 

know that they plan and they have to plan with their 

borrowings and their repayment schedules on a very systematic 

way. 

 

And to have you come here and say that the Minister of 

Finance doesn't know whether he's going to make payments in 

1993 in April or May 1 is not a legitimate observation to make. 

I will say that if he hasn't planned for that already, it isn't the 

same person that I knew in the last 10 years. That is the way I 

would put it to you, Mr. Minister. 

 

If the minister is assuming that if we are in this Legislative 

Assembly in May 1 of this year and another $26 million comes 

for agriculture, I will be assuming that the recipients on 

eligibility under GRIP '92 will not receive their payments either 

in April or in May. And if it happens in June, they will not 

receive them in June either. Can I assume that that is the way 

it's going to work? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, the explanation for that 

question is this: that if those payments are required to be made 

— and that's the key word here — then if we have to go to 

another interim supply, if that happens to be the case and we 

have to do it again, then they will be included in that. In this 

particular interim supply the most that Agriculture and Food 

can spend during the month of April would be 26.6 million. 

But if payments were required by law or through some 

agreement then they would be included in the next interim 

supply, if we have to go to another interim supply. If the 

budget is through by that time, then obviously the entire 

amount is available to them. 

 

Mr. Martens: — That's exactly what I figured, Mr. Chairman, 

and Mr. Minister. I will assume then that those people who 

were anticipating payment for GRIP '92 in March will not get it 

and nor will they get it in April. That's what I'm assuming, 

because $26 million would not cover the payments to be made 

in the Department of Agriculture from Crop Insurance under 

GRIP. 

 

I guess if you want to provide me the answer in a way that is 

reasonable, is there a difference on — that's why I asked the 

question in the first place — is there a difference in how you're 

going to manage the payments out of Crop Insurance as an 

entity of the Department of Agriculture rather than as a Crown 



816 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1993 

corporation in relation to the responsibility it has for payments? 

 

That's the question I want to have you answer, because I'm not 

sure that what we have here is an answer to a question that I 

asked you. The $26 million that is issued here, is that the 

volume of premium payment that is going to be addressed to 

the Crop Insurance Corporation, or is the Crop Insurance 

Corporation no longer in existence? 

 

Those are the kinds of questions we need answers for in order 

to even begin to start to ask questions on estimates. And that, 

Mr. Minister, is the reason why we are detailing some of these 

questions. I know that you have been forthcoming on some of 

the questions we've asked on accrual accounting versus cash 

counting because we're making the major changes this year. 

 

So I appreciate the opportunity that we've had to discuss them. 

But we need to understand as well as you need to understand 

that the public don't know what the difference is. And many 

people in the accounting field that we've asked have not 

completely understood all of the details that you have put 

together. And therefore, Mr. Minister, we are asking these 

questions in order to be . . . not to be obstructionist but to know 

exactly where you're going with your Department of Finance. 

 

The Chair: — Order. It being 10 o'clock, the committee will 

rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:01 p.m. 

 


