




















































Hansard: March 25, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 599 

 March 25, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Jess: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and 

to the members of this Assembly a group of grade 11 and 12's 

from Maymont School in the Speaker's gallery up here. They 

are accompanied today by their teacher, Mr. Austin Harpham; 

their chaperon, Margaret Thompson; and bus driver, Daryl 

Spence. 

 

And I would like to ask the Assembly to join with me in 

welcoming them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member may continue. 

 

Mr. Jess: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. I am fortunate also to have a 

friend of mine from Rabbit Lake, Mr. Norm Haryung. He's a 

former farmer and teacher from the Rabbit Lake district. And 

Norman is a regional park manager of Meeting Lake Regional 

Park, which is one of the finest regional parks in 

Saskatchewan. And Norm has the distinction of being the 

longest acting secretary-manager for regional parks in 

Saskatchewan, and he has served us up there very well for 28 

years. 

 

And I'd like to have you join with me in welcoming him here 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 

the Minister of Health, the MLA (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) from Regina Hillsdale, I take great pleasure in 

welcoming some very special guests to our Assembly here this 

afternoon. They are, Mr. Speaker, seated here on the floor of 

the Assembly. They are visitors from the Wascana 

Rehabilitation Centre who are involved in the rec therapy 

program. Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce these guests by 

name: Len Marriott; Troy Marsh; Allan Ronald; Louis Labelle; 

James Dyczkowski; and Alynn Ferstl. I would ask all members 

to welcome these very special guests to our Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

official opposition would as well like to extend a special 

welcome to our guests here from Wascana Rehab Centre. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Draper: — Mr. Speaker, sir, I'd like to introduce to you 

and through you to the members of the House, a Mrs. Dianne 

Kessler, a constituent of mine from Assiniboia, sitting in the 

west gallery, and welcome 

her to this House and our deliberations today. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Review of Crop Insurance Agents 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the minister responsible for Crop Insurance today. Mr. Speaker, 

with each passing day another piece of the iceberg is falling off 

the iceberg and coming to the surface. We have disturbing 

news from Melville, Mr. Minister. My question is this: is Crop 

Insurance, Saskatchewan Crop Insurance currently in the 

process of working to strip a large number of Crop Insurance 

marketing agents of their contracts, and can you confirm that 

this has been taking place over the past few days and is 

continuing to occur even as we speak here today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

first of all indicate to the hon. member that in running the 

government of this province one of the key indications that we 

want is first of all deed and also competence. At the present 

time we are reviewing the activities throughout the province of 

any appointments that you have made. There is, I will assure 

you, not the witch-hunt of the past administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and, Mr. Minister, it is my 

understanding that Crop Insurance is in fact attempting to strip 

a number of its own marketing agents of their contracts. A 

number of agents have received a letter from Crop Insurance 

and immediately after the budget on the 19th this letter 

instructed them to appear at a hearing in Melville at a 

designated time to discuss termination of their contracts. 

Would you be able to explain this letter and why it was sent? 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, hon. member, as I indicated 

to you, a number of agents are being assessed as to their 

performance and in respect to the information received from 

the farmers throughout Saskatchewan. That is the basis on 

which some of them are being reviewed. I want to assure you 

that the services to the farmers of Saskatchewan will not be 

decreased, in fact improved. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and, Mr. Minister, it is my 

understanding that at least 16 marketing agents received this 

letter. There may be more, we're just not sure who all. Could 

you provide me with the number of people who did receive this 

letter, the names of the people who received this letter, and the 

criteria upon which these people were singled out. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



600 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1993 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the hon. 

member, unlike their party, I am not going to be exposing 

names during the period of a review. And accordingly in due 

course, and in estimates of Agriculture, that information can 

specifically be provided. But I am not in the House going to be 

putting forward names where no decision has been made, only 

a review in respect to the performance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, last summer 

the people of Saskatchewan received a questionnaire to answer 

on behalf of the agents to report to the minister about the value 

of the agents in their field. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, 85 per cent said the agent's 

knowledge of the program was good, excellent; 83 per cent, the 

agent had an ability to explain the program; 88 said the 

availability of the agent was good; 96 said that the agent is 

courteous; 87 per cent, they know when the deadlines are; they 

understand the program. And I could go on and on — 87 is the 

average of the kinds of things that the people said. 

 

Mr. Minister, it is my understanding that when these agents 

arrive in Melville for their so-called hearings they are 

confronted with a series of false accusations and 

misinformation. And when they are instructed to sign a form 

resigning their contract with Crop Insurance in return for a 

small compensation payment from Crop Insurance, they are 

told that if they do not sign this form, Crop Insurance will take 

action to strip them of their contracts and they will receive no 

compensation. 

 

Can you confirm that this is exactly what is taking place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

indicate to the minister that unlike your government in the past, 

our approach in dealing with people that are working in respect 

to the public have to be, first of all, competent, have to be 

doing the job, and if they fulfil those requirements, they will 

retain their jobs. Fairness is a part of our policy and fairness 

will be a part of our policy in the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, 87.8 per cent 

are either satisfied or very satisfied when it comes to giving 

their agent an overall service rating — 87.8 per cent, Mr. 

Minister. That's what the farmers and all the people of the 

province . . . You sent it to more than just the farmers. You sent 

it to the rural and urban people. That's what they said, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Following the interrogation I have just described on the matters 

of these agents, these agents are told to sign the release form 

immediately. They are also told not to discuss this matter with 

anyone in an attempt to deny them access to the full 

acknowledge of their 

options. 

 

Mr. Minister, can you confirm that this process is occurring, 

and do you feel that using threats and coercion to 

systematically break these contracts and to deny them due 

access to the process of law is what the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation should be doing? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, I have a lot of 

problems dealing with the facts as put forward by the hon. 

member because I have absolutely no faith in the accuracy of 

your facts. And in fact, your facts are wrong. 

 

There are a number of agents that are being reviewed only on 

the basis of whether or not they are fulfilling the duties within 

the confines of their commitment and service to the public. 

Fairness, as I indicated, will be done. 

 

We didn't indicate and up and fire them. These individual 

agents have in fact been able to come forward to indicate their 

situation and their side of the facts. That is better than what you 

did, Mr. Minister. During your reign you walked into offices, 

led people out of the offices, closed the door. That was your 

approach. And, moreover, I want to tell the hon. member, that 

each and every one of them have a contract and within the 

contract they have rights which they can in fact protect. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, those agents 

were told to bring their computer, all of their files, all of the 

letters, details of all of their office, and bring them to the 

Melville office. To me, Mr. Minister, that does not mean that 

this is an ordinary kind of a review. 

 

And I want to ask you this question. You are hiding behind the 

very fact that you have those people out there, you call them in 

for a training session, and you ask these 16 people to come 

back, and say: I want all of your things, bring them in to this 

office here and we will review them. And they are being asked, 

Mr. Minister, to sign a contract and releasing them from any 

. . . asking the Crop Insurance Corporation to release them of 

any responsibility to these individuals. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, they are given time lines and date lines. 

You have to sign by 5 o'clock or 12 o'clock and you're done. 

That's what they're doing. Will you confirm that today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — Again, Mr. Speaker, the member brings 

in a set of facts to suit himself and to put the worst possible 

case, as Tories usually do. The fact of the matter is there are a 

review of some in respect to their performance and that is a 

normal process that any responsible corporation . . . We cannot 

continue to run an operation like the members 



March 25, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 601 

opposite. Because running an operation like the members 

opposite put us into the financial debt that we are faced with. 

 

Obviously what we want to do is to provide the best possible 

service to the people of Saskatchewan. And that will be 

achieved and it will be done with fairness and it is being done 

with fairness. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, 87.8 per cent 

of the farmers said that these people have an overall good 

service rating — excellent. The fact is that most of the agents 

involved with this which and have almost never, ever received 

a single complaint. 

 

There is absolutely no basis for these actions, and since you 

won't provide an explanation for the witch-hunt, I'm going to 

suggest one. Mr. Minister, on May 1, 1992, Mr. Terry 

Tangjerd, the hand-picked NDP (New Democratic Party) 

appointment, gave this explanation to the agents. 

 

He said, he said this in a letter that he sent to all of them, and I 

have a copy of it here. He said: 

 

 You are not in a position to speak out against the corporation, 

government, or the program. As a corporation we are 

prepared to initiate appropriate action if this contractual 

obligation is not met. The action taken could include the 

termination of the agent contract. 

 

That's what Mr. Terry Tangjerd wrote to every one of the 

agents. The president of Crop Insurance told agents that they 

were not allowed to speak out against the government. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want to know whether you authorized that 

letter. Do you agree with the threat contained in this letter? Do 

you agree with the Crop Insurance agents must never speak 

against the government? And is the witch-hunt that is occurring 

today the systematic breakdown of the contract that you have 

with the agents of the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — I want to indicate to the member that 

first of all, we require and expect, we expect that public 

employees will in fact carry out the policy of government. And 

while they are on duty, I would not expect them to be running 

against the policy which we are asking them to implement 

during their work. But where you people went, you terrorized 

civil servants during your reign that even when they were . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I would ask the members please 

not to interrupt. Let the minister be able to answer the question. 

And members then have an opportunity, I think, to ask a 

question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — As I was saying, Mr. Speaker, we expect 

the civil servants to implement the programs and the policies of 

the government. I think any 

government can expect that of their civil servants — no more, 

nor less than most governments. 

 

But I'll tell you this, that outside of their government duties 

they have every freedom, and we have always expressed that 

— unlike what your party did in the past to totally terrorize and 

to hand-pick, by the way, Tory supporters for every possible 

jobs that you could. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, I want to ask 

you this question: why are you asking the members of the crop 

insurance agents, why are you asking those individuals to bring 

all of their computers, all of their work, all of their whole office 

supplies to the city of Melville for them to deposit there? Why 

would you be doing that if you weren't going to fire them, if 

you weren't going to say that your work is done and 

terminated? 

 

They are being coerced and pushed on every level that they 

possibly can. And, Mr. Minister, it is your intention to replace 

the marketing agents with who? — NDP supporters, as you 

have done in the Crop Insurance office already in the town of 

Melville. You've put NDP supporters . . . individuals who are 

the secretaries of the member from Melville are now in the 

Crop Insurance service office. You have put them in there. Will 

you tell this Assembly that you will not back-fill any of them 

with people who are NDP supporters? 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier and this 

government is committed to restoring a professional civil 

service and independence of the civil service here in this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — Unlike the past, we are going to restore 

an independent . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — We don't believe you, Murray. 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — Well you don't have to because you 

didn't practice it so it's very difficult for you to believe. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — What I am saying here, the hon. member 

is drawing conclusions without even the knowledge of the 

outcome of . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. I ask the member 

from Estevan to please come to order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — As I said, the hon. member is coming to 

conclusions far before he knows the facts. And you can't come 

to conclusions. How can he hypothecate, before a single agent 

has been removed, that we're going to be filling them with 

NDP supporters? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Because they wouldn't sign off 



602 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1993 

at 5 yesterday. They wouldn't sign at 5 o'clock. 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — I'll tell you . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. I will have to ask 

the Leader of the Opposition to please not get into a debate 

with the minister when he is trying to answer a question . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . If members don't wish to ask any 

more questions, we can simply take a little breather until 

question period is over. That's fine with me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I have 

indicated, the hon. member is hypothecating the results of 

interviews with a number of agents who are under review. I 

indicate to you that they have contracts, they have legal rights 

within that contract, and therefore it's impossible for anyone to 

be derogated of their rights. 

 

We intend to be fair. We will be fair. We will have a 

professional civil service, unlike the previous administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, I don't 

believe that you will do that. I don't believe it at all. You 

haven't done it before, you aren't doing it now, and you won't 

do it in the future. 

 

You wrote . . . and your minister responsible for relationships 

with SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) 

wrote them a letter and said, you toe the line or else. 

 

Now Saskatchewan Crop Insurance, the corporation for which 

you are responsible, is also threatening people. Bring all the 

stuff in here and then leave it here and we'll kick you out. And 

they stripped them of their livelihood. 

 

Some of these people had given up an opportunity. Are SGI 

(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) agents going to be 

next? If they don't toe the party line, are they going to be next? 

 

Mr. Minister, are you going to take full responsibility and say 

to these people that they have legal . . . a right for legal counsel 

in those negotiations? Are you going to allow that to happen? 

And, Mr. Minister, will you commit to this Assembly that you 

will allow that to happen? 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — The hon. member goes from the sublime 

to the ridiculous. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — Obviously any individual has the right to 

seek counsel. Obviously anyone has that right. Also they have 

a contract which I believe that you renegotiated prior to your 

defeat. They have the protection within that contract. They 

have that right of legal counsel. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, I stood in this 

House last year and voted against farmers being stripped of 

their rights. And you say you're going to keep these 16? Forget 

it. You don't consider any rights of any individuals. And I'm 

saying to you, these individuals need their rights maintained 

and we in the opposition will see that they get them maintained 

across the board, whether they're NDP, Liberal, or 

Conservative. 

 

Mr. Minister, are you going to take full responsibility for the 

actions that you're taking by firing or forcing these individuals 

to be stripped of their rights in dealing with the kinds of things 

that they have to deal with at Crop Insurance? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — It would be far easier to deal with the 

question if you knew anybody that had been stripped of their 

rights. No one has been stripped of their rights. Individuals 

have contracts. Individuals have the right to counsel. 

Individuals have all of the legal rights within that contract, so 

don't stand here talking about a hypothetical stripping of 

anybody's rights. I'll indicate to you that what we will do is to 

be fairer to the civil servants than that past administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Premier, I want to ask 

you the question. As a lawyer and as a former attorney general, 

you must understand that due process must be followed and 

that people have rights that must be respected. Why . . . when 

the very government that is supposed to uphold the justice 

begins to run roughshod over people's rights and ignore the 

law, this is a really a dark day, just like the day that you voted 

for GRIP and no contracts were allowed. 

 

Mr. Premier, is this the kind of government that you will lead? 

Will you give your commitment to this House today to 

personally investigate this matter and to report your findings to 

this House as quickly as possible, and take some appropriate 

action with those individuals who are carrying out this at the 

request of the minister? Will you provide that opportunity for 

us to see what you're going to do, by apologizing to those 

people that you've called into Melville? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: — As I have said to the hon. member, due 

process is the entitlement of any individual. I indicate to you, 

each and every one had the rights within the contracts that you 

supplied them. Every individual has the right to legal counsel. 

Every government has the right to review the performance of 

individuals within the corporation. 

 

And I'll say to this: fairness, I promise, will be the process with 

this, unlike the process under your 



March 25, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 603 

administration. I may say that we respect the civil service. We 

will respect the integrity of the individuals. But I'll tell you, we 

will not in fact tolerate incompetence or subversion of policies. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Post-Budget Consultations 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question's to the Premier. Mr. Premier, every day another level 

of your iceberg budget appears on the surface in Saskatchewan. 

Every day more and more people recognize the hurt and the 

betrayal that your NDP government has hidden below the 

surface of this budget. 

 

Today my colleague from Morse uncovers an appalling 

example of the vindictive kind of government that you are 

running, Mr. Premier. But like an iceberg, it's all done 

underneath the surface. We understand, Mr. Premier, you've 

been out about the province trying to sell this budget. And it's 

revealing how an open and accountable Premier does that. 

 

Sir, you've climbed back into your protective bubble, and we're 

wondering why your post-budget consultative process has to 

exclude the media and members of the public. Maybe you'd 

like to explain to us today why you're afraid to face the public 

of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. 

member for that question. I think at noon today I saw 

something on the podium which had these big letters called GX 

94. I don't think it was an MLA's contraption, and I did see a 

very handsome visage of a person by the name of Kevin 

O'Connor, who for sure is not an NDP MLA. 

 

And last night in Loon Lake I saw the television studios from 

Lloydminster and the local press, and the day before I saw the 

La Ronge people, and in Watson I saw CFQC TV, and I met 

the public in open forums at every one of these sessions — 

anybody who wanted to pay 7.50 for the lunch attended. 

Tonight we're having another meeting in Indian Head which is 

open to the public. We are meeting the people. 

 

And I want to tell you that while there are questions about the 

individual budget, and people may dispute specific aspects of 

it, I tell you that the overwhelming reaction of the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan is that we are doing the right thing 

for the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, we're 

fortunate in this province that at least the news media don't 

believe your rhetoric all the time. So they've been quietly 

following you around, trying to find out exactly what this 

closed-door 

process is all about. 

 

And in fact, Mr. Premier, you're right. You have met with some 

people around the province. And invariably after each one of 

those meetings someone goes out and voices concerns in the 

public because you wouldn't allow the media and the public in 

there. In fact, JoAnne Schulte of Watson said to you: why have 

you inflicted all of this pain on us with a 9 per cent sales tax 

and your other rate increases and your hidden budget, your 

hidden taxes, when you could have left it at 7 per cent and at 

least we knew what we were dealing with. It was out in the 

open. 

 

But she had to go outside the room, Mr. Premier, in order to 

voice that concern to other people in the province because you 

would only meet behind closed doors. Why is that, Mr. 

Premier? Why won't you open the process up? Why won't you 

talk to people in public? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, what is incredible about 

these questions in question period is that the hon. members 

don't listen to their answers to the previous questions. I just 

finished telling the member for the entire meeting today at 

luncheon I had the news media there. I'm telling the member 

that has been the case every step of the way. 

 

In Watson, CFQC television was there. There were ordinary 

members of the public there. At the Watson meeting, The 

Watson Witness had a reporter at that meeting from beginning 

to end, where JoAnne Schulte was at. 

 

And when JoAnne Schulte asked me why did we put on the 

sales tax, do you know what I said to her, is what I've said to 

you in the legislature and what I've said to people of 

Saskatchewan: we are forced to put on these taxes because 

after nine years of profligacy and waste and debt management, 

this province has a crisis unparalleled in the history of the 

province. 

 

The answer to JoAnne is we are forced to do the things that we 

have to do sensitively, compassionately for business because of 

your malfeasance, and I think people in Saskatchewan know 

that's the right answer and the right direction. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Twin Rivers Health District 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today 

to inform this Assembly of another positive development in our 

province journey towards health reform. 

 

I have just returned from Paradise Hill, a community just 

north-east of Lloydminster, where I took part in the signing 

ceremony establishing our province's second rural health 

district, the Twin Rivers Health 



604 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1993 

District. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — The district is made up of the 

communities of St. Walburg, Paradise Hill, Turtleford, 

Maidstone, Lashburn, Neilburg, Cut Knife, and the Little Pine, 

Poundmaker, Thunderchild, and Onion Lake Indian reserves, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The district will have responsibility for the acute care, 

long-term care, ambulance home care, and public health needs 

for the area's approximately 16,800 people. 

 

Formation of this district is another example of the growing 

commitment to health reform in our province which has 

become evident across our province. 

 

I want to commend the local planning group for looking 

beyond individual services and facilities and focusing on 

meeting the health needs of the entire district today and in the 

years to come. 

 

Their leadership in creating the second rural health district in 

our province provides both an example and an incentive to 

other communities across Saskatchewan as they come together 

to plan and form their own districts. 

 

This is an important time in our health reform process. There 

will be many changes as we restructure our health system to 

place more emphasis on community-based services. 

 

Having a health district during this time of transition means 

that local people have the opportunity to make informed 

decisions about their health services, decisions that are 

sensitive to the needs of the people who live within the district. 

 

It's the local people who need and use their health services, so 

it is only right and proper and fair that they have a say in 

determining what those services should be. The 

community-driven establishment of a health district gives them 

that opportunity. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, today one of the individuals from the 

planning group came up to me and told me that he recognized 

that there were difficult decisions to be made in the future and 

that he wanted to thank me for the fact that we were giving 

communities an opportunity to make those decisions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — I am pleased to inform the Assembly 

that an interim district board has been appointed for the Twin 

Rivers Health District, chaired by Jim Loy of Neilburg. He will 

be assisted by Ernie How of Cut Knife; Don Young of 

Maidstone; Bob Schultz of Lashburn, Bob Hougham of 

Paradise Hill, Joseph Kurjata of St. Walburg, Henry Wooff of 

Turtleford, and Georgina Gallivan of Twin Rivers Home Care. 

The local Indian bands have been invited to have a 

representative sit on the board. The board will not assume any 

fiscal responsibility until it has perfected its administrative 

procedures. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the formation of the district and the appointment 

of the board are only the first steps towards health reform. The 

people of this district have demonstrated what can be 

accomplished when people come together to discuss issues and 

work together to meet the challenges head on. That is the 

Saskatchewan spirit that built this province and it will build the 

health system of tomorrow — people and communities 

working together. It is the spirit of cooperation that is key to 

meeting our goal of a health system based on wellness. 

 

I ask, Mr. Speaker, the members of this Assembly to join with 

me in congratulating the people of St. Walburg, Paradise Hill, 

Turtleford, Maidstone, Lashburn, Neilburg, and Cut Knife, and 

of the Little Pine, Poundmaker, Thunderchild, and Onion Lake 

Indian reserves on the formation of the Twin Rivers Health 

District. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 

make a few comments regarding this presentation the Minister 

of Health has just given to us regarding her statement. 

 

I'd just like to mention the fact that even though many people 

in Saskatchewan realize and recognize the fact that we have to 

look at ways in which we can rationalize and make our health 

system serve the public more fully, what has been happening of 

late, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that indeed what is taking place 

the people in Saskatchewan, specifically rural Saskatchewan, 

are finding that time and time again they were actually losing 

more than they are gaining. In fact it appears that another 

iceberg has risen in the sea, broad sea of Saskatchewan, and 

health care. 

 

One has to wonder, in the regionalization of the services that 

we've just had announced here today, how many of these 

hospitals will be open in a few years. How many of the people 

that were appointed to the board will in two years time, as the 

effects of the offloading begin to take place, how many of them 

will be willing to stay on that board to administer the decisions 

or accept the decisions, make the decisions that the Minister of 

Health should have made? In fact, Mr. Speaker, we just have to 

look around and we find that there are many . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I ask the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose to please not interrupt when the member is 

responding to a minister's statement. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to bring out the point 

that a number of regional boards have already been facing a 

situation where members have resigned because of the 

problems they are beginning 



March 25, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 605 

to see cropping up within the health care system, this so-called 

wellness model. 

 

And I just want to point out one thing . . . brought out a point 

that was raised by a member from . . . an administrator in the 

hospital of Wynyard who said, this isn't amputation, it's 

decapitation. And if he had been involved, had been invited to 

the meeting, he would have asked the Premier exactly what 

was going on. 

 

In fact the closing paragraph in the statement he said, we'll 

become one of those wellness centres whatever the — I believe 

it's — h-e-l-l that is, he said. This budget helped urban areas at 

the demise of rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's fine and dandy to have the Minister talk with 

glowing reports about how health is being helped in 

Saskatchewan, but what we are seeing on this side of the House 

and what people in Saskatchewan are seeing is that, in fact, 

rural health care is disappearing and at the end of the day, 

people will be certainly standing up to let their views be 

known. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Before orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, with leave 

I'd like to move a motion introducing the name of Mr. Jack 

Goohsen to the Crown Corporations Committee. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Membership of the Standing Committee on Crown 

Corporations 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move, 

seconded by the member from Regina North West, that, by 

leave: 

 

 That the name of Mr. Jack Goohsen be substituted for that of 

Mr. Martens on the list of members composing the Standing 

Committee on Crown Corporations. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 

question no. 90, I would request it be converted to motions for 

returns (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: — Motions for returns (debatable). 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Unparliamentary Language 

 

The Speaker: — Before I call special orders, I want to draw 

members' attention to two things. Number one, yesterday when 

I interrupted the member from Wilkie 

on using unparliamentary language, I inadvertently referred to 

the wrong paragraph in 6th Edition of Beauchesne's. I said 463; 

I meant paragraph 486(3), so that correction can be made on 

page 587 in Hansard. 

 

The second point that I want to raise is a concern that I have, 

and I wish members would pay attention to this very carefully. 

I have examined Hansard of recent days and have observed a 

development that is giving me some considerable concern. In 

debate, members have characterized each other as wolverines, 

rats, and dogs. I should not have to remind members that such 

language is inappropriate and causes a deterioration of the level 

of debate. I know that members are quite capable of finding 

better ways of expressing their views. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that the Assembly resolve 

itself into the Committee of Finance, and the amendment 

thereto moved by Mr. Neudorf. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my pleasure to 

rise today in the legislature and speak to the budget. There are 

literally thousands and thousands of people watching today 

across the province of Saskatchewan, particularly senior 

citizens watching this afternoon. And I want to address some 

very serious concerns that senior citizens, and farmers, 

pensioners, single parents, and others have about the budget. 

Because we are experiencing a great deal of pain and a great 

deal of suffering in the province of Saskatchewan, and people 

are asking: why do we have to go through this? Why are we 

experiencing one of the meanest if not the meanest budget in 

the history of Saskatchewan? 

 

People in Estevan, people in Regina, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, 

Yorkton, The Battlefords, are all saying the same thing: we are 

disappointed; we feel betrayed. There's absolutely fear out 

there with senior citizens. They're saying: what did you do? 

You took away my health care protection; you've taken away 

my medicare. 

 

And I'm going to address that today, Mr. Speaker, because 

indeed the people of Saskatchewan deserve some answers. 

 

There's absolutely no question that the NDP opposite would not 

get elected or re-elected on this budget. This, Mr. Speaker, this 

whole budget argument is now beyond politics. It's about 

suffering and fear and anxiety, the frustration experienced by 

Saskatchewan people. They didn't expect what they've received 

in this black, dark, Thursday budget that did the opposite to 

what they expected. 



606 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1993 

And I'm going to go back, Mr. Speaker, answer a series of 

questions that the people of Saskatchewan are raising — very, 

very, serious questions. In fact, Mr. Speaker, it reminds me in 

good part about the uncaring nature of the NDP a decade ago 

when people were frightened. People needed help. The NDP 

said no. And the very man that was deputy premier at that time 

is Premier today and heads up the administration, and he is 

bringing down a budget like they did in 1982 that is absolutely 

heartless. 

 

Seniors were frightened. Farmers were frightened. Other 

people needed help, and the NDP, under Allan Blakeney, and 

the current Premier here today, said no, no help. And I'll tell 

you, senior citizens and farmers and taxpayers across 

Saskatchewan, rural and urban, said no to them, and they're 

going to say no to them again. This is the very same man that 

orchestrated it in '82 and he's done it again in 1993, and it's 

heartless and it's cold. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, beyond politics the fear and the anxiety and 

the frustration that senior citizens and our farmers and our 

families and our young people and the unemployed feel, in the 

province of Saskatchewan, is real. And in the non-partisan 

sense they are saying, why pick on them. That's what they're 

saying. 

 

(1445) 

 

So I'm going to address a series of questions, Mr. Speaker, 

because this really does remind me of a decade ago when the 

people of Saskatchewan rejected the NDP and said it's all talk. 

You don't care about people. You just care about the bankers 

and you care about other things in your own reputation, but you 

don't care about real families. 

 

My objective today, Mr. Speaker, is to tell seniors and families 

that there are choices and there are better ways. You shouldn't 

be this frightened and you shouldn't be treated this way. There 

are better ways to provide the goods and services and health 

care in the province of Saskatchewan than to terrorize you, as 

you see today. 

 

And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to speak today about 

optimism, because this great province of Saskatchewan can 

have optimism and should be optimistic, and we shouldn't have 

the Premier and cabinet ministers running around with doom 

and gloom saying how terrible it is in the province of 

Saskatchewan. There's no call for that. 

 

Saskatchewan has great potential, a great deal of excitement in 

the future, if in fact the Government of Saskatchewan would in 

fact defend the province and stand up there and say, this is an 

exciting place to be. We can balance budgets. We can protect 

people. We can provide health care. But what are they doing? 

It's doom and gloom and you frighten people. You frighten 

investors. You've got the rating institutions now, and certainly 

the seniors are telling me and others are telling me, they say, 

well you give Saskatchewan a BBB because if the government 

feels 

that badly about the province, I guess it must be true. 

 

And it's not necessary. You can balance the budget. You can 

provide an attractive environment for people to come and 

invest, and I'm going to talk about that today. And I want to 

point out the alternatives, Mr. Speaker, because there are very 

clear alternatives to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

This Legislative Assembly is about alternatives. You can 

balance the budget. You can encourage people to come in the 

province. You can protect people in health care. You can 

provide schools and hospitals and alternatives for people 

without frightening them and without scaring them to death and 

without making sure that everybody in the country thinks this 

is the last place in North America that you should invest. 

 

So the people of this province want to know, do we have 

alternatives to the fear and the offloading and the anxiety and 

the tax burden and the attack on health care and medicare that 

we see today under the NDP budget. And I'm going to say, yes, 

we have real alternatives. Real alternatives, and you can see 

them very clearly. 

 

I'm going to briefly point out, Mr. Speaker, what people are 

saying today about the NDP budget. I'm going to ask them to 

seriously look at the 1993 budget here in Saskatchewan and 

what they did. Then I'm going to address, Mr. Speaker, what 

they promised they would do. Then I'm going to talk about the 

serious alternatives that are there. 

 

And then I'm going to go back into a little bit of history and say 

the people of Saskatchewan have seen this before and, in fact, 

Mr. Speaker, we know there are deep and real alternatives, and 

I hear about them every day from the people across the 

province. 

 

Let me turn to those to start with. Here's what people are saying 

today. Today in question period, the Premier, the NDP leader, 

stood on his feet and says, oh we're having a great time across 

rural Saskatchewan. The meetings are really good, really 

positive. Well that's a joke. 

 

Read the papers, listen to the news, and he's getting beat up on 

like you've never seen before. He would never go into an 

election with a budget like this. 

 

Members from Regina are holding meetings. Regina Rosemont 

held a meeting and what did the people say? They come out, 

Mr. Speaker, and they condemn the budget. Mr. Ed Whelan, 

former cabinet minister, you heard what he said, Mr. Speaker, a 

colleague of yours at one time here in the legislature. And I 

quote: 

 

 "I'm going to suggest the people who put this budget together 

had mud for brains" . . . 

 

This is an NDP colleague standing up in a public meeting and 

saying that this is the silliest, stupidest budget he's ever seen in 

his life. It goes on to say: 



March 25, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 607 

Whelan, who had been consumer affairs minister in the NDP 

government of the 1970s, said he hadn't talked to a single 

senior citizen since last week who had a favorable review of 

the budget. 

 

Where's the Premier going where he's getting this great 

response? Ed Whelan, former cabinet minister, is telling the 

truth to the NDP. He hasn't talked to a single senior citizen 

since last week who had a favourable review of the budget. 

And I would suggest he's not talking to Tories who are senior 

citizens. He's talking to NDPers, and every single one of them 

is saying this is the dumbest budget, this is the meanest budget, 

this is terrible. 

 

He goes on to say: 

 

 "What it's going to cost me, what it's going to cost everyone, 

is an outrage." 

 

NDP cabinet ministers talking to their own and talking to 

back-benchers saying, this budget is an outrage. They've raised 

the deductible for seniors from $50 to something like $850. 

Senior citizens are saying, why pick on us. We support the 

CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation). We've 

supported the NDP. We've supported medicare and you are 

picking on our people, on the very folks that got you elected. 

 

Peter Susa, big time NDP supporter said look: ". . . the poor 

and the unemployed took the biggest hit." The poor and the 

unemployed took the biggest hit. NDP supporters. 

 

 "I'm really disenchanted with the backbenchers. If this thing 

doesn't turn around, you will not get elected again." 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier stands in here with bravado and 

false smiles and says, oh we're going across the province and 

it's really popular. Why don't you start right in downtown 

Regina. Right in downtown Regina the people are saying, this 

is the ugliest, silliest, muddiest, flop, fluke, mean-spirited, 

iceberg budget they've ever seen in their life. And these are 

NDPers. Imagine what the Tories are saying. Imagine what the 

right-wingers are saying. I wonder what the middle-of-the-road 

Liberals are saying. They're saying this is crazy, this is worse 

than 1982. And they lost every seat but eight, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ed is right, Susa is right. You will not get re-elected on this. 

You are listening to somebody who . . . And I recall — and you 

can say, well it's history, and it is, but it's interesting political 

history — when seniors came to the NDP, at 22 per cent 

interest rates you said, nope, can't help you, lose your house, 

it's gone. Lose your house. And the people of Saskatchewan 

said, you lose your job, Mr. Leader of the NDP, Mr. Allan 

Blakeney. You're out of here. And that's what they're saying 

today. Only I haven't seen it this strong since the early 1980s. 

So what else do they say? Got a letter today from Betty 

McDonald from Ceylon, senior citizen: I'm having a terrible 

time making ends meet. (And she's a widow.) Also the 

medicare, putting the 

prescription up — that is stupid (she says). We need some 

medicine and small hospitals as the cities have. 

 

This is a senior citizen, a widow who says that she can't afford 

the NDP budget. I mean why are they taxing these people? 

Well this is what it says. The Premier comes back from his tour 

and do you know what the headline says? And the seniors that 

are watching here — you're not alone, senior citizens of 

Saskatchewan. People across the province are saying the same 

thing. It says and I quote, Mr. Speaker: Romanow blasted. 

That's what it says. He's blasted out there by senior citizens and 

by chambers of commerce and by health care workers and by 

senior citizens and farmers. 

 

JoAnne Schulte, as raised in question period today, of Watson, 

says "why don't you just stay with the 7 cents? Why did you go 

to 9? We had the 7 all figured out." And when she asked the 

Premier that, this was the response: "I didn't get an answer." 

That's what she said. 

 

In the House here, the NDP Premier says one thing in the 

House and another thing in the country. Hey, he's been doing 

that all his political life, Mr. Speaker. One thing in the country: 

he was out there; he didn't have any answers. He wouldn't 

answer the lady. And it's right here in the paper. In the House 

he stands here and says, oh well I told her all this stuff and it 

really went over well. That isn't what she says and that isn't 

what the paper says. He got blasted. He got hit right between 

the eyes with the political truth. This is the most unpopular 

budget in the history of Saskatchewan and it's the most 

mean-spirited. 

 

And health care workers raised again today in Wynyard. Mr. 

Harrison said, that's not a 3 or 4 per cent reduction; that's a 75 

per cent reduction. He expects his 17-bed hospital to become a 

4-bed, will become one of those wellness centres, whatever in 

the h-e-l-l that is. 

 

Well, well, well. Senior citizens of the province, I'm here to tell 

you today that you are not alone. The people of Saskatchewan 

in health care, in chambers of commerce, ordinary citizens who 

have not been able to speak up and who can't hide in the 

legislature, are speaking up. 

 

Swift Current today, Mr. Speaker. "Budget has few fans." Well 

I want to say to farmers and seniors and people across this 

province: the lead paragraph says: "Critics are calling the NDP 

budget a monster" — a monster. 

 

And the Premier stands up here joking and laughing as if this is 

really fun for people. He can have his seat mate gave $800,000 

and a brand-new empty department to play politics with, and 

you've got people who are senior citizens and single who need 

prescriptions and you're charging them up to $800. And the 

public is saying, this budget is a monster. 

 

He's getting blasted. He's getting booed. Well I say to the 

people of Saskatchewan: there are alternatives to 



608 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1993 

this. And I'm going to be talking about them today. There are 

alternatives to this pain and this silliness and this vindictive 

nature of the NDP budget. 

 

Another one here says: The budget will hurt Swift Current. 

Teachers are laid off. The province's teachers are reeling after 

last week's announcement of a 4 per cent cut in operating 

programs which follows on the heels of an earlier 2 per cent 

cut. 

 

Closing of schools. Yesterday schools closed in the city of 

Regina and the chairman of the school board said, we have no 

choice; it's the offloading. Right on CK62 Radio he says that 

it's because we're offloaded. We have no choice. 

 

Teachers, pupils, families, men, women, seniors; that's what 

they're saying today. 

 

The teachers' federation, Mr. Speaker. The public must realize 

that these are massive cuts to the school system. The next 

generation, Mr. Speaker, we know is education, high 

technology, the information age, information highways, and 

what do these people do? They're cutting education. 

Universities are saying, this is terrible. The president of the 

University of Saskatchewan. The president of the University of 

Regina: we're a small university and don't have the reserve 

funds to cope with these cuts. 

 

I met with students at the University of Saskatchewan last night 

in Saskatoon and they say, there's no choice; the university's 

got to cut departments, raise tuition. They've got to pick on the 

very people who are the next generation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what the people are saying today from one end of 

the province to another is simply that the NDP didn't tell them 

the truth; the NDP are too arrogant to recognize that they could 

balance the budget much easier; the NDP are very, very 

vindictive. But more importantly, what's really bothering them, 

they say that the NDP have betrayed their own. The NDP have 

betrayed their own party, their own supporters, their own 

people. 

 

And Ed Whelan is right. This is the dumbest thing that you 

could possibly see. This is the silliest political budget that you 

could have. But what's much, much worse and more relevant, 

it's the most painful and it's not necessary. There are 

alternatives, and that front bench knows it, which could be 

much more compassionate. And you could have economic 

activity. You could have balanced budgets. 

 

But you know what? They're covering their political hide at all 

cost — all cost. Pain or no pain, they are going to cover and 

protect their political hide because they said that they would 

not do it with business and with private sector and allow this 

province to grow. They said they'd do it their way. And they 

couldn't find any other way so they're doing it in probably the 

silliest, most harmful fashion that you can devise. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I have a whole file here of newspaper 

clippings of people who are suffering and 

in pain who said, this is not what the NDP promised. It has 

nothing to do with the deficit and the debt. This is just about 

choices. You have alternatives. You have alternatives. 

 

Well what they say is not very flattering, Mr. Speaker. And I 

want to say to the people in the province of Saskatchewan and 

those that are watching today from whatever corner of the 

province you're in: you're not alone. There are alternatives and 

there are elections and there are opportunities. And I don't want 

you to take this sitting down. I don't want you to give up. I 

don't want you to be frightened and say, I guess there's nothing 

you can do. I don't want you to encourage the NDP to do more 

of it. 

 

(1500) 

 

I want you to write them and call them and write us and call us 

and say, there will be a federal election, there will be a 

provincial election, and we will send them a message. They 

can't betray the people of Saskatchewan like this and get away 

with it. And they won't. Absolutely. 

 

So you rest assured — the people of Saskatchewan, senior 

citizens, farmers, and others — if you feel betrayed like 

thousands and tens of thousands of people do, that you will 

have allies. But I want you to have hope, and that's what's more 

important than anything else. There is hope and there is . . . and 

there will be an alternative. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why are they so upset? Why are they so upset? I 

just want to briefly look at the 1993 budget which clearly 

demonstrates it's the most mean-spirited budget that you can 

image. 

 

The 1993 budget has sales taxes in the province of 

Saskatchewan now up to 9 per cent, and it broadened it to 

include things like clothes. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Twenty-six per cent in two years. 

 

Mr. Devine: — In fact it's 29 per cent. From 7 to 9 per cent is a 

29 per cent increase in the sales tax. And you have no choice; 

you've got to pay it. If you need clothes, if you need anything 

else that they're charging on, you have to pay a 29 per cent 

increase in the PST (provincial sales tax). 

 

And if you're that single lady on a pension and you need 

prescription drugs, they're not only charging you $800 now, 

they've raised your taxes from 7 to 9 per cent. And they 

promised you no PST. And that's what they did. They raised it. 

That's why, Mr. Speaker, when you look across there, there's 

hardly anybody in their seats because they're absolutely 

ashamed of it. 

 

They promised senior citizens, NDP supporters, rural and 

urban and farmers and single parents that there would not be a 

PST. And they not only have it, but they increased it and they 

broadened it. They did not tell the truth. They betrayed the 

people. They misled the people. They said no tax increases. 

And I've got 



March 25, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 609 

quotes, all kinds of them, Mr. Speaker, and I'm sure you're 

aware of them. And now they have really stuck it to them. 

 

They increased the gas tax 2 cents a litre. They've increased 

resource taxes. They have gone and hit people so hard, without 

any alternatives, that we find them now reeling, Mr. Speaker, 

and they are extremely upset. 

 

But look what this means, Mr. Speaker, just what they've done 

to ordinary people who they think they can fool. What the NDP 

budget does for your family — if you spend $500 a year on 

clothes, you add $45; add another $300 for just general sales 

tax; you can add $63 in gasoline — clothing, 45; sales tax, 300. 

 

Health insurance. Right now the private sector — can you 

believe it — in the province of Saskatchewan, under the 

NDP-CCF, have encouraged the private sector to come in and 

provide prescription drug insurance. MCIC (Medical Care 

Insurance Commission), Blue Cross coming in here. And the 

senior citizen says: I can't afford it; I voted NDP so that they 

wouldn't do that, and now they've done it. That will cost an 

extra $456 a year. 

 

Children's dental insurance can cost $840 a year; the gas tax, 

63; pharmaceuticals alone, $240; and in property taxes — we 

haven't even got it yet because the RMs (rural municipality) 

and the municipalities haven't raised them, but it's literally 

hundreds of dollars. You've got over $2,000 in taxes per 

family, and we haven't even included the offload in property 

taxes. 

 

Senior citizens, low income people . . . Now that doesn't 

include increases in utilities, Mr. Speaker, power rates, gas 

rates. Vehicle insurance has increased three and a half per cent 

and another four and a half per cent April 1. Registration is up 

7.6 per cent; licence renewals up 20 per cent; energy rates up 4 

per cent and then 2 per cent in '93. Surtax and personal income 

up 10 per cent. And they de-insured chiropractic services, 

optometric services, tripled the drug plan — a massive list of 

increases and target fees, all kinds of fees. And the people don't 

have a choice. They've got to pay their power bill. They've got 

to pay their telephone bill. They've got to have automobile 

insurance. These are all monopolies. 

 

The people are saying: what did they do to me? They didn't 

give me any choice. I voted for less tax, they said. This budget 

is a betrayal, Mr. Speaker, for senior citizens, for low income, 

for farmers, for all the people in the province of Saskatchewan, 

particularly as Ed Whelan says, for the NDP who hoped that 

they would get some support. 

 

They're looking back and saying, as a lady from Wynyard: 

wow, I'd take 7 cents any day. If I could just have what I had in 

1991, '90, '89 — a prescription drug program, a pension 

program, protected program, health care, and my services — 

I'd pay 7 cents. Look what these people have done. They've cut 

all these programs, raised the taxes, raised the fees, raised 

utilities, and you have no choice at all. And the ironic part is 

they've hit the people who really, really supported them. 

 

Ed Whelan is right on the money — this is the dumbest thing 

that he's ever seen in terms of political document, and you'd 

never take this to the people in an election. But even worse 

than that, it is just the pain and the suffering that it's caused. 

 

Well when we look at it we have fee increases for almost every 

agricultural activity, every business activity, cooperatives, all 

kinds — everything that you can image they've raised the fees 

on. People are genuinely upset and discouraged, taxed to death. 

And then we have it, our neighbouring province to Alberta 

rejects sales tax. 

 

What does that mean, Mr. Speaker? If it's 9 per cent here and 

there's no sales tax in Alberta and there's less sales tax in North 

Dakota and Montana, what do you think the cross-border 

shopping is going to be like? What have you done? Ask the 

people of Maple Creek or Swift Current, Weyburn, Estevan, 

Saskatoon for that matter. Raise those interest rates up in 

Saskatchewan and if there's none in Alberta, and I quote they're 

not going to have a sales tax in Alberta, you have just driven 

business and consumers and all kinds of people into the United 

States to shop, or here over to the province of Alberta to shop. 

 

So this budget, this budget, Mr. Speaker, has raised the taxes, 

has not balanced the budget. It's added to the deficit, it's ripped 

apart the people of Saskatchewan who supported the NDP, and 

it hasn't provided the optimism for investment. 

 

In fact, the Premier runs around the province of Saskatchewan 

crying doom and gloom. He says we have no choice, we have 

to make it this way because there's doom and gloom. He 

preaches it and he preaches until people actually believe it. And 

the credit-rating institutions have now dropped Saskatchewan's 

credit rating from AA to BBB since he's been in power because 

they have made this decision that they have to preach doom 

and gloom to cover their political hide. 

 

Well I want to say to people of Saskatchewan, and particularly 

to the low income and to the seniors that are watching today, 

this option of the NDP's, of preaching doom and gloom, is not 

necessary. It's a fake. It's a sham. It's a fraud. Saskatchewan is 

very, very strong. Saskatchewan can be any amount of things 

that we want it to be, but not under the NDP because they 

preach doom and gloom just to fool you. 

 

Well now, Mr. Speaker, I want to just turn . . . because the 

people of Saskatchewan are saying they don't like this, they're 

saying that when you look at the budget it's taxes and they 

promised not. It's vicious. It's severe. 

 

Now I'm going to ask the question and then I'm going to 

answer it. What did the NDP say they would do? What did they 

say they would do if they got elected? 



610 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1993 

This is what they said that they would do. This is Mr. 

Romanow and CKCK-TV, September 3, 1991: We think a four 

and a half billion dollar expenditure is roughly enough; it's 

what we now expend in the province of Saskatchewan. Is 

enough — four and a half billion is enough. 

 

This is what he said in P.A. (Prince Albert): Tax increases are 

not needed to pay for the GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) and NISA (net income stabilization account) 

programs, says NDP Leader Roy Romanow. No taxes. 

 

Then he said, no new taxes will be imposed. Instead, the NDP 

would cut wasteful spending and encourage new economic 

development. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What development? 

 

Mr. Devine: — Yes, where's the economic development? And 

he said no new taxes. 

 

Then in the Leader-Post it says, and I quote: Romanow is 

promising a government that will live within its means, spend 

no more than current budget estimates of 4.5 billion annually. 

And the people of this province are fed up with taxes and we're 

going to change that, he says. He said the people of 

Saskatchewan are fed up with taxes and the NDP is going to 

change that. What have we got? Holy smokes. 

 

They promised no PST and they promised no increase in taxes. 

They promised no increase in fees. They promised to balance 

the budget. They promised economic development. They 

promised cost of production for farmers. And they promised 

the end of food banks. They promised no more people in 

poverty. 

 

But what have you got? You've got more people in pain, more 

people in poverty, more people leaving the province, more 

people shopping in Alberta, more deficits, accumulated debt 

going up, the credit rating going down. You've got a bigger, 

deeper, painful mess today than you've seen in the history of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm going to take a little bit of time here because 

it involves several quotes. My colleague in the legislature in 

1991, Mr. Hepworth, put together a budget that would balance 

Saskatchewan's budget in 1993-94. And at that particular time 

the NDP leader got to his feet, the leader of the opposition, and 

he said several things. And I'm just going to read them back 

into the record and find out how he's doing. 

 

This is what he said after the '91 budget, and this is on page 

2716: 

 

 . . . rather than a credible plan to create jobs and economic 

activity, or to ease the tax burden on ordinary families, or cut 

waste at the top of government. 

 

He is going to ease the tax burden on ordinary families 

and cut waste at the top in government. He just gave $800,000 

and an expanded cabinet to the top and he increased taxes on 

ordinary families. He did exactly the opposite. 

 

He said, we'll ease the tax burden on ordinary families. Did he 

do that? No; he raised taxes. Did he cut waste at the top? No; 

he expanded his cabinet by 80 per cent from 10 to 18 and then 

he gave the Deputy Premier — felt a little bit of sympathy for 

him — a nice job, $800,000, and a brand-new package. For 

what? For ordinary Saskatchewan people? No, not at all. Do 

you know what's in there? No. That's what he said he'd do 

though. 

 

Then he says: 

 

 In the light of the record of the massive out-migration and the 

huge deficit and the tax increases and the waste and 

mismanagement . . . 

 

Well look at the size of the deficit today after two years of 

these people. It's up and growing, almost $2 billion more than 

when they took office. And massive out-migration. People are 

going to the province of Alberta or B.C. (British Columbia) or 

other places. 

 

And then he went on to talk about the biggest tax increase in 

our history and he would never do it. Well, Mr. Speaker, what 

we have today is the biggest tax — apparent on the tip of the 

iceberg. And then the hidden iceberg in offloading and fees and 

utilities is by far the largest tax burden ever inflicted on the 

people of Saskatchewan. And on top of that, he didn't come 

close to balancing the budget, he's added to the deficit, and his 

credit rating is going down. 

 

And it says here that he doesn't believe in the policy of taking 

hundreds of millions of dollars from Crown corporations like 

SaskPower and SaskTel, on the same page. Well if I'm not 

mistaken, Mr. Speaker, if you look at the budget, he is taking 

exactly hundreds of millions of dollars from the Crown 

corporations. But he stood here holier than thou and said he'd 

never do it. Well . . . 

 

I'm going through this tirade of promises, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

because the people of Saskatchewan and the senior citizens that 

are watching today need to know that what the NDP Premier 

promised when he was opposition is the very opposite of what 

he's done since he's been here. 

 

And he said that they would cut out millions of dollars in 

advertising and he would put money into transition houses and 

shelters for battered women and children. That's what he said. 

What about Myers House? What about the hospitals? What 

about Whitespruce? What about the people who have said, take 

care of battered women, people who have suffered from abuse, 

young people? He said he'd fix all that. And I'm going to send 

this to anybody that wants it. He said he would stick up for 

people like that. 

 

(1515) 



March 25, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 611 

And today the Provincial Secretary, his sidekick, gets 

$800,000, and at the same time they close Myers House. And 

they promised they wouldn't do it. He said we had a choice. 

You choose to ignore the people in support of big business. 

Well is he ever ignoring the people. 

 

And then he went on to say: 

 

 . . . (you have a) choice to cut the jobs of 350 public servants 

(tonight) . . . 

 

And you did. 

 

 . . . at the same time your government has refused to cut one 

single cabinet minister from your bloated cabinet? What's 

equal about that? 

 

Did you hear that, Mr. Speaker? The NDP Premier back in '91 

says, you shouldn't have fired 350 civil servants; you should 

have cut your cabinet. That's what he said. On page 2717 of 

Hansard he said you shouldn't do that. 

 

He's in power today and he cut crop insurance agents. He's 

fired them. He's fired civil servants. He's taken an axe to them 

in a very, very, political way. And then he's blown up his 

cabinet and he's added $800,000 to a budget of a man who's got 

nothing to do with it but play politics. 

 

Eat those words. He stood in here and said, oh he'd never do 

that. But he's doing it. 

 

Then he said, Mr. Speaker, what's equal about this, to choose 

strict wage guidelines on people of the province, on hospitals 

and school boards. He said he wouldn't provide wage 

guidelines to hospitals and school boards. Well I guess not. 

He's firing them. He's closing schools, he's closing hospitals, 

he's laying them off. Offloading has made sure that they're 

closing hospitals in Weyburn, closing them all over the place. 

And he said he wouldn't do it. And it's here, Mr. Speaker, and I 

imagine you were in the House and you remember that day. He 

promised all that. I don't expect you to be converted yet, Mr. 

Speaker, but give you time. 

 

And then he said, we plan to charge ordinary families for the 

provincial PST on the purchase of clothing. Well we — that is 

the PCs (Progressive Conservative) — were going to do that. 

And what did he do? He's turned around and he's raised the 

PST from 7 to 9 per cent and he's included clothing. Exactly 

the opposite to what he said — double standards. 

 

He said he was concerned about fairness and double standards. 

And what we see in here today, and the people across the 

province of Saskatchewan, are double standards and hypocrisy. 

And as Ed Whelan said, the dumbest budget he's ever seen in 

his life. This is the most unfair betrayal that you can imagine, 

double-talk, double standards, betrayal. It's pathetic. It's 

unbelievable. 

Then what is really interesting, Mr. Speaker, he goes on to say 

this on 2718: 

 

 Our plan is to do the following: 

 

Now here is the NDP leader's plan if he gets into government. 

 

 - to really attack waste and mismanagement; 

 

And he's just given his Deputy Premier $800,000 to play with, 

with nobody in his department. 

 

 - secondly, to approach revenue where needed (on) the 

principle of fairness; 

 

Fairness. We can read from senior citizens, from town 

councils, from chambers of commerce, from people all across 

this province, and they'll say there's nothing fair about this 

budget. It is unfair; it's silly. The people who designed it, said 

Ed Whelan, must have had mud for brains. But he said he 

would give fairness. 

 

 - thirdly, to rejuvenate our economy to create jobs; 

 

Well how can they create jobs when they're running all over the 

province preaching gloom and doom? Gloom and doom, it's 

terrible, it's awful. And they want people to invest here. The 

sky is falling in and the NDP have to run and preach doom and 

gloom because that's all they've got. That's all they can say 

politically: we have to do this because of doom and gloom. 

And he promised he was going to create jobs; people were not 

going to leave the province. 

 

Well the fourth, this is a great one, Mr. Speaker, the leader of 

the NDP said: 

 

 - fourth, to stand behind farmers and rural Saskatchewan; 

 

Well, well, well. And you know, some of them believed him. 

He said he'd stand behind farmers and the people of rural 

Saskatchewan. And some of the members on the front bench 

used to be farmers, stick up for farmers. 

 

Well Mr. Romanow said this. People of Saskatchewan know 

what he said . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I know the member 

inadvertently used the name of the Premier. He knows he's to 

refer to him as the Premier or the member from Riversdale. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was used to reading 

it here. It's the Hansard quote and it says his name. The NDP 

leader from Riversdale promised to stand behind farmers and 

rural people. Well if there are farmers watching tonight — or 

people who are related to farmers — or this afternoon across 

the province, they are betrayed. They were not told the truth. 

 

Their GRIP program is cancelled, the insurance 



612 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1993 

program is cancelled, crop insurance agents are gone. They've 

raised their taxes, raised their fuel, they've cut their programs, 

their livestock programs — all kinds of support for rural 

people, it's gone. 

 

And Mr. Leader of the NDP stood here and promised that he 

would back them with the cost of production and all kinds of 

support. He didn't tell them the truth. It's awful. 

 

 - fifth, to improve our quality of life, especially in the field of 

health and education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, can you believe this? The NDP Premier stood in 

opposition and he said: we are going to attack waste and 

mismanagement at the top. They are going to get revenue on 

the basis of fairness. They're going to create economic activity. 

They're going to stand behind farmers. And they're going to 

improve the quality of life in health and education. 

 

And we've just gone through this budget and they're getting the 

tar kicked out of them on every one of those issues. He didn't 

tell the truth on any of those. He didn't live up to them. It's a 

betrayal, it's false; it's the biggest falsehood perpetrated on the 

public in the province's history. 

 

And he stood in this legislature and he wailed away about all 

the things he was going to do, and he's done exactly the 

opposite. And he says: we're going to cooperate with our 

neighbours and help friends, keep people coming together and 

achieve a common cause. Good luck! 

 

He talks about young farmers. Well, Mr. Speaker, I just want to 

say he has pitted people against people, rural against urban, 

farmers against farmers, and families against families. 

 

The members opposite don't like to hear it, Mr. Speaker, but in 

fact it's the truth. And they should listen to this, and that's why 

the member opposite is quitting. I'd quit too. And you won't get 

elected federally either. You don't deserve to. I think you're at 

11 per cent in the polls and you've earned every inch of it, 

okay? Bless their heart. 

 

And they laugh — they laugh. It's a big joke, taxing people and 

betraying the people and betraying seniors. And they sit over 

there and laugh. Big deal. They didn't know why they wanted 

to get elected. They just get elected to be there. What was the 

reason to be elected . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And he 

says, to get rid of the PCs. For what reason? For health care, 

for seniors. He said, well that's reason enough. Isn't that the 

truth. That's the whole thing, just to be there. Not to help in 

education; not to help in health care; not to help farmers; not 

for fairness. Just because they want to sit there. 

 

Why did you get elected? To do what? What's your claim to 

fame? What have you done for the people of Regina? What 

have you done for the people of Swift Current? The people of 

Prince Albert, what have you done for them? Not a darn thing. 

You've taxed them, 

betrayed them, closed their hospitals, closed their schools. And 

you laugh. You think it's funny. 

 

I'll tell you the people out there are experiencing real pain. 

That's why they said, you must have had mud for brains to 

design this. It's silly. It's unfair. It's a betrayal. And what's 

more, it hurts people . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And he 

says it's not true. It's not true. Well that's what the paper says, 

and that's what your colleague says. And anybody that had any 

courage to stand up and say, how do you defend this in caucus, 

has the front row got you absolutely buffaloed and baffled? 

Haven't you got any backbone? Can't you stand up and say, we 

can't do this . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Jellyfish is right. 

You don't have any courage. You don't think about seniors, 

your parents or your grandparents, or low income people, or 

those on welfare, or the people in food banks, or those 

suffering from abuse. You don't care. 

 

You sit there and laugh and chirp, make fun as you're being 

protected here in the legislature. Well I'll tell you, you won't be 

protected out in the streets, because you betrayed them. It's not 

right. 

 

There's town hall meetings as late as last night. Hundreds of 

people say you don't care. You run roughshod over farmers, 

roughshod over native people, roughshod over seniors. You 

hide and you come in here. 

 

I'm going to tell you what people say. And I'm reminding you 

of what you promised, because you betrayed them. And you 

couldn't win an election on this budget if you were paid to. You 

didn't have the courage to tell them the truth. Well the truth is 

coming out. And people are going to remember. They're going 

to remember you a long, long time. And you think you can fix 

this in two years? You think you're going to get this back? You 

can cut taxes or something? You're going to have any 

confidence in the economy? 

 

I'll tell you, you've got a lot to learn about the people of 

Saskatchewan if you think that you can pull the wool over their 

eyes like this. Maybe once. You tried it in '82 and you got hit. 

And you tried it again in '91. And I'll tell you it's going to come 

back to meet you. 

 

He goes on to say that they have some major objectives. 

They're going to point out that there's a deficit in the province 

of Saskatchewan and that's what opening the books will say. 

Well, well, well, we had a deficit. Of course. Every jurisdiction 

in Canada had a deficit. Do you know of anybody that balanced 

the budget in the '80s? Not one. 

 

People needed help against 22 per cent interest rates and 

drought, and we were there. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I'll say quite clearly, they've accused me of 

sticking up for senior citizens, spending money on senior 

citizens. Well, Mr. Speaker, 



March 25, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 613 

I'm guilty of that. 

 

They accuse me of protecting people against high interest rates 

that were 22 per cent. Well, Mr. Speaker, I plead guilty to that. 

 

They accused me of sticking up for farmers and saving them 

from drought and the ravages of a trade war and spending 

money on them. Well, Mr. Speaker, I plead guilty to that. 

 

People needed help and compassion, they needed protection 

because they were losing their homes. Seniors needed nursing 

homes and we built them; seniors needed hospitals, they need 

rehabilitation centres like Wascana Rehab; we needed new 

educational institutions, and people accused me of spending 

money on education and health care, and I plead guilty — 

because we cared. 

 

In 1982 there was no compassion when people needed it in the 

worst interest rates in our history. And these people didn't care. 

And we accused them of not caring, and the people said you 

know what, you're right and they kicked them out. Well they're 

going to get kicked out again because they don't care. 

 

Deficits are there. As Allan Blakeney says, you're going to 

have a deficit. What's it used for? Is it to help people, is it to 

diversify the economy, is it to stick up for senior citizens? Fair 

enough. If it's for boondoggles, granted, no way. And all 

administrations have their share of them, but when you start to 

deny people basic health care and protection and homes and 

protecting their farms and communities, you've made a serious, 

serious error. And that's what you've done here today and this 

last week with this budget. 

 

The second thing the leader of the NDP said, we're going to 

introduce fair taxation for business and we are going to stick up 

for GRIP and NISA. We don't need money to fund it. We can 

do it with better management. We spent three weeks or longer 

in this legislature last year fighting over this and saying the 

farmers need protection. We changed the rules in here, we 

voted without the opposition, we did undemocratic procedures, 

we just kicked the farmers right in the head. We cancelled their 

contracts. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition said: we will be fair. That's what 

he said when he was here, but he goes over there — there's no 

fairness. You don't find farmers out there really happy with the 

NDP approach. That's why they fired the NDP Crop Insurance 

minister and the Ag minister, the man from Rosetown. He got 

fired. They still give him a cabinet position to run around and 

do something, but they kicked him out, and rightfully so. And 

they should kick out the next one. They betrayed the farmers. 

 

Then he went on to say you have no mandate to impose a 

massive new tax because it's unfair. Well where is his mandate, 

friends and neighbours, to raise taxes from 7 to 9 per cent, 

increase all the other taxes? Where's his mandate to do that? 

 

He said he wasn't going to tax. Mr. Hepworth was very open 

and said, we need this harmonization for GRIP and NISA and 

to balance the budget. He said 

that. You guys say: oh no you don't; just a little bit of 

mismanagement and we can clean it out without taxes. He was 

honest with the people of Saskatchewan and said, this is 

necessary to balance the budget. 

 

What did you guys do? The Leader of the NDP said: no, you 

don't have to do that; we'll just have a little bit of better 

management and we'll have no tax increases and it'll all go 

away. Well he can eat those words today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is the largest betrayal in the history of 

Saskatchewan in terms of budgets. And he wants to go on and 

talk about the GST (goods and services tax). And he says: I 

want to be mindful of the dislocation of businesses by 

preventing the harmonization. Mr. Speaker, we've got virtually 

every business in Saskatchewan who still wants harmonization. 

It still makes sense, to balance the budget. 

 

He called it a regressive tax. The people in business who invest 

called it the right tax. It's the appropriate thing to do. It is 

progressive. It sees cooperation with the federal government, 

so it cuts our costs. It allows people to compete. You're sales 

tax-free for all businesses, so you're not charging them twice. 

 

(1530) 

 

And now what have you done? You've just raised it to 9 per 

cent. No relief except for this little nine-month experiment in 

harmonization because you think it just might be the thing to 

do. Couldn't raise the courage . . . screw up your courage to 

say: let's do it at 7 or at 6 and balance the budget. No. You've 

got to raise it to 9 and try it on a few things because you think 

you might be able to slip it in. 

 

Well the provincial GST, he said, had a negative impact on all 

of Saskatchewan. Well if PST has a negative impact at 7 per 

cent, imagine the negative impact of 9 per cent when it isn't 

harmonized and you don't get any of it back. It makes no sense, 

and that's why people are reacting today. 

 

Because what the NDP said in this legislature and what they 

said on the campaign trail was absolutely false, and they knew 

it. They knew that they couldn't live up to it. They knew they'd 

have to betray their supporters. They knew they'd have to 

betray because any indication at all was they would have to 

have higher taxes and they'd have to offload and they'd have to 

cut health and education if they didn't do what Mr. Hepworth 

recommended. 

 

And he talks about Maple Creek and Canora and he says: 

where are all the back-benchers? Listen to this. This is the 

Leader of the NDP, the now Premier of Saskatchewan, saying 

where are all the back-benchers when it comes to GST? 

 

 Have you not had the courage to stand up to the Minister of 

Finance and speak for the interests of your communities or 

have you abandoned your communities as I think you have 

— this 



614 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1993 

hurts the economy in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, well, well, Mr. Speaker. He said, where is the courage of 

the back-benchers? Well can't we just throw that out today? 

When they're raising the sales tax to 9 per cent, my colleagues 

here in the legislature, did you think that was fun, it was a good 

idea? 

 

When they cut the drug program, when they cut the dental 

program, when they raised the taxes, and when they put people 

in jeopardy and closed their hospitals and schools, didn't you 

stand up and say, this is nonsense? 

 

I can say as sure as I'm standing here, Mr. Speaker, this budget 

that you have right here today would not have passed my 

cabinet or my caucus. It wouldn't have. Deputy premiers, 

whether it's Pat Smith, George McLeod, Eric Berntson, people 

like that would have said, this would not pass. We would not 

do this. And they didn't. 

 

Seven per cent sales tax to balance the budget means much 

more sense than this 9 per cent with no relief, and pain and 

suffering and more and more debt. And where's the courage of 

the back-benchers? There is none. They follow like sheep; no 

backbone. And you're not going to get re-elected because you 

stood there and you supported this bunch with the silliest 

budget, the dumbest budget, the most largest betrayal in the 

history of Saskatchewan. 

 

And you think you're doing the public a service. For what? 

Have you balanced the budget? No. Have you added to the 

debt? Yes. Have you raised taxes? Yes. Have you increased 

confidence? No. Is your credit rating up? No, it's down. And 

you're proud of this. Are farmers happy, seniors happy, health 

care workers happy, public service happy? No. What are you 

doing? You say, well is this for the banks? The rating 

institutions, the rating institutions gave harmonization a better 

rating than they give your plan. Look it up. I'll quote if for you. 

 

The speech that the NDP leader gave in here, that he said that 

he would provide fairness, that he would stick up for 

communities, that he wouldn't raise taxes, was all a betrayal. It 

was not accurate. It wasn't honest. And what's more, Mr. 

Speaker, the really damaging part of it is that he has betrayed 

the people of Saskatchewan, not just NDPers, but betrayed the 

people of Saskatchewan in a way that they will never, ever 

forget like they didn't forget when he tried it before in the late 

'70s and early '80s. 

 

And then he goes on to say: 

 

 . . . Saskatchewan has been . . . victimized by bad fiscal 

policies generated by Ottawa. High interest rates and a high 

Canadian dollar are intertwined and they've been kept high 

purposely by Ottawa. 

 

Imagine. Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the people of 

Saskatchewan, the new NDP Premier has 

got 5 and 6 per cent interest rates to deal with — try 22. The 

new NDP Premier has virtually no inflation to deal with — try 

15 per cent inflation. The new NDP Premier has a very positive 

exchange rate, like 80 per cent — try it the other way when it 

was above the U.S. (United States). 

 

Those are the kinds of conditions that we fought and we stuck 

up for Saskatchewan people. And he's got 6 per cent interest, 

he's got no inflation, he's got a very positive exchange rate, and 

he betrays them. He says: oh, I can't do it; it's too tough for me. 

I'm going to have to go after the seniors, go after the farmers, 

go after the poor, go after the people that I thought supported 

me — because I have no choice, because it's doom and gloom. 

 

Doom and gloom, doom and gloom. Try doom and gloom at 22 

per cent interest rates, try doom and gloom in an exchange rate 

that is in favour of Americans, and try doom and gloom at 15 

per cent inflation. He doesn't know what tough times are. That's 

cowardly. He stood in this legislature and said: oh, but look at 

those high interest rates. 

 

I'll tell you what happened. Under good Conservative 

government across Canada interest rates are now at a 35-year 

low, inflation is down to a 30-year low, the exchange rates are 

very positive so we're winning in exports. Even the member 

from Elphinstone says: absolutely, free trade can really benefit 

the province of Saskatchewan, particularly in Mexico. Well 

finally some of them have figured it out. 

 

That Conservative policy has got 6 per cent interest rates. The 

old Liberal policy under Trudeau generated the worst havoc in 

the history of Saskatchewan and Canada. 

 

And the NDP — oh they love Mr. Chretien, they love Mr. 

Trudeau, and they hugged them all, and they all got kicked out 

of office. Well I'll tell you they're going to get kicked out and 

stay out federally and provincially, because it makes no 

economic sense. 

 

We have now got 5 per cent interest, 6 per cent interest. I just 

renewed my mortgage on our home and I think it was five and 

three-quarters per cent. And they're complaining over there. 

They've got more reason to be optimistic and buoyant and 

telling Saskatchewan people to get up. But it's doom and gloom 

all over the province because they have to do it their way. They 

couldn't do it at 7 cents because it didn't make any sense, so 

they're going to do it at 9 without any relief. And they are 

fighting 6 per cent interest? Imagine. 

 

Well he went on to say that he would do all these wonderful 

things, Mr. Speaker, in terms of providing protection. He's 

going to make the pie grow bigger. He's going to make the pie 

grow bigger, he says on page 2721. 

 

Well Professor Anderson and others are saying, I don't see it, 

Mr. NDP Premier. How are you going to make the pie grow 

bigger? With doom and gloom you're 



March 25, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 615 

making it grow smaller. You talk to business people in 

Saskatoon and Regina and they're saying, why can't he say 

something positive about the future. We can't do CANDUs 

(Canadian deuterium uranium) because there's no money. We 

can't do this because interest rates are too high. We've got to 

worry about an exchange rate. Oh my gosh, there's deficits and 

across the country we can't do anything. 

 

He's going to make the pie bigger? He talked about making the 

pie but he has no idea about making the pie bigger. When he 

was in office before and he had some money, he didn't make it 

bigger; he just bought what was here. He nationalized the 

potash mines; he bought farm land; he did all these dumb 

things that come back to haunt us for years and years. 

 

And then he says his fourth goal — and this is a dandy, Mr. 

Speaker — the fourth goal of the NDP in '91 was to protect our 

rural way of life. And he said, we suggest a moratorium on 

farm foreclosures. Well there's still signs up along the No. 11 

Highway. Where's the moratorium, Mr. NDP Premier? Where 

is it? Where's the cost of production? Where's the help? 

Where's the compassion? Well for heaven sakes, all the 

objectives and all those opportunities, Mr. Speaker, are for 

naught. 

 

And fourth, he said he is going to stabilize farm income and 

finally he's going to improve GRIP and NISA and he's going to 

have a cost-of-production formula — on page 2722. And any 

farmers that want it that are watching, we'll send him the new 

NDP cost of production; it's called zero — no help, 

abandonment. 

 

This man stood in this legislature right there and he talked 

about all the great things he was going to do. Complained 

about the deficit, but he's going to do them anyway. And we've 

got the biggest betrayal on rural Saskatchewan and farm people 

in the history of the province. And that's why he gets booed. 

That why he's secretly goes out, until the media catch him, and 

tries to sell this budget. He'll never sell it; they're not going to 

buy it. They are not going to buy it. And we'll send them this. 

Anybody that wants this speech of the NDP Premier when he 

was opposition, we'll send it to you and you can just read it. 

Page after paper it's full of betrayals, false information. It's just 

a joke. It's a façade. 

 

And then he went on to say: and I want to really end up talking 

about health care and how we are going to improve health care. 

What in the world's gone wrong with medicare and health care, 

he said. One hundred nine-seventy beds, 197 people, 113 beds 

in Saskatoon, 200 in Moose Jaw, Yorkton closed down. He 

said he'd never do it. He complained about us and we never 

closed hospitals; we opened them. And he is talking about 

fewer beds and fewer hospitals and he would never, ever do it. 

 

Well to the public let me say, this document is quite interesting 

political history. He campaigned in '91, saying Mr. Hepworth's 

opportunity to balance the budget and have health care and 

pension plans and stick up for farmers with GRIP and NISA is 

nonsense. 

We can fund all those without doing any of this. And he 

promised better health, better education, sticking up for 

farmers, sticking up for seniors. And today we see what we get, 

Mr. Speaker; we get the betrayal. 

 

And that's why people are watching television today and 

saying, right on. I am angry, I am frustrated, I'm upset. Well I 

want to point out, Mr. Speaker, they had a choice. And the 

reason that he's gone to these terrible, terrible ends is simply 

because he's ornery. 

 

And the NDP cabinet have one thing in mind and that is protect 

their political hide. They promised they wouldn't do 

harmonization at 7 cents and they got to stick with it as best 

they can and do it some other way. And they do it at 9 with no 

relief. And he still tries to tell you that people wouldn't want to 

see harmonization. Well I'll tell you, at 7 cents or 6 cents, in 

fact if it's broad enough you can do it at 5 cents and you can 

balance the budget. And provinces like Quebec are figuring it 

out and other jurisdictions are talking about it. 

 

And the public now is seriously asking, as the lady did today in 

the newspaper: heaven sakes, we're getting used to 7 but you 

put it up to 9. And you haven't done a thing to balance the 

budget. 

 

But let me just remind the hon. member. Here are the groups 

that supported harmonization because it meant economic 

growth and tax relief compared to Americans and other 

jurisdictions: the Hotels Association of Saskatchewan, and they 

still support it; the Canadian Federation of Independent 

Business; Society of Management Accountants; the 

Consumers' Association of Canada; the Regina Chamber of 

Commerce; the Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce; the 

Saskatchewan Home Builders' Association; cooperatives; the 

Western Canadian Wheat Growers Association; Wheat Pool 

directors; the Association of Saskatchewan Taxpayers; 

International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers; Institute of 

Chartered Accountants; Investment Dealers Association of 

Canada; Yanke Transfer; Philom Bios; Flexi-Coil; Saskoil; 

Cameco; Sask Sport; International Outfitters; International 

Minerals and Chemical Corporation Ltd., and on and on. They 

said it makes eminent sense to them. What have they got now? 

It makes no sense. You've raised it, your debt's up, your 

deficit's up, people are leaving. It's up to 9 per cent and there's 

no relief and you haven't done anything to balance the budget 

at all. You've added $1.5 billion to the debt and it's still going 

up, and no relief. 

 

And the business community said, as the students say, why 

didn't you just do it at 7 and balance the budget and leave the 

seniors alone; leave the pensions alone; leave the drug program 

alone. You could have a good farm program, and business 

supports it. Imagine. They support it, the co-ops support it and 

business support it, and you can balance your budget, and you 

don't have to pick on all these little people — the little people 

you said that you went to the wall for. 

 

Well if you look at the harmonization that was put together by 

Mr. Hepworth and the family tax credit for 



616 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1993 

low income people, boy would they like that back. Ho. Rather 

than hitting them on health care and diabetic problems, insulin 

costs, drug costs up to 800 bucks, we had a family tax credit 

and still balanced it, and helped those low income people. They 

said, oh, if I could only have that back. And they had their 

pension. And they had hospitals and schools, and supported by 

the private sector. And why didn't they get it? Because the 

member opposite stood up in this legislature, and stood up on 

the campaign, and he says, no, we can do it without any tax 

increases and we can balance the budget. 

 

And he knew that was false. And he went town hall to town 

hall, and riding to riding and he said to senior citizens, I can 

make it better for you. Just trust me. Just trust me, we'll make it 

better for you. And he was speaking with a forked tongue 

because he took away the family tax credit, he took away the 

pension plan, he took away the drug plan, he took away senior 

citizens' accommodations, he took away hospitals, he's closed 

schools, he's raised taxes, he's preaching doom and gloom, and 

the people of Saskatchewan said we're not open for business, 

we're closing up shop. 

 

(1545) 

 

We're leaving the province because the NDP are back in just 

like they're in in Ontario, just like they're in in B.C., and if you 

find them you'll see doom and gloom. And that's the truth. And 

they're not going to get elected, they're not going to get elected 

again federally, they're not going to get elected in Ontario, 

they're not going to get elected in Saskatchewan — for the 

same reason. They don't know what they're doing. They don't 

know business and they admit that. They don't know business. 

They're not in business, they're in politics. They admit . . . 

(inaudible) . . . that's something, you know, the other guys do. 

So all they know is politics and all they're doing to the people 

of Saskatchewan is saying well if we really pitch doom and 

gloom because Grant Devine spent money on seniors and 

farmers and others — and I say yes, I did — then they'll be sure 

to win again and do something else. 

 

Well what is it they want to do? It isn't business. It isn't 

creating economic activity. It's just to be there. And people see 

through it. They see through it in Bob Rae, they see through it 

in Harcourt, and they see it through this fellow sitting here. 

Because what he said in the legislature is the exact opposite of 

what he's doing today. 

 

And the alternative is so evident. The alternative is there — 7 

cents. And they got it, plus support for lower income people, 

payments of $245 each quarter, $980 a year, almost a thousand 

dollars a year for low income people. Plus they had health care, 

drug programs, senior citizen accommodations; utilities weren't 

going up through the roof. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, isn't it interesting . . . and people have said 

it. Senior citizens say it today. Under the 7 cents harmonization 

they had a choice. They could 

shop for this or shop for that. If they didn't want to pay 7 cents 

on a hamburger, they could make it themselves. But you try 7 

per cent increase in utility rates, you don't have a choice. No 

choices. You just hit them, you cut them off. 

 

You take away their pension. What do they do without 

pensions? What do you do without insurance, and health care? 

You're taxing the sick. Those that have prescription drug needs 

have no choice. And you're proud of this? Is this what you got 

. . . this is . . . I mean it's unbelievable. It's unbelievable that 

you would do this to yourself and do it to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

You gave seniors no choice. Raised their utilities, power rates, 

telephones, insurance, drugs, cut them off, kicked them out of 

homes — no choice — and you said 7 cents on a hamburger 

was so evil. Compared to what you're doing? They could at 

least have a choice; they could make the food at home. 

Unbelievable! 

 

Bless your hearts. Boy oh boy, have you got something to do to 

look into your conscience if you think you're helping people of 

Regina, Saskatoon, Swift Current, or any place else. You 

couldn't look in the mirror and logically say that you were 

doing the right thing. You'd say, well 7 cents was so mean, 

right, isn't it terrible? We put it on clothes. And you've got 9 on 

clothes. Do you think clothes are a luxury? No, you've kind of 

got to have them. 

 

Senior citizens have no choice. They don't get any rebates, no 

heritage program. You just hit them and hit them and you've 

got to do it your way, which is silly, because you promised you 

wouldn't do it our way. And that's your claim to fame. That's it. 

That's the whole election and the whole reason Saskatchewan is 

in pain and suffering and doom and gloom today. Because you 

said you wouldn't do it at 7; there must be a better way. And 

obviously there isn't because now you're doing it at 9 and 

you're kind of harmonizing because you know it's the right 

thing to do and you've got to go around preaching doom and 

gloom so people can't ask you real questions. 

 

Even in the House we stand up and we ask the Minister of 

Social Services, or pardon me, the minister of seniors, we say, 

when we raised it to $50 deductible for seniors, you said it was 

drugs or food. That's what she said in her riding. Was she 

lying? Can't say that. Was she not telling the truth? Was she not 

telling the truth when she said, seniors in my riding will have to 

choose food over prescription drugs? Was she making it up or 

was it the truth? 

 

Well if it was the truth, how in the world could she raise it to 

$800 for the senior citizens and then say that they're going to 

get by? And they say, well it's because that there was . . . we 

couldn't do it with 7 cents because we promised we wouldn't. 

 

People see through that. You're not fooling them. You're not 

fooling them at all. You know that you can balance the budget 

with cooperating with the federal government who has all the 

money. Harmonize, 



March 25, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 617 

cooperate, call it whatever you like, put your own wrinkles on 

it, but you can do it at 6 per cent, 7 per cent, and the business 

community would be happy and you wouldn't have to pick on 

senior citizens. My goodness, how can you do this? 

 

If that minister, Roy Atkinson's daughter — who stuck up for 

the CCF and I've been in lots of platforms with him and I have 

respect for the man, have been out there, don't agree with him 

all the time, but I'll tell you he believes in it — if his daughter 

can say in this House that if you raise the deductible from 50 

. . . to $50 on seniors in her riding they're going to have to 

choose food or drugs, then how in the world can his daughter 

raise it to $800 and look at herself in the mirror? Unbelievable. 

 

Why are you doing this to people? Is it that you have such a 

dislike for people on the other side of the political spectrum 

that campaign and whose grandfathers and grandparents came 

to this province and homesteaded? Do you think that we don't 

care about people? Do you think that we haven't stuck up for 

farmers and stuck up for seniors and tried to diversify this 

province, fought 22 per cent interest rates and drought and all 

kinds of things? Are you that warped that you don't think that 

anybody in this legislature can care for people? 

 

Let's put it this way. I would think folks in this legislature 

genuinely do care. What I'm asking you is how can you live 

with what you've just done? How do you live with yourself 

given the promise that you are the party that does care? You 

are the socialists. This is on the history in the back of Tommy 

Douglas. 

 

This is the socialist party who is going to rip seniors and rip 

other people when there's clearly an alternative. You could 

have optimism. You could have a balanced budget. You can 

cooperate with the federal government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to make the point. I think the NDP would 

say, well we had no choice. The rating institutions say we've 

got to do this or we're going to get a CCC. Well let me point 

out what they did do — gave them a BBB. 

 

When we brought in harmonization, Mr. Speaker, the rating 

institutions looked at us and said we demonstrated a 

willingness to make the hard decisions, and kept our credit 

rating at a AA to a AAA. Because we said to the people, look 

it's difficult, but 7 cents across the board in cooperation with 

the federal government is necessary to balance the budget. And 

the rating institution says, right, AA. And we made the hard 

decisions. 

 

Look in May of '91, what the business community says about 

harmonization. Saskatchewan gets an A for economic growth. 

The rating institution says this makes much more sense than 

what you are doing. 

 

And you're running around the country and saying, oh we have 

to do it and we have to do it our way. You don't have to do it 

your way at all. There are 

alternatives. There are choices you could make. And you have 

chosen this mean-spirited, flip-flop, contrary — as Ed Whelan 

says — probably the silliest, dumbest thing he's ever seen in his 

life. 

 

And the business community is upset. The business community 

doesn't see any hope. You don't get any headline: 

Saskatchewan gets an A for economic growth, after your 

budget. Nothing there. Seniors aren't happy. Business isn't 

happy. The rating institutions say, well they did cut but oh it's 

painful. I wonder if they can sustain it, that's what they say. Are 

there growth figures there? I'll tell you a lot of people don't 

think the growth figures are here. 

 

And you've been given every instrument of growth — 6 per 

cent interest rates; great exchange rates; no inflation; free trade 

agreements that open up markets. And you're given everything 

and you're preaching doom and gloom and doom and gloom. 

And I'll tell you, you have an alternative. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I point out this alternative. Because it's 

important to remember, if you're a senior citizen or a farmer or 

somebody that's unemployed watching television today, don't 

believe the NDP argument that they couldn't do it another way. 

They didn't have to pick on the poor. They didn't have to pick 

on farmers or those with low income or the senior citizens or 

health care. They could have done it another way. 

 

And the only reason that they're doing it this mean-spirited way 

is to cover their political hide because they just couldn't do it 

the way we did, because then they'd have to admit they were 

wrong. And if that's the case, then you might as well vote for 

us. 

 

So they've got to force the public to see it their way. So if they 

can preach enough doom and gloom, they think they might just 

survive the next election. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . or Mr. Speaker — I didn't mean 

to demote you there — let's just look at the comparisons 

because the choice is very real, and the people are going to talk 

about this choice. And, Mr. Speaker, in fact if the budget 

debate could go on — and I'm sure it will when it comes in 

estimates — we could talk about it for days. Let's just look at 

the budget alternatives. And for the people that are watching on 

television, I want you . . . if you want to, you can write them 

down. This is the 1991 budget versus the 1993 budget. 

 

What was the provincial sales tax in 1991? Under Mr. 

Hepworth's budget it was 7 cents with a low-income tax credit 

harmonized with the federal government. What is it under the 

NDP? It's 9 cents; up 29 per cent. 

 

The 7 cents harmonization provides a balanced budget in 

1993-94. We absolutely hit the target at 365 the year before, 

265 that year, and the next year balanced budget. What does 

the NDP . . . balanced budget in '96-97. Four more years of 

debt. The deficit then was $13 billion. And you can look it up; 

got it in here in terms of the budgets. And today it's 14.9 



618 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1993 

billion, and another billion to add in four more years. So 

they've added almost 2 billion already, and they haven't 

balanced it. So it's going from $13 billion deficit to a $15 

billion deficit, and a $16 billion deficit by 1996-97, just 

because they're ornery. 

 

What was the credit rating in 1991? Under the harmonized 

budget of Mr. Hepworth it was a AA. What is it after the NDP 

took over? Today in 1993, BBB — BBB, Mr. Speaker. And 

they ran down there and said, look, it's just doom and gloom, 

and we've got to tell you how ugly it is. 

 

What about safety nets in 1991? You got a pension plan for 

senior citizens. You've got a drug plan for all kinds of people. 

You've got a seniors' heritage program. You've got GRIP and 

safety nets for farmers. You've got health care and education 

expansion. What about 1993 under the NDP? They're gone. 

They're all gone. 

 

Is the business community happy with this budget? No. You 

get A for economic activity and growth in Saskatchewan in 

1991. Today you get doom and gloom all over Saskatchewan, 

the business community, the commerce students, and others 

saying: why don't you harmonize? Admit your mistakes, admit 

your error, and have some economic growth. Why charge them 

twice? 

 

You look at choices in 1991 versus choices in '93. There were 

lots of choices in '91. People had an alternative. They had low 

utility rates. They had the confidence and security of pension 

plans. They had a great prescription drug protection plan. They 

had opportunities, Mr. Speaker, to grow, to protect, to build, 

and they had choices. They didn't have to pay the sales tax if 

they wanted to shop in various ways. And the business 

community was sales tax free. How's that for an economic 

incentive to build in the province of Saskatchewan? There's no 

sales tax in Alberta. Saskatchewan is now up to 9 cents and no 

relief. 

 

Well if you look at the NDP today, under 1993 budget, what do 

you see? No choice. You got to pay the utilities. If you're sick 

you got to pay up to $800 in prescription drugs. You got to go 

to the private sector to get insurance. If you want a pension 

plan you got to go some place else. If you want some farm 

support program, none there. You have no choices, and if 

you're broke and down and out, you got to pay your power bill 

that's gone up, your utility bills, your telephone bill, your 

insurance bill, and now your health bill. And then on top of that 

you have no choice because your provincial tax, municipal tax, 

is going to go up because there's $450 million of hidden 

iceberg tax that is underneath this budget that comes in the next 

four years and you have no choice. You got to pay it. 

 

(1600) 

 

So if you look at it, Mr. Speaker, 7 cents versus 9, 

harmonization versus none, the accumulated debt, the credit 

rating, the optimism in the business 

community, the safety nets that have been taken away, the 

choices that people have, I would ask, Mr. Leader of the NDP, 

to go any place else and just take those comparisons and look 

at them, provide them to the people of Saskatchewan and tell 

them why 7 cents . . . and cooperating with the federal 

government — I know it's a Conservative government — but 

cooperating with them didn't make economic sense, social 

sense, and much less pain than this boondoggle that you've put 

together that you're trying to shove onto the people of 

Saskatchewan. And that's why they call it a boondoggle, a 

major boondoggle. 

 

The hon. members are still hung up on water projects. 

 

I want to point out to the hon. members, and onto the public 

here, the NDP government, the new NDP government, is 

absolutely responsible, and I've got the quotes here, absolutely 

responsible for the decline in their own credit rating in the 

province of Saskatchewan. Shortly after the NDP was elected 

in October the government drastically increased the province's 

deficit projections to 960 million from 265 million for the 

fiscal year 1991-92 because they didn't harmonize and they 

didn't provide share offering. Quote: 

 

 The new government and the uncertainty as to what the 

budget is going to say is why we put the debt on credit watch, 

says the rating institution. 

 

They knew they were a bunch of socialist radicals. The new 

government which didn't implement the policies and had to 

backtrack, postponed everything for a year, ran up the deficit 

another $900 million, has just got the rating institutions a tad 

worried. And so they give them a BBB. And they said you'd 

better watch it because I'm not so sure that you've got a plan to 

replace that. And if you don't, you're in big trouble. Because all 

the things you said in the legislature and you said on the 

campaign trail can't come true. What will you do? What will 

you do? Well now we know. 

 

And I'll tell you you're going to stay on watch given this 

attitude, and given the ornery and stubborn nature of the fact 

that you won't admit there was a better way to do it. And then it 

goes on to say: 

 

 Moody's Investors Service, also reviewing its rating of 

Saskatchewan debt, said Saskatchewan is the second 

provincial NDP government to see its ratings slashed by 

credit ratings. Last May it was Ontario. 

 

Well guess who it's happening to? NDP in Ontario. They 

promised the moon, only difference was they didn't think they'd 

even get elected. NDP here thought they might if they 

promised, knowing they can't deliver, but the people might 

believe us because we have some roots here. The CCF used to 

be believable, and they promised. But the NDP in Ontario, they 

can give them a bit of a benefit of the doubt. They never 

thought they'd get elected, but as soon as they get elected the 

credit rating just falls apart. And right after that the NDP gets 

elected here 



March 25, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 619 

and down goes the credit rating because they don't have a plan. 

 

They have no economic interest and they're going to just raise 

taxes, and now they're going to betray the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And then it's interesting, Mr. Speaker, if you go on and look at 

how they put together their deficit and they try to frighten 

people. They try to frighten people. It's really quite interesting 

how they've managed to put together some of the things that 

were just not quite up to snuff. You've got to remember that the 

debt they're running around talking about is in good part in 

utilities. And we know, we know that in good part the debt is in 

the utilities and what that means is it's self-liquidating debt. 

 

So I want the people of Saskatchewan and the public and the 

senior citizens that are worried to hear this. Don't be afraid of 

the doom and gloom because so much of the provincial debt in 

Ontario or in Saskatchewan, particularly in Saskatchewan, is in 

the utilities. SaskPower pays for that debt to build power 

projects; the same with SaskTel. And on top of that, if you look 

at the asset value of those utilities, it's huge. 

 

Secondly, if you look at guarantees that the provincial 

government makes, there's no interest on the guarantees. In fact 

in many of them you get paid for the guarantees. It's a 

commercial transaction. You guarantee a debt at Saskferco, 

you get paid for that. You don't pay interest on it. You get paid 

for that, plus you're going to get about 20 per cent return on 

your investment. 

 

Now you don't go around and tell the people of Saskatchewan, 

well this is a big amount of debt that we have to pay interest 

on. But that's what you do because we hear you saying that. 

And it's absolutely unfair and untrue. You make money on 

those guarantees. That's a financial transaction. They don't 

understand that, but they will. 

 

And if you want to look at the asset value, the asset value of 

utilities, the conventional business evaluation technique is the 

discounted cash value of anticipated cash flow. And if you do 

that to SaskPower, SaskTel, and SGI, you have in the 

neighbourhood of 10 billion-plus in terms of asset value, and 

that's in any organization and institutions. 

 

And if you look at the profit and retained earnings that are 

saved, you don't have to run around and tell people of 

Saskatchewan the sky is falling in. You can take any 

organization and any utility, and you can provide that net worth 

and that real value because you have a monopoly, and you have 

raised the rates. Lord knows people understand that. And they 

have no choice. And you can pay. And if you take seven times 

the cash flow of a utility, you'll get something in terms of what 

it's worth, and that is billions and billions of dollars. 

 

Now you should be telling the people of Saskatchewan that 

that's the case. Don't frighten 

them. Don't say that SaskTel and SaskPower and SGI can't pay 

their bills. They have and they will. In fact the asset value of 

that is worth more than the combined debt, an awful lot more. 

And if you look in your budget today, you'll find that it's only a 

modest amount compared to that asset value. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in fact I've got the numbers right here. 

SaskTel, if you look at its cash flow, is $568 million; a multiple 

of seven is 3.98 billion. Not a bad company. Do you talk about 

that out there in the business community — the strength of the 

utility? 

 

SaskEnergy, 318 million times seven — that's their cash flow 

— is over $2 billion. That's a good company. SGI, 491 million 

times seven is $3.44 billion, a major source of economic 

foundation to the people of Saskatchewan — not, not a 

problem. SaskPower, 674 million in cash flow times seven is 

$4.7 billion. That's $14 billion plus, Mr. Speaker, just in the 

four utilities. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, shows you . . . I just want you to quit 

preaching doom and gloom. Be fair to the people of 

Saskatchewan. Say look, look at the debt that's in these four 

Crowns. These four Crowns can build power projects and 

water projects, telecommunication projects, insurance projects, 

and it's there and it's on solid ground. And you would expect 

them to go in to the market to build those things. You don't 

have to frighten people with it. 

 

Who do you think you're fooling? I'll tell you you're not going 

to fool the seniors any longer. You're not going to fool the 

farmers any longer. 

 

And with that kind of strength in those utilities, you go attack 

Ed Whelan's neighbours. You attack senior citizens; you attack 

your own; you attack farmers. You've cut out the health care. 

You charge him for all the things you said you never would. 

 

Well that's one more reason why the NDP are down at 11 per 

cent in the polls, and they're going to stay down whether it's in 

Ontario or here. And the public are saying that they have no 

heart. In fact they haven't got any real political head. 

 

And on top of that I want the public to know that they added 

$750 million to the deficit because of accrual accounting. Now 

they were nice enough to admit it. They put it in the budget, but 

they just topped it up by three-quarters of a billion because they 

changed the accounting mechanisms. But they didn't tell you 

that loan guarantees are not something you should be all that 

concerned about if you're getting paid for them. They didn't tell 

you that. So if you have several hundred million dollars in loan 

guarantees which are . . . it's a personal financial transaction, 

that you get paid for them, then it's not interest on that you're 

paying. 

 

In fact I have some serious questions about the interest on the 

debt that they say we're paying on an annual basis. And I think 

they've bloated it up and before the end of this session we'll 

find out for sure. Well I point 



620 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1993 

that out because the students of commerce point it out. They 

say there are alternatives. We have real alternatives in this 

province to putting together a budget. 

 

They don't like to hear this. Well I'll tell you, the people don't 

like to hear what you're doing to them. You might not like to 

stand or sit in the legislature and hear about the pain and the 

suffering, but somebody's got to stick up for them. You're not. 

You've betrayed them. 

 

And you can chirp from your seats and say the seniors will be 

okay; the farmers will be okay; the rural communities will be 

okay; they won't need the hospitals. The member from 

Weyburn or the member from wherever else . . . oh the 

hospital's going to eventually close but we'll open up a new one 

some place else. You'll be fine, thanks very much — probably 

somewhere that you don't live and you'll have to move there if 

you retire. 

 

The new wellness program, they just call it a joke. It's 

mean-spirited. You might not like to hear about it, but 

somebody has to stick up for these people. They know there's 

not a provincial election this year but by George, they're going 

to be waiting. And then there's a federal election this year. Well 

just see how many NDPers get elected across Canada and in 

the province of Saskatchewan on your great promise to the 

people, on your compassion and your understanding and your 

intelligence about business. 

 

So you might not like to hear it, but I'll tell you it's the truth. 

People out there in the newspaper today said: it is a monster 

budget; it's terrible; it's disloyal; it must have been mud for 

brains, and on and on and on and on. And I'm saying to the 

people of Saskatchewan that are watching on television, you're 

absolutely right. These people knew that they were going to do 

this to you but it didn't matter. They promised to get elected. 

And now they're sitting over there, they've got nothing to say. 

They don't like to hear about it, but some of us are going to 

stick up for real people. 

 

And they laugh. Well let them laugh. They don't laugh . . . you 

go talk to the seniors in my riding and you won't be laughing. 

Just get out there and defend it. Go talk to them. Go talk to 

them. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Go talk to Ed Whelan's neighbours. 

 

Mr. Devine: — He couldn't find one senior citizen who 

thought this was a good idea. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if you look at the alternatives that are here, 

there's only one thing that becomes very clear. The NDP under 

this NDP leader don't have the courage to look at the people of 

Saskatchewan and say, we can provide you some protection 

and some relief and some diversification; we can provide you 

that but we're going to have to eat a little political crow; we 

might have to cooperate with the federal government and do it 

at 7 cents. They couldn't do that. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to make sure that you realize the 

people of Saskatchewan even under difficult circumstances 

respected the fact that the people on this side of the House 

would protect them. And I just want to point out to the people 

of Saskatchewan, if we face this again, if we face 22 per cent 

interest rates again, if we face the kind of pain that they've 

experienced, that people in Saskatchewan will have the 

compassion to help you, will have the compassion to help you. 

And we have been there before. 

 

And again I will say, people have accused me and my 

colleagues for spending money defending farmers in drought 

and in $2 wheat. And all I can say is we are guilty as charged. 

 

And we have been accused of sticking up for seniors when 

interest rates were 22 per cent and it was going to cost us. And 

we'd said that, I'll put the treasury up to protect farmers and 

seniors from losing their homes. We were accused of that, and I 

say: guilty as accused. 

 

Sticking up for young people who had bought mortgages and 

into mortgages locked in, two or three kids, going to lose their 

home. They said, somebody help me. The NDP: no, not at all. 

They've accused us of sticking up for those young people. And 

I say: guilty. We stuck up for them. 

 

And the same applies for all kinds of situations in the province 

of Saskatchewan that needed to be addressed with 22 per cent 

interest rates, 15 per cent inflation, an exchange rate that was 

going against it, drought and commodity wars, difficult 

economic conditions. And we were there, thank goodness. And 

we are accused of spending money for those people. 

 

Well I say to the hon. members: what have you got to show 

today for the money that you've taken from the people of 

Saskatchewan? What have you got to show for it? Any 

protection, any new hospitals, any enthusiasm, a better credit 

rating? Have you decreased the total debt? What have you got 

to show for it? Not a thing but pain, misery, and betrayal. 

 

(1615) 

 

Your debt has gone from 13 billion to 15 billion and it'll soon 

be 16 billion. And you might, you say, balance the budget by 

1997. You have nothing to show for it. You don't have new 

hospitals. You don't have an agriculture college. You don't 

have farm protection. You don't have new nursing homes. You 

don't have a drug plan, a pension plan. You don't have 

protection for people. You don't have a senior citizens' 

program. 

 

For heaven sakes, can you imagine trying to defend this on live 

television debates or town hall meetings? What have you got to 

show for this? Any growth? Any excitement? No. You've got 

nothing to show for it. 

 

And what you left us, as the former Finance minister said — 

and he acknowledged it, finally went at it; he's sitting there — 

and it was $3.7 billion at 22 per cent 



March 25, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 621 

interest rates, for heaven sakes. If you take three and a half 

billion at 15 per cent for 10 years, it's $14 billion if you did 

nothing with it. Absolutely nothing. And they think it's a joke. 

 

Lookit, I finally got their attention. They've been hiding . . . 

come on, come on. Mr. Speaker . . . You get your pencil out. 

You ask the people of Saskatchewan, okay, what you did for 

the province of Saskatchewan. Let me give you an example. I 

finally got the Premier's attention. 

 

Let me give you an example. When he had a little bit of money 

he purchased $250 million worth of loans from the United 

States; he borrowed in New York in 1971. The terms were 

sixteen and two-thirds per cent for 16 years, and this is to buy 

SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation). 

You try $200 million at sixteen and three-quarters per cent for 

15 years and see how you do, and pay too much for it. And 

that's here. That's what you've done. That's already recorded. 

 

And the exchange rate was the wrong way; interest rates were 

high and went up; inflation was high. And you did the same 

with potash mines; you did the same with land bank. You 

bought all kinds of land way too high. And that's what we 

inherited from you people. Three and a half billion dollars at 15 

per cent for 10 years is $14 billion, and then on top of that you 

speculated like finance companies. You bought land and 

speculated. 

 

I finally got the member's attention from Quill Lakes. Look, 

you speculated with farm land, Mr. Member, and you're paying 

the price. Why did you speculate on farm land and buy at the 

high? Why did you do it in potash mines? You paid way too 

much. Why did you do it in uranium mines? You paid way too 

much. And then interest rates went to 22 per cent and just like 

finance companies and banks, the people of Saskatchewan had 

to take the hit because of your mistakes. 

 

That's what we deal with in the province of Saskatchewan. 

Then when people really need help what do you provide? 

Absolutely nothing but speculation in farm land and 

speculation in mines, no new jobs. And when interest rates go 

right through the roof, you duck. And that's the kind of thing 

that people asked us to deal with and that's real. Those numbers 

are real. 

 

You had alternatives in 1982 and you've had alternatives in 

1993. What I've pointed out today that your choices today hurt 

Saskatchewan people something fierce. Your choices today 

have betrayed them. You have economic alternatives, and there 

are many. And people have pointed them out over and over and 

over again — that hidden deficit, that speculation, that 

predicament that you put Saskatchewan people in. You were 

bragging about all the things you were going to buy and own, 

and then whoops, the interest rates go to 22 per cent. And you 

say, take it, take it away. 

Well we got it all right. The people of Saskatchewan said, 

whew. Farm land fell in half; potash mines fell in half; uranium 

mines fell in half. And you guys were all the big speculators. 

You think you knew something about business. You didn't 

know a darn thing about business, and you still don't. 

 

I mean even, even the unions, the union leaders are saying, 

you're going about it all wrong. So you've got union leaders, 

you've got seniors, you've got former cabinet ministers, you've 

got farm supporters, you've got people all across the province 

are saying, hey you're doing it all wrong. 

 

Don't tell us it's beyond repair. Don't tell us we can't fix this. 

Don't frighten us. Don't give us this bunch of malarkey. You 

could do it. Tommy Douglas did it. You can do it without 

hurting people. And that's the argument today. 

 

I want you to go tell the seniors, and the low income, and the 

farmers, and the single parents, and the young people getting 

into business, those that want an education, all those people 

that want health care protection and other protection, I want 

you to tell them why you think you're helping them today by 

hitting them so hard. Please tell them. Go out to the town halls 

and tell them. 

 

You have a choice. You could have done 7 cents on a 

hamburger, and harmonize, and you could have had the same 

thing, but you wouldn't. You promised you never would. So 

you haven't the political courage to look at the alternatives. No, 

you've got to hit them right between the eyes. 

 

And it makes no economic sense. It makes no political sense. 

And that's why you're going down in the polls. And that's why 

federally you're at rock bottom. Well you're not at rock bottom; 

it's a free fall. You have no alternative, no play with it, and 

particularly in the province of Saskatchewan. And your Liberal 

colleagues are on the same boat, exactly the same boat. 

 

You and Trudeau and Chrétien used to waltz around together 

and say, isn't this nice, all this fancy stuff we're doing. We're 

nationalizing things. We have all this going for us. And you 

had nothing going for you. 

 

The only leader in Canada, the only political leader in Canada 

— Mr. Chrétien is the only guy in Canada that we can find that 

wants an elected Senate and an appointed House of Commons. 

He said, well appoint the MPs (Member of Parliament), eh? 

And the Liberal leader here in the legislature supports him. 

And you are in the same boats. 

 

You have no idea what the Saskatchewan and the Canadian 

people really see in the future . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Well you wouldn't be at 11 per cent in the polls if they did . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . I'm talking about it. I'm talking 

about it all the time and you don't like to hear about it. 

 

You've added $2 billion to the deficit; your credit 



622 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1993 

rating is going down; and you left us with a legacy of spending 

and speculation like we've never seen before. It was a joke. 

Absolute joke — 22 per cent interest rates and a bunch of 

mines that were empty and you paid way too much for them. 

And you said, oh we were doing really good, really, really, 

really good. And the people said, give me a break. 

 

And now what I'm asking is that you go out into the town halls, 

into the communities, and you take it on the chin like the 

Premier was doing today. 

 

We finally caught him out there. He wasn't hiding any more, 

the media was after him . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes 

they did. I talked to the media and they said the Premier's office 

didn't release any information about where he's going. He's 

sneaking out there to sell the budget behind closed doors. Then 

they finally caught up with him . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

He's out there now, and we got people watching him. 

 

So they're going to watch what he says in the country, watch 

what he says in here. He's an old fox at that, eh? He's an old 

fox at that. We know. He'd say one thing in town and one thing 

in the country. He's been doing it for years. He'd say Fair Share 

is okay over here, but not here, right? He did that. We got you 

on record all over the place. I won't cancel Fair Share. Then 

you come back in here and talk to the union leader: oh for 

heaven's sakes, no, no, I'd cancel and it's okay. He's done that 

on record times and occasions, and we're just pointing it out 

today and the people of Saskatchewan can know. 

 

We've caught him one too many times, one too many times so 

he's on the record. What you said in this House in '91, what you 

said in the campaign, and now what you're saying out in the 

country will be watched. 

 

And we're encouraging you. You get out there in the town 

halls, you get out there and talk to people. We'll be inviting you 

out to town hall meetings or on debates and say, you explain 

this to the seniors and to the farmers and to the other people 

why this is a really good idea. 

 

You'll hear about that because the Liberals won't show up 

because they don't have any alternative. I want to say, Mr. 

Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are watching television 

today, are going to recognize that indeed there's an alternative 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure to sit 

in here and look at these faces that are so ashamed of what 

they've done, and all they can do when you mention the fact 

that people are suffering is laugh. I just want the television 

cameras to know if you could see their faces — they laugh at 

the pensioners, they laugh at the farmers, they laugh at the 

taxpayers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those people out there in Saskatchewan who 

believed the NDP would do the right thing and 

will have been betrayed will know today and they'll know the 

next day and the next day, by the time we finish this session, 

that you had an alternative. You could have provided 

reasonable taxation; you could've supported pensioners, health 

care, senior citizens, farmers, but you chose not to just to 

protect your political hide. And that's the very reason. 

 

Can't admit, can't admit that there was another way to do it . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, that's a good question. How in 

the world are you explaining that to your back-benchers and to 

the health . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well then, you tell 

me, you tell me and the public . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I believe the member 

from Saskatoon Broadway has been in this debate and I ask her 

to let the member from Estevan have his day. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it's very good to engage the 

members opposite in debate because I believe out in the 

country and in the town halls and in the streets and the coffee 

shops of this province, there's going to be considerable debate 

of whether you knew what you were doing or not and whether 

it was the right thing to do. 

 

I am providing some ammunition to ordinary Saskatchewan 

people who want somebody to stick up for them and speak for 

them because they don't believe that you are thinking about 

them . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, no, no, no, no, no. 

What they did my friend, they believed you, they believed you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there's the whole reason, the whole reason that 

we're in this debate today is because these people said we can 

say whatever it is and get elected. Well the public and the 

province of Saskatchewan knows, Mr. Speaker, that their day 

of reckoning will come. 

 

The promises made in here to farmers and to seniors and to 

pensioners and those that need help and support are not going 

to be forgotten, and there will be people like me and my 

colleagues in here who will speak for those people, who will 

stand up and say there are alternatives and we'll make sure that 

we challenge you to come to the homes and to the coffee shops 

and to the town halls to defend yourself in public because we 

know you can't. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe I've made myself very clear and make it 

be well known that the people of Saskatchewan don't like this 

budget. I don't like this budget. I'm not going to support this 

budget. There are very clear alternatives, Mr. Speaker, and I 

won't be voting for this piece of legislation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, thank you very much, 

Mr. Speaker. I often wondered what it would be like to stand 

under a broiling sun to listen to a speech by Fidel Castro for 

five hours and I never did 



March 25, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 623 

have that pleasure. But I've got to admit, Mr. Speaker, that after 

having listened to two hours by the former premier of 

Saskatchewan, I never want to hear Fidel Castro or anybody 

else speak in this context. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I say to the former premier that I 

hope he feels better after two hours. First, because he finally 

got to deliver the speech that he wanted to deliver in 1982 and 

that he practised so hard from the Speaker's gallery to deliver in 

1982 but never could deliver. So I hope he feels better in that 

context. 

 

And secondly, I hope the former premier feels better at making 

the same old speech that I've actually come to looking forward 

to and liking, the same old speech about why he shouldn't have 

lost the election in 1991. 

 

He keeps on telling us why he is right on harmonization, why 

he is right on privatization, and why the people of 

Saskatchewan are wrong. I get so soothed in hearing that 

message over and over again from the former premier, I feel a 

little bit better about it; I hope you do, sir. But I've got to tell 

you, no matter how you think you are right — something 

which with the greatest of respect I submit you should accept 

— in a democracy the people are always right and you are 

wrong. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — But if it makes your soul feel good to 

get the 1982 speech off and to justify 1991, I guess we all 

benefit by that. I think that it's perhaps time and money well 

spent. 

 

I would say one last point before I leave the remarks of the 

former premier aside and address the substance of the debate 

that we've had here over the last several days. I think that he 

would be well advised in adjusting to the defeat in October of 

1991 to begin by publicly or perhaps, if I may say so, privately 

acknowledging that he was wrong. I'm not going to belabour 

him because — no I'm not, not today — and I say this very 

genuinely, I respect the person as a former premier who has 

contributed and worked hard in the province of Saskatchewan, 

although I oppose the policies. 

 

And I'm not going to for a number of reasons talk about the 

period from '82 to 1991; that I think has been debated enough. 

 

But I would simply say to the hon. member that there is good 

advice in outside editorialists and others who say the following, 

February 25, 1992, after the election, in the Star-Phoenix, a 

columnist writes: PCs blame disgrace on everyone but 

themselves. I think that essential truth remains as blindingly 

true today, after the former premier's address, as it did at the 

time of the article. 

And I would say finally, in this context, that while it is true in 

my judgement that the disgrace cannot be blamed on anyone 

else but themselves, this is my advice to him and to the party 

opposite. The way to get out of this situation, for you, is to do 

what other editorialists and people have been saying, as they 

did in the Leader-Post on May 2, 1992: admit your past. And if 

you admit your past and admit your mistakes and don't berate 

us for two hours about why the people are wrong, don't in 

effect say that they'll learn to love your policies, admit the 

mistakes, there is no shame in this. 

 

I've been defeated in 1982. I admit the mistakes that we made. I 

repeat, again, those mistakes were made in 1982. There's 

nothing wrong in serving and doing the best that you can and 

eventually losing an election. That's the way democracy works. 

And if you lose an election, it doesn't matter whether you think 

you are right or wrong. You are wrong; the people are right. 

 

And I say to the member from Estevan and I say to the official 

opposition opposite, we would all be better ahead in the debate 

that is facing us for the 1990s and the year 2000 if we began 

with that fundamental proposition. 

 

Mr. Member from Estevan, I commend you to that comment. 

And I really believe that your credibility and your role and 

contribution to Saskatchewan life will be enhanced not by an 

apologia or by a lengthy address, but by in fact that 

acknowledgement. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to move to the substance of the 

debate as I have been following it over the last several days. I 

want to begin, first of all, by outlining to the people of 

Saskatchewan what this budget is all about. And I'll be very 

brief this afternoon, within 15, 20 minutes I hope to wrap up. 

 

What this budget is all about, from our point of view, is to 

secure the future of our province. That is the objective. In 

securing the future of our province we have to achieve an 

objective of getting the fiscal house in order. It's not our only 

objective, but I think any fair-minded person would admit that 

this is surely a primary or overarching consideration of a 

government — any government, regardless of its ideology 

today. 

 

I think that we have unveiled a budget for '93-94 and a plan to 

1996-97 which by external analysis indicates that we've got a 

chance in doing exactly that — securing our future by putting 

this fiscal house in order. 

 

This is the first time probably in the history of any government 

anywhere in Canada, but for sure in Saskatchewan, that there is 

this plan. It's possible that it could be derailed by events 

beyond our circumstances. But the estimates are fair, they have 

been judged to be reasonable, and it provides daylight at the 

end of the tunnel for those Saskatchewan people who have 

been forced to labour as the consequence of nine years of the 

accumulation of the largest debt in the history of our province. 



624 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1993 

This budget is also about not only a plan showing light at the 

end of the tunnel, it is also priorities and choices. As tough as 

it's been for us to find extra cash, Mr. Speaker, this government 

I am proud to say, this Minister of Finance, has been able to 

find money which shows compassion and concern for those of 

us in our society who cannot sacrifice any more, who've taken 

it too harshly and in a difficult way in the last nine years, 

whether that is in the food banks or the poverty situation or in 

question of social assistance or job retraining, the compassion 

package is set out. I'm very proud of that. 

 

Today in one of my open sessions, somebody asked me in Fort 

Qu'Appelle: Mr. Premier, is there ever a time when 

governments can't concern themselves about compassion 

because we simply can't afford it? And I said to that person, in 

answer to that question, what I'm going to say to this House 

now: so long as I'm Premier and so long as this party is in 

government it will never be thus that there will not be room for 

compassion. We will always make way for compassion as best 

as we can under circumstances . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — We've endeavoured to recognize the 

small-business community. I won't go through the various tax 

incentives that we have provided for our local Main Street 

people. That is well documented. 

 

We're attempting to restructure the delivery of services in 

wellness. I think this is going to prove to be a revolution in 

health care. It's going to be difficult. There will be changes and 

dislocations which will affect families and communities. But 

when we succeed as Saskatchewan people, as we surely will, 

we will look back on this — mark my words, one or two or 

three years from now — as one of the great accomplishments 

and achievements of a government that had the foresight and 

the wisdom to effect change in order to improve the lot of 

people in this province. 

 

It is always the case that you never make a mistake if you do 

nothing. I've never seen an armchair quarterback throw an 

interception yet anywhere. But if you're determined to improve, 

if you're determined to build, if you're determined to secure our 

future in the areas of health care, then it is incumbent upon 

you, using government as the positive force, to build for our 

families and our communities. 

 

Wellness is going to do that. And it'll be difficult and it'll be 

controversial and the members opposite will make it political, 

but I want to remind the members opposite, be careful in your 

political attacks on us as we launch this game plan because we 

will succeed. Be careful lest, when we do succeed, your 

credibility will be destroyed and the people of this province 

will remember and re-elect again a government that had the 

courage and the guts and the determination to build the finest 

health care system in Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Agriculture is another dimension. I'm 

not going to talk about this at length because it's been 

discussed. You know our view. GRIP is fundamentally flawed. 

I think the majority of Saskatchewan farmers also share that 

view now. Member from Estevan, if I may return to him for a 

moment, is absolutely hung up on this plan. Most do not agree 

with him, independent observers. 

 

We know we have limited dollars in this province and this 

country. We've got to fashion a program which stands behind 

our family farmers in a way which is doable and in a way 

which recognizes the cost of productions, which is aimed and 

focused at those who need it. 

 

There are a variety of ideas kicking around. I like the concept 

of the first 8,000 bushels being guaranteed in accordance with 

some target price. Take the United States target price, big or 

small, every farmer would be guaranteed that. And it wouldn't 

be open-ended and it wouldn't be like GRIP where a large 

proportion of the public money ends up in the hands of few 

people. This would be a plan which would be predictable, 

would be logical, would be simplified, would be permanent, 

and would be paid at the elevator. 

 

And I think that our review committee — I'm not trying to tie 

their hands; they're going to have to make their 

recommendations — but our review committee, working in 

consultation with the farmers and working in cooperation with 

Mr. Mayer or whomever should be the next minister of 

Agriculture, are going to come up with that restructured, solid 

agricultural program, again an example of a party and a 

government that's got the courage to stand behind the farmers 

and secure our future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I could talk about government 

reorganization. I won't, other than to say that it's in the same 

mode. We are reorganizing and we are attempting to reduce 

expenditures and to make things more efficient, but not for the 

sake of efficiency. We are also doing this because we want to 

fashion government to be meaningful for the 1990s and the 

year 2000. 

 

If you do not believe in the worth of government, all you do is 

attack it. That is not our mission. It is because we believe in 

government as an agency, as an instrument of the ordinary men 

and women of this province, that we seek to improve its 

credibility. We know that when people are suffering in their 

individual lives, they have to be demonstrated and we have to 

show to them that we too are capable of change. 

 

No institution, no government, no configuration of departments 

is permanent. That is the one essential, immutable law of life; it 

is change. And it is because we want to preserve and protect 

the efficacy, because we want to restore the trust of our people 

in government — a trust which was badly damaged as a 



March 25, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 625 

result of nine years of attack willy-nilly — it is that reason that 

we're reorganizing. 

 

Because we are going to end up, also when it comes at election 

time, with the finest civil service, dedicated, sensitive, and 

committed to delivering and restoring confidence in 

government right from the top to the bottom. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — And all of these plans have been laid 

out in writing. They're there. That's what this budget's about, 

Mr. Speaker. It is securing our future in the face of the 

devastation. It is to provide hope and opportunity to the 

greatest province and the greatest people in all of Canada. It is 

to provide that sense of hope and optimism. 

 

It's not going to be achieved overnight because we did not get 

into this mess overnight. But I say to you, Mr. Speaker, as I say 

to the Conservative official opposition and the Liberal third 

party, and as I say to all the people of Saskatchewan, join us, 

join us in pursuit of those goals and those objectives. And as 

difficult as the task will be, we shall rise and, if I may say, we 

shall overcome and we shall prosper and be more 

compassionate and more fair-minded than ever before in 

Saskatchewan . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, you do not have to 

accept my words for it. This budget has been analysed by many 

people, and there are comments ranging from ordinary men and 

women who are voters to organizations about how this budget 

addresses the right issues and the right priorities — sensitivity 

for those who are least capable of fighting the problems, 

opportunity for small business. 

 

I have them here. Culture, sports groups expected worse. 

People talking about cooperation. The development of the 

districts under the wellness model are examples of people 

cooperating. They're pulling together. That's what's being said. 

What's being said outside our borders is the same. The Liberal 

Premier in New Brunswick — I draw this to the specific 

attention of the leader of the third party — quote in the 

Leader-Post, March 20, says: 

 

 New Brunswick Premier Frank McKenna added his voice to 

a chorus of hurrahs Friday for the tough budgets brought 

down by the two hard-pressed provinces. 

 

 "We as Canadians should all applaud the courage and 

commitment that Premier Roy Romanow of Saskatchewan 

. . . (has exhibited) . . .". 

 

I don't normally cite Liberals in support, but I say that this is a 

person who is a Canadian, even though we differ in policies 

and we do have our differences. That is what the Liberal Party 

is saying there. I wish the leader of the third party in 

Saskatchewan would join 

her colleague and her friend in saying the same thing, because 

it is the truth. This is the situation. 

 

I have others. I'm not particularly proud of some of these 

quotations but none the less they're coming in from all over that 

we have put together a budget which is blended, a proper mix 

of cuts and unfortunately tax increases where necessary, and 

yet sensitivity to go about it in the right way. That's what 

they're saying outside of this province in addition to saying 

inside. 

 

And what about the people that we borrow from? 

Unfortunately the people that we also have to pay attention to. 

The former premier kept on talking in his address that we took 

a credit rating drop. Well we did. We took it within about three 

weeks after we assumed office, based on the fact of this budget. 

But there hasn't been any since. 

 

Canadian Bond Rating Service, quote: the province of 

Saskatchewan has taken stern but positive measures. Rating 

outlook, stable. Wood Gundy, I can give the quotation in the 

Wood Gundy prediction: balanced budget plan is a credible 

effort to come to grips with the rising debt problem. Balanced 

budget effort sends a strong, positive signal to financial 

markets. Burns Fry: 

 

 For a second consecutive year the Saskatchewan government 

has taken a major step towards stabilizing the provinces 

unsustainable debt growth. The Romanow government has 

taken aggressive steps to deal with the budget mess which it 

inherited. 

 

(1645) 

 

These are not Roy Romanow's words, or my words, Mr. 

Speaker; these are the words of Burns Fry — taken aggressive 

steps to deal with the budget mess which it inherited. 

 

Bond rating analysts call Saskatchewan budget very positive 

steps — Standard and Poor's. Toronto Dominion Bank: this 

year's tough budget measures provide a good starting point for 

improving the province's fiscal situation. And on and on it 

goes. And that's what they're saying outside. 

 

What in the world is it that motivates the Leader of the 

Conservative Party, the official opposition leader, and the 

leader of the third party in this House to presume — I say this 

with the greatest of respect — to say to the people and to this 

legislature that they know better than all of these independent 

analysts, none of whom are our political friends but with whom 

we all make business because we have to do business, all of 

whom have analysed and said this budget is a budget of 

compassion, hope, stimulation of the economy, the right way to 

go, a model for all the countries and all the provinces . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Why do you differ? On what basis do 

you differ? You have a right to differ, of 



626 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1993 

course. But on what independent analysis is there a differing? 

 

Now that's what they're saying inside the province. That's what 

they're saying outside the province, in Canada. The Prime 

Minister, the retiring Prime Minister, I don't quote him often 

either, but even he doesn't agree with the former premier. He 

thinks the budget is good. The Liberal leader in New 

Brunswick thinks it's good. Everybody inside thinks it's a 

positive — bond rating agencies. 

 

So what's wrong with the official opposition, Mr. Speaker? So 

what's wrong with the leader of the third party? Why can't they 

catch on on this? Why? What's wrong? 

 

Well let's take a look at the Conservatives for a moment. The 

former premier got up in his remarks a few moments ago and 

he said: you know, I'm going to talk about alternatives. Well in 

his Castro-like lengthy speech, one hour and 50 minutes in the 

address, I think he talked about the alternatives. And I decided 

to myself, well maybe let's take a look at his alternatives to see 

if they match the alternatives of the official Leader of the 

Opposition. That would be an interesting test. 

 

The official Leader of the Opposition, the member from 

Thunder Creek, says: you didn't cut enough. Estevan says, you 

cut too much, too mean. By the way I'd like the idea of the 

former premier somehow squared the circle in his mind that we 

were on the one hand just lacing on the hurt — as he would 

describe it to the people — but immediately thereafter in the 

same breath said, but this budget was designed to save our 

political hides. 

 

How in the world putting on the hurt is saving our political 

hide I don't know, but perhaps in the former premier's mind 

there is some rationalization or logical connection in this 

context. 

 

But what is the alternative in the face of all of this 

overwhelming evidence? What is the alternative of the 

Conservative Party and the Leader of the Opposition opposite? 

Simply put, Mr. Speaker, in the interest of time, it's boiled 

down to two things. Number one, harmonization; they still say 

harmonize. And number two, they say privatization. 

 

The two hallmarks of nine years of selling off Crown 

corporations at huge losses, giving away money to GigaTexts 

and Supercarts and all of the various litany of hugely 

spectacular bad investments. Nine, ten years later, the 

alternative is privatization and harmonization. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said in question period one day, if that is the 

sum total of the Progressive Conservative alternative to a 

budget, they are like the Bourbons — they have learned 

nothing, and they remember nothing, and like the Bourbons 

and when their reign is done, as their reign is done those men 

and women will never return to the front benches because the 

people of Saskatchewan reject those fundamental 

approaches. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — We do not want to sell them out. We 

want to build. We want to preserve our heritage and we want to 

do it in the context of our values in the face of the difficulties 

which have been imposed upon us by the administration 

opposite. And you know, the now new Leader of the 

Opposition, the member from Thunder Creek, talks about 

somehow trying to distance himself. 

 

Again, time doesn't permit me but I've quotations here, 1987, 

March 23: Thunder Creek MLA, Rick Swenson, applauds 

Saskatchewan Finance minister Gary Lane's recently released 

economic and financial report, Moose Jaw Times-Herald. 

 

Moose Jaw Times-Herald, March 23, 1987: Swenson says the 

report showed the provincial government is determined to get 

the deficit under control and manage public spending. 

 

Moose Jaw Times-Herald, March 23, 1987: It takes political 

courage to wrestle government deficits and manage public 

spending, Swenson said. 

 

By the way it was okay when his government tried to do it with 

all the wrong priorities, but not okay when our government 

tries to do it. March 23: Swenson welcomes this strategy to 

control government spending. 

 

March 23: Swenson believes Premier Grant Devine's 

government has sound priorities in 1987. 

 

I might stop there to say about the priorities of GigaText and 

the like. Of course we argued against the dismantlement of the 

drug plan. Of course we said all those things the former 

premier said. Because what we were saying is, you didn't have 

to do it because you didn't have to divert the money to all of 

those schemes. You didn't have to get involved in the 

privatizations and bankrupt the province. You could have 

directed that money to preserve our health care system. And 

we're here today because of your actions, yours and yours and 

yours and yours. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — And then there is the mock budget of 

the University of Saskatchewan. That's the other alternative, 

privatization and harmonization. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this is going to be . . . the Premier, the 

former premier says, get out there and tell the people. Yes I'm 

going to tell the people. Here's what the mock budget that they 

endorsed: freeze on any hospital special care home 

construction, page 4; $15 million cut in special care funding; 

user fees; lab services; health care premiums, health care 

premiums. 

 

Now the Leader of the Opposition is piping up, health care 

premiums. And the former premier said, you 



March 25, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 627 

know lookit we have a sales tax, in Alberta they don't have a 

sales tax. That's right, they don't have a sales tax in Alberta. 

But in Alberta they have a health care premium of $640 which 

we do not have. Roughly this is the approximate amount that 

we would pay for a certain level of income family in 

Saskatchewan. They have a health care premium in British 

Columbia, it goes to 840. In Manitoba the Conservatives have a 

payroll tax, and that's what the official opposition wants us to 

adopt. In fact they'd probably have us impose deterrent fees if 

they had their way. 

 

Well this is the mock alternative plan. Delivery of social 

services by charity groups, Mr. Speaker. Well that's exactly 

what the Premier in Manitoba did. He cut off 57 NGO 

(non-governmental organization) social services because those 

were his budget priorities in a deficit. It isn't ours because we 

support people who are trying to help people through NGO 

agencies. But that's the alternative. 

 

Eliminate crop support for agriculture. Now that's one. Because 

one thing I do give the former premier credit, he was a strong 

defender — I think misplaced in his priorities — but he was a 

strong defender for farmers. 

 

But this alternative package — I don't think he's even read it — 

said eliminate crop support; change the method of payment of 

Crow. You endorse that now, Mr. Leader of the Opposition. 

Eliminate field services in Department of Education; advanced 

education, eliminate; higher tuition fees; and of course that 

good old fashioned harmonization of the GST. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if those are the alternatives, you doggone 

right I'm going to ask the people of Saskatchewan to examine 

those alternatives. Because I want to tell them, and I believe 

this firmly to be the case, I don't think the people are ever 

going to go back to the days when the programs of 1991 were 

stopped dead in their tracks. They're never going to accept 

harmonization and privatization as those people have 

advocated it, nor are they going to accept this alternative 

budget, because that is exactly what created this mess. They're 

going to support the government and the people that are 

defending and cleaning up the mess, that is, this side, Mr. 

Speaker, the people on this side. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Just a word about the member from 

Greystone, the Leader of the Liberal Party and what her 

alternatives are. I read her speech of March 22 in Hansard, Mr. 

Speaker. The line is that her cuts are not enough. Now she 

points out to what her cuts should be. I asked the Finance 

department people to document what the total cuts would 

amount to. You know what they'd amount to, Mr. Speaker? Just 

slightly over $4 million. You know, Mr. Speaker, what that 

amount to? One-half a day's daily interest on the interest 

charges of the public debt that we pay, $840 million. 

 

One-tenth of 1 per cent of the total budget, that is the 

position of the Leader of the Liberal Party. She says the cuts 

are not enough. Well I'll tell you, at 4 million they're not 

enough. 

 

I believe, Madam Leader of the Liberal Party, you're going to 

have to tell us precisely what you're going to cut to get that 

deficit balanced off because you could find the $840 million. 

How are you going to do it? Tell me precisely what you're 

going to cut. 

 

And if the argument is you're going to trim the MLAs and the 

number of MLAs — something that perhaps we should debate 

— I can tell you, you can shut down the entire legislature, you 

can fire every one of us and all the pay and all the offices tied 

into it, and what would we save? Eight or nine million? A day 

and a half's interest. 

 

If that is the extent of your economic policy, Madam MLA, I 

tell you the Liberal Party has got to go right back to square one 

and economics 101 because it is incredible. 

 

And not only that, if you're saying that that's the extent of the 

cuts and that you're not going to increase taxes — in fact you're 

going to decrease taxes — I say you won't even be back in the 

legislature because it is totally dishonest and unacceptable as 

far as the people of Saskatchewan are concerned. Not back in 

the legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Of course, there's maybe something 

else the Liberal Party would advocate. Liberal Premier Ross 

Thatcher had deterrent fees. It was only $2.50 a day back in 

those good old days. Maybe you'd like to make them $20.50 a 

day; maybe you'd like them $20.50 a day for a stay in the 

hospital. That's a Liberal plan. 

 

Maybe another Liberal plan would be the way that Quebec is 

handling its civil service — not only freeze but roll back and 

slash. Maybe that's another Liberal plan that you have up your 

sleeves. And by the way, you're going to do all of this while 

building a CANDU 3 nuclear reactor at $1.2 billion. 

 

Now you try to square those circles as an alternative and it's 

clearly one — with the greatest respect to an MLA who I think 

is making a contribution, trying to make a contribution to 

public life; I say that genuinely . . . but it is incredible. It 

simply doesn't total up and you know that to be the case. So I'm 

saying, Mr. Speaker, what is it when the people in 

Saskatchewan say, as Mr. Lazar said in the chamber of 

commerce in Meadow Lake as quoted in the article that 

everybody quotes today, he said I don't think anybody liked the 

budget but he said, quote, they're on the right track. That's what 

they're saying inside. 

 

And Mr. McKenna says it: they're on the right track; I applaud 

the courage. That's what they're saying on the outside. And the 

rating agencies are saying that this is the right thing to do, to 

finally get a hold of this. They're saying that on the further 

outside. What is it 



628 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1993 

with the official opposition parties that they cannot join us in 

building Saskatchewan? What is it? 

 

You know the Minister of Finance on our side wrote to the 

Leader of the Official Opposition and to the leader of the third 

party and said, look — well before the budget was being built 

— come down and take a look at the figures, can we talk about 

some ideas. Both wrote back and said, I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker, 

we're not interested, not interested. 

 

In the case of one, the Leader of the Official Opposition, he 

said, your budget's in the can so I'm not even talking to you any 

more about it. In the case of the Liberal leader, her position 

was simple: I disagree with you philosophically. This is the 

new politics, the new politics of sharing. I disagree with you 

philosophically, that's the end of the issue. Full stop, period. 

What is it ends philosophically, politically, philosophically, 

Madam MLA, I think so. That is the new politics. 

 

I tell you if that's the new politics, it is about as new as the 

politics of appointing Georgette Sheridan contrary to a 

democratic nomination convention, the good old Liberal. And 

it's about as new politics as the election of Ralph Goodale and 

the pizza politics that your party practised, and the people of 

Saskatchewan know that totally and completely. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Totally and completely. In this 

regard, Mr. Speaker, there is no difference because they have 

no plans between the Conservatives and Liberals, it's either 

Tweedledee or tweedledummer, one way or the other. As 

Tommy Douglas used to say, the Liberals and the 

Conservatives are like a chicken standing in the snow; one 

foot's in the snow and the other foot's up trying to keep warm. 

That's the foot that's in government. And then of course it gets 

a little bit too cold and the cold foot goes up and the warm one 

goes down in the snow. Two different feet. Two different 

parties. Same old chicken and same old lack of policies. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1700) 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to close. I want 

to close by saying to you, sir, and to the members of the 

Legislative Assembly and to the public of Saskatchewan, this 

has been for us a challenging and, frankly speaking, trying 

time. As I travel around rural Saskatchewan I have people 

genuinely saying to me, you shouldn't have cut the children's 

dental plan. I say, what should have I cut? They say, well you 

should have cut the ag centres. I say, we have, unfortunately. I 

go to another community; they say, you shouldn't have cut the 

ag centres, you should have cut the children's plan. I say, 

unfortunately, I've done them both. 

 

Forty-seven thousand letters is what I got in the Premier's 

office last year, Mr. Speaker. That's a huge 

amount of letters — and by the way it shows the awareness of 

Saskatchewan people — and by far the largest number of 

letters start off something like this: Dear Mr. Premier, 

sometimes even Dear Roy, sometimes even a little more 

colourful. And it goes like this. We know that you inherited a 

mess and we know that you have to do something about it and 

you're doing the right effort. And then the letter says, but, but 

. . . and fill in your blank. And as you listen to the blank — 

don't make the change to the ag centres, don't make the change 

to the business centres, don't make the change to the drug plan, 

don't do this, don't tax, don't do this, don't do this, if you did all 

the buts, each one individually, meritorious in their own view, 

you'd be back in the jackpot that we are in that we have to 

desperately get out of. 

 

And when you write back to the people and say, look I'm 

asking you, as we're trying to do ourselves, to look beyond the 

lean horizons of our years; to look beyond, as important as it is, 

our individual objectives and goals to the larger, common weal. 

 

We'll have made mistakes in this budget — I admit that 

frankly. But overall, the budget is strong because it is looking 

to the common weal. As externally, externally/internationally, 

and nationally, and even domestically, people reluctantly have 

to agree, and are agreeing, to say they know this can't be saved 

overnight because we didn't get here overnight. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a wonderful challenge, to look to try to see 

beyond the lean horizon of our years. Sometimes I tend to, as a 

practising politician, look in the day-to-day problems. You 

wake up every day and you see this deficit and you wonder 

what in the world you can do with it. 

 

But what is encouraging is you look beyond the lean horizon of 

your years and you know when you're out there in rural 

Saskatchewan that the ethic of cooperation and community and 

understanding and compassion and understanding of the facts 

is as great as it ever was. It's as great as it was during Tommy 

Douglas's era. And his problems, as severe as they were, are 

nowhere near by comparison as severe as ours. It is there 

because this province is our home and the people of 

Saskatchewan want to make it a strong home. 

 

And it is a strong home. Our foundations are strong — potash, 

oil, natural gas, wheat, the best farmers, the most innovative 

people, uranium. We have a number of options and 

opportunities. We are innovating. We are producing jobs. Of 

course it's not fast enough. We are pulling together as 

communities, and we're rationalizing, and we're cooperating, 

and we will be making mistakes, and it will not be easy. 

 

But we ask you, the ladies and the gentlemen of the opposition, 

to join us in that task. Don't stand back and say, for partisan 

and political reasons, that you're simply not going to do it. 

Look beyond the lean horizons of your years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm going to close by saying, by giving 



March 25, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 629 

you two quotations which kind of give me motivation in some 

ways. One is from the late former American President John F. 

Kennedy, who said this — and I think it's applicable to this 

budget — Kennedy said about America: divided there is little 

we can do, for we dare not meet a powerful challenge at odds 

and split asunder. United, he said, there is much we can do in a 

host of cooperative ventures. 

 

Ladies and gentlemen of this Assembly, let's not forget this. 

United in cooperative venture, under our values of compassion 

and decency and opportunity, there is much we can do. And 

that's what this budget's all about. 

 

And finally I'd say this, Mr. Speaker, of all the correspondence 

that I've received, there's one letter which really touched me 

personally. One of my colleagues referred to it — I think it was 

the member from Kelsey-Tisdale — the letter from Mrs. Irma 

Douglas, the widow of the former premier, Tommy Douglas, 

which if I read in its detail I don't think the member from 

Estevan would particularly like, because she described our 

situation so astutely at her advanced age as she watches 

Saskatchewan politics and the love of this country. Her words 

lastly to me were: Roy, some day the sun will shine again on 

the greatest people in all of Canada. And she said, you'll be 

there to see it. I don't know if I'll be there to see it or not; that's 

another issue. 

 

This is from a spirit and a soul and a wise person who lived it, 

who practised it, who was a partner, who exemplifies what this 

mission in 1993 is all about. Are we going to let her down? Are 

we going to let down the people? Are we going to let down our 

pioneers? Are we going to give up? 

 

We're not going to do that. We are building a brand-new 

Saskatchewan. We're going to do it. The better day is dawning 

now. I feel it and I see it and I say one more time to the official 

opposition, in the vote that's going to take place momentarily, 

join us, join us. We cannot be beaten if you do. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It's a great pleasure to close the debate on the budget. 

It's also a very difficult act to follow here. 

 

I want first of all to thank the constituents in Saskatoon 

Westmount for giving me the privilege of representing them in 

the House. And I want to take this opportunity to thank the 

people of Saskatchewan who provided so much input into our 

pre- and post-budget meetings around the province. 

 

I also want to speak briefly about the process by which this 

government arrived at our budget. It was very much a team 

effort. I want to pay tribute to the wonderful foundation for this 

budget laid by the former minister of Finance, the member 

from Regina Dewdney. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — The member from Regina Dewdney 

worked very hard this year and last to begin the process of 

rebuilding Saskatchewan. Our Premier as usual played an 

invaluable leadership role at all levels, particularly in meeting 

with Saskatchewan people and helping them to come to 

understand the magnitude of our problems. Treasury Board 

members, especially the Minister of Labour and my colleague, 

the member from Swift Current, spent many long hours sifting 

through the difficult choices. 

 

But I want to say a special word about our caucus. What 

pleased me so much was the open and honest approach that we 

took to this budget. I want the people of this province to know 

that all members of this government spent long hours looking 

critically at our situation. We all asked the tough questions. Is 

our situation really as difficult as we're being told? Have we 

looked at all of the options? And we all asked those questions 

because we all have to go back to our constituents and explain 

this budget in the context of the problems we faced. 

 

The input of the caucus into this budget was absolutely 

invaluable. When I stand to vote for this budget, I will stand 

with confidence because I know that I have standing with me 

54 of the most decent and capable men and women that this 

province has ever seen in this Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Life is not about the hand that one 

is dealt. We have little control over that. It's about how one 

plays the hand they've been dealt. That's what historians and 

our children will judge us by. They will judge us by how we, as 

a government, played the hand that we were dealt. No one in 

this province would deny that we were dealt a very difficult 

hand. Anyone who thinks our job is easy probably also believes 

that Elvis Presley is still alive. 

 

I don't want to dwell on the mess that we inherited except to 

say this: some day some historian is going to sit down and 

chronicle what happened to this province in the 1980s — the 

bad deals, the reckless spending, the lack of accountability — 

and the tale will be one unprecedented in the whole annals of 

Canadian history. 

 

When confronted with such a mess our government could have 

sought an easy way out, a way to kind of muddle through the 

next four years and try to keep the voters happy. But that would 

not have been the responsible thing to do. And so, Mr. Speaker, 

this government played the hand that it was dealt. We took the 

situation in hand. We acted boldly, decisively, with compassion 

and vision, to lay out a plan to turn around this province and to 

secure our children's future. 

 

We said the era of the 1980s is over in this province; welcome 

to the '90s and the 21st century. First, we showed the people of 

Saskatchewan how we can 



630 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1993 

develop jobs and stimulate the economy without bankrupting 

the treasury. We said the era of megabucks for megaprojects is 

over. We ushered in a new era of working with co-ops and 

small businesses to create jobs, the new era of 

community-based economic development, the new era of 

building on our strengths and working together. 

 

Secondly, we said to the people of Saskatchewan, we're going 

to have to change the way that we operate in this province. The 

world is changing around us and either we adjust and ride the 

waves of change or change will bowl us over like a tidal wave. 

We're going to have to change the way we deliver services in 

health care, education, economic development. We're going to 

have to integrate service delivery to make the services more 

affordable and more effective. What the wellness model will 

show in health care is that what one community cannot achieve 

alone is attainable if a whole district combines its energies and 

resources and works together. 

 

The members opposite feed into a gloom and doom scenario 

when they talk about offloading onto local governments and 

predict huge increases in taxes at the local level. What they fail 

to do is to give the people of this province the credit they 

deserve for being imaginative and innovative. I notice that the 

mayor of Regina, who I believe runs an exemplary 

administration, said about reductions to municipalities: if we're 

going to see an end to cuts to grants, we first have to see an end 

to the increases to the provincial deficit. 

 

And I noticed the mayor of Prince Albert says that in his 

community he will not be increasing taxes. Last night I was 

visiting with some people in Strasbourg who talked about the 

need for rural municipalities to sit down with each other, to set 

aside their old historic rivalries and differences, and begin to 

share administrative services so as to cut costs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, across this province people are rising to the 

challenge. They are changing. They are being imaginative. 

They are working together at the community level to play their 

part in turning around this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm amazed as I listen to the members opposite. 

They seem, for example, to be unhappy with our move to 

accrual accounting — funny numbers, they say. 

 

I say to them, accrual accounting is the way of the future, 

supported by the auditor, the Gass Commission, professional 

accounting associations. It's already used by many businesses 

and farmers in the province. 

 

What accrual accounting means is getting rid of our credit card, 

the very credit card that the members opposite used with such 

gay abandon to rack up a huge debt in this province. 

 

From now on governments will have to tell taxpayers each and 

every year what their level of indebtedness 

is. Accrual accounting is just one of the many steps that this 

government has taken to make government open, honest, and 

accountable. 

 

The members opposite have been speaking out of both sides of 

their mouths. They want the cost of government cut, yet they 

howl like wounded wolves when anyone loses their jobs or a 

facility is closed. So they want government cuts with no job 

loses and no facilities closed, and they want to balance the 

books without increasing taxes. I say to them, Alice in 

Wonderland would enjoy their budget. 

 

(1715) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — When the members opposite say 

they want more cuts and no tax increases, if you read between 

the lines I think what they're really saying is that they would 

remove all of the safety nets which we have put in place in this 

budget. They would get their cuts and balance their books on 

the backs of some of the most vulnerable people in our 

province. 

 

Let's not forget what happened to the poor in this province in 

the 1980s. In that era of reckless spending, as the number of 

children living in poverty increased dramatically, Grant 

Schmidt, the then minister of Social Services, denied that there 

were even hungry children in the province of Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Speaker, that era has ended in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — This is a new era. Despite our 

financial problems we are not cutting funding to the most 

vulnerable, and in fact we're providing for small but targeted 

increases. We're increasing benefits to low income families, 

we're increasing our support for single parents and troubled 

families, we're establishing an aboriginal court worker 

program, and in 1994 we're developing a new child benefit 

program to help support working poor families. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Because of our financial 

circumstances, we cannot move as quickly as we would like to 

remove some of the inequities in our society. The time frame 

has changed; the principles haven't. Make no mistake about it, 

this government and the New Democratic Party remain firmly 

committed to the ideal of equality. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget is a budget of hope. It's a budget of 

hope because of the economic forecasts upon which it's based 

— economic forecasts, by the way, which do not come from 

within the province but come from agencies outside the 

province. What they're saying is that the next four years are 

going to be years of economic growth and new job creation. 

 

What these numbers reflect is what the Premier has already 

referred to. Saskatchewan, the house that we 



March 25, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 631 

live in, yes, it's mortgaged to the hilt, but the underlying 

structure of the house, the economy of the house, is sound and 

it's growing. The good news then is once we get the mortgage 

under control, we will be left with a structurally sound and very 

beautiful house. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — It's also a budget of hope because 

we now have a comprehensive plan for the future of this 

province. We have said to the people of the province, the era of 

spending recklessly today and leaving the bills to be paid by 

our children tomorrow is over. We've entered a new era in 

Saskatchewan, the era of living within our means and planning 

for our future. 

 

As the Premier has said, our balanced-budget plan is the first in 

Canada and it's receiving significant attention from other parts 

of Canada and from around the world. Other provinces are 

calling and asking about our plan. And just this week I 

participated in a conference call with financial agencies from 

across North America and Europe. They were keenly interested 

in hearing about our balanced-budget plan and what it means 

for the rest of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they understand that Saskatchewan and Canada 

are in a tough spot. All governments in Canada have a problem 

with debt. What matters is how they are dealing with their 

problem. 

 

The problem common to all of us, ironically, is driving us 

closer together. Partisan petty politics is beginning to take a 

back seat as we grapple together with our debt problem and 

struggle to present a united front to the outside world. 

 

Our Premier mentioned the remarks made by the Prime 

Minister. I would just like to quote what he said. The Prime 

Minister of Canada said about this budget: there has been 

overspending in the province, and the Premier has begun to 

deal with it. 

 

The Liberal Premier also made remarks about our budget 

which the Premier did not quote. Liberal Premier of New 

Brunswick said about our budget: I believe their strong 

leadership signals to the international world that Canada is 

going to get its act together. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, Canada is going to get 

its act together and Saskatchewan is leading the way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — At this time, when provincial 

budgets are being so carefully scrutinized, we acted first. We 

took the tough measures. We laid out a plan for the future. We 

have charted a course for others to follow. That's why, Mr. 

Speaker, I'm pleased to stand in this legislature and to say that I 

will be joining with my colleagues and supporting this 

budget, because it's the plan that will secure our future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 5:22 p.m. until 5:24 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Toth 

Devine Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

Boyd Haverstock 

— 10 

Nays 

Romanow Lautermilch 

Van Mulligen Calvert 

Thompson Murray 

Wiens Hamilton 

Simard Johnson 

Tchorzewski Trew 

Lingenfelter Draper 

Teichrob Serby 

Shillington Whitmore 

Koskie Sonntag 

Anguish Flavel 

Solomon Roy 

Goulet Cline 

Atkinson Scott 

Kowalsky McPherson 

Carson Wormsbecker 

Mitchell Kujawa 

MacKinnon Crofford 

Penner Stanger 

Cunningham Knezacek 

Upshall Harper 

Hagel Keeping 

Bradley Kluz 

Koenker Renaud 

Lorje Langford 

Lyons Jess 

Pringle  

— 53 

The division bells rang from 5:27 p.m. until 5:28 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Romanow Lautermilch 

Van Mulligen Calvert 

Thompson Murray 

Wiens Hamilton 

Simard Johnson 

Tchorzewski Trew 

Lingenfelter Draper 

Teichrob Serby 

Shillington Whitmore 

Koskie Sonntag 

Anguish Flavel 

Solomon Roy 

Goulet Cline t 

 



632 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1993 

 

Atkinson Scott 

Kowalsky McPherson 

Carson Wormsbecker 

Mitchell Kujawa 

MacKinnon Crofford 

Penner Stanger 

Cunningham Knezacek 

Upshall Harper 

Hagel Keeping 

Bradley Kluz 

Koenker Renaud 

Lorje Langford 

Lyons Jess 

Pringle  

— 53 

Nays 

Swenson Toth 

Devine Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

Boyd Haverstock 

— 10 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Energy and Mines — Vote 23 

 

The Committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:32 p.m. 

 

 


