




















































Hansard: March 03, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 83 

 March 3, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

 

Deputy Clerk: -- Mr. Swenson, chair of the Standing 

Committee on Public Accounts, presents the second report of 

the committee which is hereby tabled and filed as sessional 

paper no. 21. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I 

move, seconded by the member for Regina Victoria: 

 

 That the second report of the Standing Committee on Public 

Accounts now be concurred in. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm just wish to say a few words on 

the report which has just been tabled in the legislature.  This . . 

. 

 

The Speaker: -- I'm informed that the member can only speak 

by leave of the Assembly.  Does the member have leave? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the 

particular report which has been tabled with the legislature 

resulted from a motion put forward on January 10, 1992 and it 

was a request to the special . . . to the Provincial Auditor to 

look at some areas that were special and unique to public 

accountability in the province.  The committee held a total of 

nine meetings, I believe, on this particular area.  There were a 

number of witnesses called before it. 

 

I think that the recommendations that have been put forward in 

the report by the Public Accounts Committee of this legislature 

are ones that all members should apprise themselves of.  I think 

that there are some suggestions there that certainly go a long 

way down the road to improving public access and public 

accountability to many aspects of government. 

 

Some of those areas were vague.  Some of those areas were 

very ill-defined. And particularly when you get into the Crown 

corporations sector, there were certain areas where no one 

could properly discern maybe what the proper procedures were. 

 

And I would just like to thank the members of the committee 

for all of the hard work that they've put into in going through 

this process, and I think that we as a legislature and as a 

province have gained by making this report and making it 

available to the legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to beg leave of the 

Assembly to make some comments with respect to the report 

on behalf of the government members of the Public Accounts 

Committee. 

 

The process was, in our view, Mr. Speaker, a very positive 

exercise for the reasons stated by the Leader of the Opposition.  

Several practices have been reported and the motion made by 

the member from Regina Victoria last January allowed the 

Provincial Auditor to investigate those practices, allowed the 

committee to address them in a public forum, but I think most 

importantly, allowed the committee to formulate some 

recommendations to attempt to ensure that some of the 

practices and perhaps grey areas the Leader of the Opposition 

referred to could be rectified so that any abuses would not be 

repeated in the future. 

 

The amount of material the committee went through, Mr. 

Speaker, was really quite voluminous.  And I think the whole 

process involved a lot of work not just by members of the 

committee but also by the civil servants and heads of the 

departments and agencies of the Crown. 

 

And we were very pleased, Mr. Speaker, that we were able to 

arrive at, and I think all parties represented on the committee 

agreed upon, a series of I think very positive recommendations.  

And the most gratifying aspect of this, I think, Mr. Speaker, has 

been that the auditor was able to make recommendations, the 

committee was able to make recommendations, but more 

importantly, the government is acting on those 

recommendations. 

 

And I was very pleased to see in the Leader-Post of December 

14, 1992, Kevin O'Connor making the following statement.  He 

said: 

 

 Cynics might suggest you'd have to wait a while to collect 10 

good ideas from the Saskatchewan legislature. 

 

 But in recent weeks MLAs on the legislature's public 

accounts committee have been discussing a number of 

worthy proposals designed to make politicians and 

government organizations more accountable for the 

taxpayers' dollars they spend. 

 

And I think that's a very fair comment, Mr. Speaker.  And I 

was very pleased, and I think all members of the committee 

from all parties were gratified to read the progress report from 

Executive Council, January 1993, dealing with the 

recommendations of the committee and the actions the 

government is taking.  And we commend the government for 

that and I would refer all members to the report.  I think it deals 

with the situation in a very fair and objective manner. 

 

Thank you very much for your indulgence, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I give 



84 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 1993 

notice that I shall on Friday next ask the government the 

following question: 

 

 Regarding the conflict of interest policy of the government: is 

any relative of the Minister of Justice employed by the 

government or any of its agencies or Crown corporations; 

acting as an agent of a third party doing business with the 

government or any of its agencies or Crown corporations; or 

directly supplying any goods or services to the government or 

any of its agencies or Crown corporations? 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that I shall 

on Friday next ask the government the following question: 

 

 Regarding the conflict of interest policy of the government: is 

any relative of the Minister of Community Services (a) 

employed by the government or any of its agencies or Crown 

corporations; (b) acting as an agent for a third party doing 

business with the government or any of its agencies or Crown 

corporations; or (c) directly supplying any goods or services 

to the government or any of its agencies or Crown 

corporations? 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that 

I shall on Friday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

 Regarding the expansion of the cabinet and move of the 

protocol office, the office of constitutional affairs, and the 

Intergovernmental Affairs office from the Legislative 

Building: (1) what was the total expense of moving these 

offices from the Legislative Building to their current location 

elsewhere in Regina; (2) were these offices moved to 

accommodate the extra office space required by the expanded 

cabinet; (3) what is the cost of rent for these three 

organizations in their present location; and (4) how does that 

vary from the previous cost of renting space within the 

Legislative Building? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to introduce 

to you in your gallery this afternoon 25 students from 

Connaught School.  It's the school that my son graduated from, 

and I know that it has a very good reputation and is well 

respected in the community for having good involvement in the 

community and providing a good service to the students. 

 

The students are accompanied today by Melanie Little, their 

teacher; and Roger Anderson, their chaperon.  So I want you to 

join me in welcoming them to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- With new members it is difficult to 

keep track of the names, Mr. Speaker. 

 

First of all, I want to welcome the students from 

Connaught School.  While I have no direct connection with that 

school now, the school was in my constituency for some 15 

years and both my children went to Connaught School.  It is, as 

the current member for the area said, an excellent example of 

how a community school should work. 

 

I also when I'm on my feet want to ask all members to join with 

me in welcoming Mr. MacLeod and Mr. Ottenson, who 

represent the building trades, to this legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want to 

take this opportunity also to introduce some special guests in 

the opposition gallery, a group of 10 distinguished ladies.  And 

members from this side of the House revere these ladies 

actually, because they are the eyes and the ears and the 

extension of us as MLAs (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly). 

 

And I think that all MLAs in this building will extend to these 

secretaries, these constituency secretaries, a warm welcome 

because we all appreciate the work that these people do for us 

in our offices and to make MLAs generally look pretty good.  

It's these hard-working, front-line people that do so much work 

for us.  And I would ask all members of the Assembly at this 

time to welcome these 10 ladies into our midst this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Review of Gaming Commission 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, you 

will know that . . . to the Minister responsible for the Gaming 

Commission.  I want to ask you a question, Madam Minister.  

You will know that representatives of hundreds of Regina 

charities are feeling violated by the actions of the 

Saskatchewan Gaming Commission and you also know that we 

have seen criminal charges recently laid against one of the 

commission regulators. 

 

This is obviously a very sincere vote of non-confidence in the 

operations of the commission by people representing thousands 

of volunteers in our province.  In light of the serious problems 

in the Gaming Commission, are you prepared to conduct a 

public review of the operations of this commission and its 

treatment of charities running bingos in this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you for that question.  Mr. 

Speaker, what I would say is that we have had an individual 

who is being investigated because of wrongdoing, and that 

matter is with the police and in the courts.  So I don't want to 

comment on that. 

 

But I will make this comment.  Recently I hired a former chief 

superintendent of the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) 

to join the Gaming Commission.  My purpose in hiring that 

individual was very clear.  That was to ensure that there was 

adequate security in all aspects of 



March 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 85 

gaming; that there was no criminal overtones to any aspect of 

gaming in this province.  And so I can make that commitment. 

 

With respect to the bingos, there have been some difficulties in 

moving to a new and better association model, and we are 

working with the bingos to straighten out that situation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, surely you're 

not questioning the honesty and integrity of the thousands of 

men and women who, frankly, have lost faith and confidence in 

the Gaming Commission.  Charities, bingo hall operators, 

Saskatchewan Indians, and most of the other groups regulated 

by the Gaming Commission, do not trust it to deal with them in 

good faith. 

 

Are you telling us that all these people are wrong, or will you 

agree that a public review is the only way you have left to 

restore some sense of fairness, non-partisanship, and credibility 

to the Gaming Commission? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, if I could go back in 

time.  In 1990 when the members opposite were in government 

there was a key legal decision which said that the way that 

bingos were organized across Canada had to be changed.  Now 

we moved to make those changes, to move to what has been 

called an association model.  The key to the changes is that the 

charity should be in the driver's seat in the long term and the 

main beneficiaries of bingo. 

 

Now in the process of moving to that dramatic change there 

have been some difficulties.  And as I say, the commission is 

sitting down with the bingos and other charities to work 

through these difficulties.  But it is a legal requirement that we 

change the structure of organization of bingos and charities' 

roles in them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, your 

observation about the charities being involved is a stretch that I 

won't go into at this point, but it's a stretch of the imagination 

that you've been meeting with the charities. 

 

It is no wonder this government has gone through four chief 

executive officers and three chairmen of the Gaming 

Commission since November of 1991.  This government won't 

listen to these people, just as they wouldn't listen to health 

workers, farmers, business people, or anyone else. 

 

Are you aware that the Saskatchewan Gaming Commission has 

allowed new bingo hall licences in the Regina market-place 

over the past 30 to 60 days?  And does the minister realize that 

the approvals were given against the advice of the vast majority 

of Regina charities?  Why were these given? As the market is 

saturated and new halls simply hurt the efforts of charities 

raising the funds for their charities. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, the request for the new 

halls came from charities themselves, just as the main movers 

requesting the commission to act against bingos violating 

regulation come from charities.  This is a dispute amongst 

charities themselves. 

 

But the key point and the one that I want to emphasize is that 

the Gaming Commission in its regulation of bingos and 

charities is a quasi-judicial body with which I do not interfere.  

They make their decisions in a non-political, non 

_partisan way. 

 

Now I have suggested to them that what they need to do is sit 

down with the charities and iron out some of the differences. 

 

But unlike the previous administration, where the minister did 

interfere in the operations of the commission, I am not 

interfering personally in the independence of that commission. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, the 

government's own study done by Fox Consulting said that there 

was too much saturation of the gaming market-place already 

and yet this government is handing out new licences both in 

Moose Jaw and in Regina.  The industry, including charities 

and operators, was happy with the former government's 

self-imposed moratorium on licences.  Is this moratorium still 

in place or has it been cancelled?  The minister can't have it 

both ways.  There can't be a self-imposed moratorium except 

for your friends. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, if I could refer to the 

history of that moratorium, that's the action which I was 

mentioning previously.  The minister, in my view, totally 

exceeded -- the previous minister under your administration -- 

totally exceeded his authority when he imposed upon the 

commission a moratorium. 

 

The commission is an independent, quasi-judicial body.  What 

they did in Regina, what they did in Moose Jaw is they sat 

down, they listened to both sides -- charities that said they 

wanted no more bingos, charities that said they did want more 

bingos -- and they independently decided to license the 

appropriate facilities.  It has to be independent of politics.  It 

has to be independent of . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I just want to remind the 

Leader of the Opposition, on every question today so far he's 

interrupted.  There was no interruption when the member asked 

their question, and I expect them also not to interrupt. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, the 

government's record of breaking contracts with citizens of this 

province has now become legendary and has marked our 

province's government as an untrustworthy partner.  In spite of 

this, the government seems intent on 



86 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 1993 

helping their friends. 

 

Does the minister know who the new hall operators are who 

received approval to operate halls in a market where charities 

believed a moratorium on new halls existed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to reiterate my 

point again.  I take no involvement in the decisions of the 

Gaming Commission with respect to who is licensed and why 

they are licensed.  The only advice I give them is with respect 

to the diplomacy with which they handle the bingos and the 

charities.  Those decisions are made by this body as an 

independent, quasi-judicial body.  I have had no involvement 

and no interference. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, since you 

acknowledge that you have had no interference, would you tell 

me, is the minister prepared to admit that the former NDP 

(New Democratic Party) cabinet minister, Reg Gross, is 

associated with the group who, surprisingly, recently received 

this approval? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I am not aware of who 

is involved in that particular group. 

 

If I could state my point once again, because it is an essential 

point.  The applications that come before the Gaming 

Commission are reviewed by the members of that commission 

totally independent of the minister.  All the minister can do is 

give them advice about how they might handle the diplomacy 

of the way they deal with these individuals.  I have no capacity 

to tell them who to licence and who not to licence and I do not 

think it appropriate that I have that power. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, this 

government's theory seems to be that the end justifies the 

means.  The rules according to the NDP government can be 

changed without consultation as it relates to the charities, as it 

relates to the associations, on an as-needed basis.  And it seems 

that the government is now practising that what one of its 

members preached -- the system is more important than the 

individual.  Is it not true, Madam Minister, that the terms and 

conditions proposed by this government were developed 

without any consultation with any of the charity associations or 

the hall operators?  Isn't that true, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, as I said, it was a legal 

decision going back to 1990 that necessitated the change to an 

association model.  The association model has many 

advantages in that in the long term it is the charities that are to 

be the main beneficiary of it.  The Gaming Commission 

developed the rules and regulations consistent with the law.  

What I have advised the Gaming Commission is that they 

should spend more time working with the charities.  That's the 

only advice that I have given them. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, charities have 

tried to communicate with this government but no one will 

listen.  They have written, they have lobbied, and now they 

have no choice but to expose what is surely an effort by this 

government to destroy this vital means for volunteers to help 

their community. 

 

Madam Minister, the new rules you are imposing are designed 

to put these people out of business.  Madam Minister, is it not 

true that by permitting politically motivated licences that help 

over-saturate the market, and by directly changing the terms of 

the landlord agreements -- some of which have five-year 

commitments -- that you know you will be putting the financial 

viability of these operations at risk? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Again, Mr. Speaker, my point is a 

simple one.  If you look at the statute, the Gaming Commission 

is an independent, quasi-judicial body which makes its own 

decisions relative to who should be licensed.  The Criminal 

Code sets out the framework under which they operate.  All 

that I can do is talk about the diplomacy with which they 

handle the various groups.  And I have suggested to them that 

although they may be right in the way they are applying the 

regulations, they need to sit down with the charities and ensure 

the charities understand what is occurring. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, you talk about 

consulting and being open and yet here's where they have a 

problem.  In their attempts to learn anything at all about the 

government's plan to regulate the gaming industry, charities 

have learned that the government has a two-year plan that the 

NDP refuse to share with those it directly affects. 

 

Instead, they have been forced to do this:  they have been 

forced to use the freedom of information Act to try and obtain 

that information, Madam Minister.  What has the government 

got to hide, Madam Minister?  Why don't you open your 

books?  Why don't you open and be open and accountable?  

Give them the plan that they have for the two years and let the 

charities decide whether they agree with you or not. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, we have had an 

unprecedented level of consultation with respect to gaming in 

this province.  The end of your regime, the beginning of ours, 

there was extensive consultation with the bingos about the 

movement to the association model. 

 

Just recently a five-person interdepartmental committee went 

around the province consulting with various groups about the 

development of gaming policy.  They were open to any 

individual or group who had a submission to make.  And I will 

make available to the member the list of groups consulted 

because it is extensive.  So when it 



March 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 87 

comes to consultation, we have a very proud record here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Madam Minister, will you 

tell this Assembly that they have not asked for in the freedom 

of information Act, that they have access to that information on 

your plans for the future for the charities in this province?  Tell 

me that.  Have they not asked for that in that area? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I am not aware of the 

freedom of information request.  It may very well, if it exists, 

have gone to the Gaming Commission and not come to my 

attention. 

 

What I am saying is that the access to information has been 

unprecedented.  Groups may not have liked the end result of 

the policy, but there was wide consultation.  They had their 

opportunity to speak and to have input, and the chair of the 

Gaming Commission has assured me that she is going to 

continue to dialogue with these groups on an ongoing basis. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Madam Minister, 

everything we've been told here today does nothing to ensure 

the thousands and thousands of volunteers and the contributors 

of these employment opportunities for various people in the 

charities and in the associations -- the churches and the sports 

and culture groups -- that this government does not have an 

ulterior motive. 

 

You haven't convinced us and you haven't convinced them that 

you don't have an ulterior motive.  The ends cannot justify the 

means in this case, and the ends aren't even justified, Madam 

Minister. 

 

Will you not admit that your government has only one goal in 

mind.  Won't you admit that you want the charities and the 

bingo hall operators out of the way so that you can implement 

your ideological plan and step in and run this business? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm not even sure that I 

could begin to answer that question because it's almost 

unintelligible. 

 

If I could reiterate the point that I made.  The charities are a 

vital part . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  I want to warn the members 

again, there's just too much interruption when the minister is 

answering her question. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- If I could reiterate my point.  The 

charities are a vital component of the delivery of services in 

this province.  I understand that.  The charities are regulated.  

The bingos are regulated by the Gaming Commission which is 

an independent body which operates under the framework of 

the Criminal Code.  Beyond that I can say nothing.  As minister 

I have not been involved; this is a non-political process. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Madam Minister, charities 

don't want you to run their business because they know you'll 

increase your percentage of the revenues beyond the hundred 

per cent increase you have already imposed at their expense.  

Bingo hall operators know you will cut them out of this 

business completely. 

 

Will you not now, Madam Minister, give us a categorical 

assurance that you will leave this vital source of revenue to our 

charities unscathed; tell us you won't subject these people to 

the same cure you imposed on farmers, namely to fix the 

contracts so they could go broke. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Yes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Will you then, Madam Minister, provide, 

under the terms and conditions under the freedom of 

information Act, the two-year plan that you have intended to 

implement in the province of Saskatchewan and the gaming 

side.  Will you provide that to the associations and the charities 

in this province?  Will you provide that to them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I would be pleased to 

provide information on our gaming strategy because it's 

something I'm very proud of.  We are the only province in 

Canada that has managed to make way for Indian and Metis 

people to realize their desire to participate in gaming in this 

province -- the only province in Canada. 

 

We are in the forefront of monitoring the social costs involved 

in gaming.  We have a strategy which is a long-term strategy 

and I would be pleased to unveil it to anyone who's interested. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Minister 

of Justice.  I want to ask you this question, Mr. Minister.  We 

have no choice, given all the nonsense and inability of this 

minister to respond appropriately to the associations and the 

charities, and the confusion we have heard here today, but to 

direct our appeal to you.  Mr. Minister, given that thousands of 

volunteers have lost confidence in the Gaming Commission 

because it cannot seem to treat them fairly without political 

interference and in a fashion that is beyond any doubt in terms 

of conflict of interest, will you not today at least agree to 

review the need for a review by the public of the Gaming 

Commission and its responses?  And will you give us a 

commitment that you will do it soon? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I would invite the 

member opposite to look up the legislation, to go through 



88 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 1993 

it, to look at what the powers of the Gaming Commission are.  

And what you'll find is that the Gaming Commission is 

independent; it has quasi-judicial powers; it makes these 

decisions independent of the minister and of politics. 

 

Now you may not understand that because the minister under 

your administration did interfere in the Gaming Commission.  

But this is something that this administration is not going to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Government Purchase of Computer Equipment 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, an order 

in council dated February 16, 1993, revealed that the 

government has spent $8.5 million on computer software and 

hardware and that money went to a firm in Florida.  My 

question is for the Minister of SaskPower.  Was this computer 

purchase tendered in Saskatchewan, and will he provide details 

of that purchase? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I am proud to tell this 

House and all its members that SaskPower has a Buy 

Saskatchewan program and policy.  And I am proud to say that 

today 82 per cent of all purchases from SaskPower are made in 

this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, in the case of the computer 

equipment the member raises, that equipment is simply only 

available, only available from the state of Florida. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the 

minister knows that the previous government was the one that 

established the Buy Saskatchewan program in SaskPower.  

That's who established it, sir.  And during the term of office of 

the last government, the rate of purchases in SaskPower was 90 

per cent, not 82 per cent as he likes to point out now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, $8.5 million of Saskatchewan 

taxpayer money went to a company in Florida for purchase of 

equipment, something that was not tendered in Saskatchewan.  

Mr. Minister, would you provide us with details -- details -- of 

that computer purchase? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I would be more than 

happy, more than happy to provide the member and all 

members details of that transaction.  I repeat again: this 

particular computer equipment and software is only available 

in the United States, through the state of Florida.  It is essential.  

It is essential to our power distribution grid here in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  We had no alternative but in this 

case to tender in the United States. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I will be more than happy to provide to that 

member or to all members the detail. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In the province of 

Saskatchewan today the computer software industry is in a 

severe downturn, and the minister stands in this House and tells 

us that the computer software companies of Saskatchewan 

were not even asked about the computer tendering program -- 

not even asked, Mr. Speaker.  They're paying high, excessive 

taxes in this province and you don't even consult with them. 

 

Mr. Minister, we would ask you that you table the documents 

surrounding this computer purchase as soon as possible. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I repeat again, I am more 

than willing and will do at the earliest opportunity to provide 

this member and all members the detail of this particular 

computer purchase, not simply software, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I may add just to conclude, we did not go to 

anybody called Mr. Guy Montpetit for our computer supplies. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker,  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the Minister of Economic Development.  Mr. 

Speaker, Mr. Minister, is this an example of your policy of Buy 

Saskatchewan?  Is this your example of economic development 

in Saskatchewan?  When it comes time for a large computer 

purchase you trot on down to Florida without even consulting 

with the computer companies in Saskatchewan.  Is this an 

example of your development, economic development strategy, 

in Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I repeat again to the 

member, to all members, that SaskPower is very proud of its 

commitment to buy in this province.  As one of the MLAs from 

Moose Jaw, I note that through SaskPower's increasing 

commitment to secure its supplies from Saskatchewan 

suppliers, we have been able to announce an expansion of the 

Phillips Cable plant in Moose Jaw with new jobs and new 

construction.  That is a result of this corporation's commitment 

to purchase in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question also is 

to the Minister of Economic Development and Trade.  And I'm 

wondering if the minister could inform the House today if this 

was part of his recent trip to the island of Cuba and Mexico and 

other points in the Caribbean, if this particular contract was 

something that was talked about on that trip. 



March 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 89 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say that the 

member asks a question that is very difficult to follow the logic 

of. 

 

But I want to say that the issue of computer software that was 

referred to, obviously as the minister has stated, was purchased 

where it could be purchased because it wasn't available in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to say that in the area of procurement, in SaskPower you 

pick a strange corporation to attack, when their procurement is 

82 per cent, I'm sure the highest of any company in 

Saskatchewan that is purchased here in the province. 

 

I'm not sure what point you're making, but the clear fact is is 

that wherever possible, this corporation has broken down big 

projects, has made it available.  They've helped with buyer 

training for Saskatchewan suppliers.  And that's why they've 

achieved one of the highest levels of any corporation that 

purchase in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 2 -- An Act to recognize Jean-Louis Légaré / 

proposera la première lecture du projet de loi relative à 

reconnaissance de Jean-Louis Légaré 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move that a 

Bill to recognize Jean-Louis Légaré be now introduced and 

read for the first time. 

 

Pursuant to rule 49-2, I'd like to give a brief explanation on the 

object of this Bill.  This Bill is to recognize Jean-Louis Légaré 

for his heroic and compassionate efforts with respect to Chief 

Sitting Bull and his people.  He supplied food, shelter, and 

hunting supplies for 5,000 exhausted and hungry people in 

what is now the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 3 -- An Act respecting Health Districts 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move that An 

Act respecting Health Districts be now introduced and read the 

first time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as it would relate to 

question no. 2 put by the member from Saskatoon Greystone, I 

would like to table that answer.  And further, Mr. Speaker, as it 

relates to questions 3 to 74 put by members, I would ask that 

they be converted to motions for return (debatable). 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  Answer to item no. 2 

has been tabled and the rest are converted to motions for return 

(debatable). 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Ms. Stanger, seconded by Mr. 

Renaud. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is once again a 

pleasure for me to rise and speak on a throne speech in this 

Assembly.  I was just . . . It's my 15th year and I believe it's the 

17th or 18th throne speech because we have had, in the past, 

more than one throne speech in one year. 

 

And I'd like to take this time, Mr. Speaker, to congratulate our 

new Leader of the Progressive Conservatives, the member from 

Thunder Creek. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- And also the assistant leader, the member 

from Morse.  I congratulate them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- And why it's also a pleasure for me to speak 

in this here throne speech because I know that it's only going to 

be about two more and we'll be on that side of the House 

because this is for sure. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Without a doubt, Mr. Speaker, when I spoke 

a year ago on the throne speech, one year ago, I pretty well 

figured it'd be nine years, eight years, before we would be 

back.  But now, without a doubt, this is a one-term government.  

Without a doubt, Mr. Speaker, without a doubt.  No 

government could get away with what they've got away and 

ever, ever be returned to power. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm not going to go back too far, but we're going 

to talk about a few . . . just for a few minutes, on broken 

promises.  This is quite important.  Before the election, they 

made so many promises.  And let's talk about the utilities for 

one.  Very important.  They promised very clearly.  The 

Premier went throughout this province and said: we'll either be 

holding, holding utilities, or lowering.  What did they do? 

 

No new taxes, that was a promise.  And affect everybody.  

They've raised taxes, increased phone rates -- affects 

everybody.  They raised them.  Increased power rates twice in 

one year, Mr. Speaker.  Is this keeping the promise?  Increased 

natural gas rates twice in one year -- affects every individual in 

this province.  Increased SGI (Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance) vehicle insurance second year in a row -- affects 

everybody that 



90 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 1993 

drives a vehicle in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

This is strictly broken promises.  Every one I'm saying here is a 

broken promise.  Fifteen per cent increase in PST (provincial 

sales tax).  Try to go out and fool the people with their taking 

off the 7 per cent and add on 8.  I mean, what a carryings-on.  

People aren't going for this, Mr. Speaker.  This government is 

in serious trouble and people are not going to forget. 

 

An increase on fuel tax -- affects everybody.  An increase of 1 

per cent in corporation income tax; an increase of 1 per cent in 

the corporation capital tax surcharge rate; increase of 25 per 

cent in the corporation capital tax rate; impose user fee for the 

chiropractor services. 

 

(1445) 

 

Associate Minister of Finance has hinted at imposing selective 

harmonization for some items.  Mr. Speaker, it's coming; 

harmonization is coming.  It's coming.  At election time, what 

did we hear?  Harmonization -- it's going to be the death and 

ruination of Saskatchewan.  We knew we were right.  All 

Canadians knew we were right.  But they just don't seem to 

want to accept change when there's all the NDPs out there 

saying how bad it is.  Now they're starting to come across 

knowing that there has to be harmonization. 

 

All these broken promises -- what's their excuse, Mr. Speaker?  

What is their excuse?  They say the excuse is the Tories left us 

big debts.  Isn't that their excuse, Mr. Speaker?  The Tory debt? 

 

More broken promises: they said they'd stand behind rural 

Saskatchewan.  The wellness model -- it'll probably translate 

into rural hospital closures and consolidation of health regions, 

local boards relieved of their duties, and new boards were 

appointed by the Minister of Health.  They were not elected.  

Why is this happening, Mr. Speaker? 

 

When the Minister of Health, when we closed the session here 

last fall, says: oh, there's going to be local autonomy; they'll 

pick their own members.  But I see as the boards are coming 

forth . . . Who are they?  Who are these people?  They're all 

NDP appointees.  Appointed, so they know that it's just a 

liaison between the government to these board members. 

 

They eliminated the Saskatchewan Pension Plan -- just a big 

joke.  And then they put it back in again and thought they'd 

fool people.  You didn't fool one person out there. 

 

You cancelled rural natural gas distribution program and that 

was serious.  I've got a neighbour that already had his money 

down.  Under the Tory government, he had paid.  Paid his 

money, had his receipt, and it froze up in the fall and didn't get 

it dug.  You go by his farm, everybody that drives up No. 11, 

it's the Risk and Hope farm.  He only had to go a few feet for 

$2,600.  Now they want $25,000, these people, to give Risk 

and Hope farm . . . 

 

You people, at the regular time you drive up No. 11 highway 

and look at the Risk and Hope farm, think of that man being 

taken for 25,000 -- $25,000, and he has a  

receipt paid in full for $2,600 from the Tories, to put in natural 

gas and only to go a short distance.  And I could tell you, Mr. 

Speaker, that anybody in that household . . . and I know some 

of their relatives have voted NDP in the past but never again -- 

never again.  They're out campaigning against you.  Never, 

never again. 

 

You reduced municipal revenue sharing, reducing number of 

rural municipalities.  Department leak stated that government 

intending to further reduce funding to RM (rural municipality).  

Well is that helping farmers, Mr. Speaker?  Is this government 

trying to help farmers?  They're not trying to help any farmers.  

They're trying to hinder, I believe.  I do believe they're trying to 

hinder. 

 

Because they know that if they can just hold on, as the member 

from Estevan said the other day, if they could just hold on to a 

few of these here urban seats, and you'll find out in the next 

distribution there won't be an Arm River; it'll be, likely it'll be 

Moose Jaw North.  It just won't be there. 

 

But I'll tell you I'll be there.  I'm getting so . . . I was going to 

quit, but I'm getting so upset with government, I'm going to run 

again.  I've had enough of this.  I don't have to quit at 61 years 

of age.  I don't have to quit, but I was going to.  But what you 

people are doing to my good people in Saskatchewan that I 

represent and you represent, has never happened before since 

1905, since the beginning of this here good province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

It has never happened.  Bills you're bringing forth, Bills you're 

thinking about bringing forth that you hint about, it's never 

happened and we have to fight.  The people that believe in this 

province, believe in the people, have to fight for a cause. 

 

So how long I stay in politics has nothing to do with it.  

Whether I'm an MLA or just a citizen in the province of 

Saskatchewan, I am going to be fighting for the rights of the 

people of this province because this government is fighting for 

their rights, the government's rights and not the people's rights. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like to resume speaking from my seat, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, they also plan to redraw the 

electoral boundaries to reduce the number of constituencies -- 

most likely the rural constituencies.  Now it's just not common 

sense what I understand their thinking.  They're thinking that 

we have to have less seats in rural Saskatchewan and more in 

the urban.  Well that's not correct. 

 

Let's take a look at Calgary.  An MLA in Calgary, the city of 

Calgary, will represent 40 or 50,000 constituents.  But you get 

out in the cattle country and the sheep country, they're only 

four and five.  You tell me why I should represent the people 

from Chamberlain to Saskatoon, which is a long ways.  The 

largest seat in the province of Saskatchewan, other than the two 

northern.  I got the largest square miles and it's an awkward 

seat. 



March 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 91 

And now what you're going to do . . . I can just see what's 

going to happen because Arm River has never been an NDP 

seat -- only twice since 1905.  And we've got it so tied up for 

the Tories that you'll never get it again.  The only way you're 

going to get the seat of Arm River is to eliminate it.  That's the 

only way you'll ever win Arm River is to eliminate the seat.  

I've already heard Moose Jaw North or Saskatoon South is 

going to be Arm River. 

 

This government, Mr. Speaker, also cancelled Fair Share.  

They are going to regret that some day because rural 

Saskatchewan . . . The people out there that voted for this 

government that says Fair Share Saskatchewan wasn't fair, well 

now they're saying, boy, I'll go any place for a job. 

 

Because what do we hear in the throne speech?  The Premier 

says, he says, we're going to have to get rid of a lot of civil 

servants.  Oh, not you people standing out here holding the 

union flags.  We don't mean you, we mean the people above 

you, the out-of-scope people.  Well I'll tell you, those 

out-of-scope people were standing up here in 1991 against Fair 

Share Saskatchewan.  Oh, don't move me to Melfort, don't 

move me to Kinistino, don't move me to Hudson Bay.  But I'll 

tell you, they'd move any place in Saskatchewan because you're 

going to fire them.  That's what you're going to do. 

 

You're a heartless bunch of people.  You sit here and you 

promise you're going to create jobs, and you're eliminating 

them.  You've hit everything you can on a farmer.  You 

increased the pasture rental fees last year.  Breeder fees are up 

31 per cent.  Everything up, up, up.  Cancelled all cash advance 

programs.  Capped fuel rebate for farmers and brought back 

purple gas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, do these people over here think they're smart?  

When people are so happy out there, the farmers, not to have to 

-- and all the fuel dealers -- to contend with purple gas, and 

these guys bring it back?  They're not. 

 

But I really shouldn't be sitting here condemning all these 

things because you're just about liable to correct some of these 

things the last year to try to get elected again.  We should let 

you turkeys just go.  We should just be sitting here. 

 

But that wouldn't be a proper opposition.  When I was sworn in 

here in 1978 as a member of this here Assembly I was sworn to 

look after the King's money.  And so help me, and I'll tell you, 

we did a good job.  And we're going to get to the three and a 

half billion dollars in a hurry here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, laugh as they may, but they better not laugh in 

about 10 minutes here. 

 

They capped the fuel rebate for farmers and brought back . . .  

They don't understand, Mr. Speaker, what they're doing to the 

farmers.  Anything at all . . . The member from Rosetown -- I 

feel sorry for him.  He was dumped out of cabinet because he 

didn't do a good job in Agriculture.  It wasn't his fault.  I've said 

it before.  He got his orders.  He got his orders from the 

minister of Finance. 

 

Now the minister of Finance is gone.  He's not feeling well.  I 

understand.  He may be back; he may not be back. 

 But there's a new Minister of Finance now.  I feel sorry for the 

new Minister of Agriculture because he's going to say, where's 

my money?  There isn't going to be any.  And no money for 

farmers.  There isn't no money for farmers. 

 

The NDP government, and you know what they did a year ago 

in this Assembly -- not quite a year ago but the last session.  

They absolutely come up and they rammed legislation through 

the Assembly, forcing farmers to accept the '92 GRIP (gross 

revenue insurance program).  Now I didn't think that we came 

in this year we'd have to talk about GRIP.  But boy, I'm telling 

you, we'll be talking about GRIP I guess till the end of the 

NDP, till they're never hear them again.  Because they have 

absolutely, literally destroyed and finished many farms in this 

province. 

 

It's not the past minister of Agriculture's fault.  What did they 

do?  The upper echelon says, oh let's just dump the member 

from Rosetown and the blame's all on him.  I literally say, Mr. 

Speaker, that I felt sorry for you because you'd . . .  I really do.  

Because you were told in cabinet -- don't think I didn't sit there 

for four years -- you were told: heh, you get this done; there's 

no money, you get this done, Mr. Minister of Agriculture.  You 

go out there and you tell those Tories, you tell them, tell them 

right now. 

 

But what a fool they made of you, what a fool.  You poor guy.  

Because your own Premier stands up this winter and says: we 

should have stayed with the 1991 GRIP.  I can't believe this, 

that a government could be so mixed up in their thinking. 

 

How could you people . . . One by one as I talked to you over 

this last year, and every one of you people had an excuse for 

the '92 GRIP, how wonderful it was and how terrible the '91 

GRIP was and how wonderful the '92 is.  What are you going 

to say to me now?  What's your views going to be now when 

your own Premier said we should have stuck with the '91?  

What are you going to say when we have our nice, friendly 

chats behind the ropes here?  Are you going to still stick up for 

'91 GRIP as being no good, no good for farmers?  No, sir. 

 

You made a fool of the minister of Agriculture.  And I know 

that you're going to do the same thing with the next Minister of 

Agriculture because the new Minister of Finance and the 

deputy minister of Finance, the member from Swift Current, is 

going say: I'm sorry, Mr. Member from Canora, but we've got 

no dollars; there's no dollars for farmers.  And then people are 

going to hate him.  It won't be his fault; it will be the upper 

echelon in the front row.  So we've got to get . . . We can't get 

enough votes out of 60,000 farmers to get back in again.  We 

only got a few of their votes last time anyway.  We've got to 

hold on to the Regina, Saskatoon, urban vote.  We've got to 

hold on to them. 

 

Yes, the member from Quill Lakes is looking around where 

they come from.  Just take a look at below No. 1 Highway and 

the West where they come from, pretty solid block.  And all the 

ones over on the east side winning by 50 votes and 200 votes 

and . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Yes. 



92 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 1993 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Yes.  Anyway, Mr. Speaker, likely the only 

way you'll get rid of the member from Quill Lakes and the 

member from Arm River is to eliminate his seat and my seat.  

He's hung on a long time.  He must be doing something right.  

He's been my colleague since 1978 and I won't come down too 

hard on him. 

 

The Regina Health Board, they went and cancelled the 

Victorian Order of Nurses contract, claiming it will save 

money.  Government will lose thousands of hours of volunteer 

work and cash donations.  I watched it on television, Mr. 

Speaker.  Very clearly when some of these real nice people 

said that yes, they'll go work for government, but most of them 

are not going to work for government without some money.  

Now some of the ones that can afford it, they're good people, 

they're real good people and they've done a wonderful job out 

there.  Why did you touch it?  Why did you not just leave it the 

way it was? 

 

If people in the city of Regina, and most have voted for you, 

why did you turn off these here . . . I watched it on TV like you 

people did.  These dear old people in these homes, they open 

doors and smiling, and in come these here nice nurses all 

dressed up nice and clean and neat and said, how are you today 

in a conversation that people are lonesome, and they'd come in 

and they'd check their heart and they would check their blood 

pressure and they would fix something on their feet, their 

bunions or whatever, and made them feel good.  And then 

maybe they'd tell the next one, you need to go to the doctor this 

afternoon; you're just not quite feeling as good as you think you 

are. 

 

I mean these are wonderful things they've done.  Why did you 

go eliminate something that was helping your friends?  I can't 

understand it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why did they put a freeze on capital projects, cuts 

in funding on both education and health care?  How could this 

government stand up and tell everybody and sit there and 

snicker at you when you talk about it in the House, smile and 

grin, when they said they'd put . . . there'd be increased funding 

on education and health care, and down she went.  Down it 

went. 

 

Proposed closure on many rural schools -- for example, Elbow.  

I'm just going to talk for a minute about Elbow.  It's very 

important.  It's very important.  It's going to be a very big issue 

in this here House before this is over.  Mr. Speaker, I'm going 

to continue again from my seat. 

 

Mr. Speaker, back in estimates last summer there was a real 

issue between the Minister of Education and myself over the 

funding of Elbow School.  They were building onto the 

Loreburn School -- I'm going to cut this short, but I'm just 

going to bring out a point -- they were building onto the 

Loreburn School and moving Strongfield and Elbow to that 

school for a dollar figure of $438,000. 

 

(1500) 

 

And I've got several evenings, night after night, from June 1 to 

August 6 where I argued with the minister, and finally . . . I'm 

going to read this.  This is where she agreed.  They 

always said that I was wrong in my figures, but finally they did 

say this.  I'm going to read it with your permission, an insert 

from Hansard, August 6, page 2061.  This is myself saying this 

one sentence here: 

 

 I don't understand that.  And I don't understand how come 

that the local school board has been given the figures . . . 

(that there are, that came out at the meeting) . . . the Elbow 

school board was at the Outlook (school) board meeting in 

Outlook.  And an architect said it would cost about 1.4 to $6 

million to move Elbow to that school.  Now that's what's 

wrong here.  The wrong information's getting out.  You can't 

have the taxpayers from Outlook school district, some 

thinking that it's one and a half million and you, the minister, 

says about half a million.  Now that's $1 million out.  But 

that's the way this whole government operates.  The Minister 

of Finance is out millions every day. 

 

And I go on to say -- one more short paragraph: 

 

 So, Madam Minister, I want you to be able to tell me and so I 

can have it on the record for the Elbow people, which is right.  

(Which is right?)  Is it going to cost a half a million dollars, 

or roughly -- whatever that figure was that you gave me -- to 

move Elbow and have the Loreburn School (schools united 

together under one roof from) . . .  K, 1 to 12 plus the 

kindergarten?  What is it going to cost?  Who is right, your 

figure or the Outlook School Division?  Is it one and a half 

million or is it a half a million? 

 

The minister stands up, very clearly, after several hours and 

days of arguing, and says this statement in this Chamber: 

 

 Mr. Chairman, the estimate of the facilities branch was that 

for a capital project for the Loreburn School -- I repeat -- to 

repair the roof and provide relocatable class-rooms which 

would accommodate the transfer of K to 6 students from 

Strongfield, Loreburn, and Elbow, if this was the wish of the 

school division, that that cost would be $438,000. 

 

Then she goes on to say: 

 

 Whether someone else came and said that to build a whole 

new school (for 1.6 million), which didn't include . . . 

 

But whatever they are she called it. I can't get the word here.  

It's kind of been covered over. 

 

 . . . whatever the (hypocrites) . . . are (she says, whatever the 

hypocrites are) would cost more than that, I have no idea. 

 

Now why I bring that out, Mr. Speaker, is because they just put 

out a tender, a tender saying that it's 1.6 million is the tender to 

build on the Loreburn School -- 1.6 million, and they're 

spending money to close two schools.  Spending money to 

close two schools.  I never heard of 



March 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 93 

anything.  There's something wrong here. 

 

The minister thinks that it was built for 438,000, and then I find 

out they got to come to this new budget to get another three or 

four hundred thousand because there's not enough money to go 

around.  They didn't have enough money to move Elbow in yet. 

 

But to make this worse, and when closing off estimates, Mr. 

Speaker, I say to Madam Minister: 

 

 Can I have this commitment (to save time and get off 

estimates) from you  so we can get off this estimate tonight, 

or off my part of it?  Can I have this commitment -- that you 

will sit down with me and we can discuss this personally 

ourselves to get to the bottom of these figures?  Can I have 

that commitment, Madam Minister? 

 

She rises, Mr. Speaker, and says this statement: 

 

 Mr. Chairman, I have no problem whatsoever with making 

that commitment.  I'd be happy to discuss this with the 

member from Arm River . . . 

 

The next thing I read a few months later -- we've never met 

with her -- is $1.6 million contract's been accepted by Graham 

Construction.  They're building the school now. 

 

We're going to get into that and we're going to get into it very 

deeply in this House.  What went wrong here?  The critic for 

education understands this and maybe it'll come up when I'm 

away. 

 

But it's serious and it's going to be discussed and we're going to 

get to the bottom of it because I think there's been some 

misrepresentation, there's been some misleading here -- 

misleading.  And I don't think it's the minister's fault because 

she kept asking her officials that night and got the answers 

from them, and they're the same people that dealt with Outlook.  

So something's not right. 

 

This government, Mr. Speaker, they increased air ambulance 

fees, increased resident income charges for seniors and special 

care homes by as much as $211 a month.  Why do they do 

things like that?  The NDP claimed people were dying on 

hospital lists.  The lists are just as long, if not longer, today. 

 

Let's back up a few years, Mr. Speaker, when we had the 

minister of Social Services as a critic for Health and we had the 

minister of Health was one time the critic for Health.  And if 

we even so much, the Tories, had a nurse take an extra week's 

holiday in July, they'd come down on us as killers of people.  

They stood right here and said we're letting people die. 

 

And I'm in St. Paul's Hospital a week ago today for a test and 

they told me they're closing 160 beds in Saskatoon -- 160 beds.  

Now what is wrong with this government? 

 

I mean I shouldn't talk about something that happened myself, 

but I'm going to.  I was brought in an ambulance on November 

29 to the hospital in Regina, and I couldn't move.  The doctor 

examined me, said I had a ruptured 

disc, and I was paralysed from the hip down.  And he said, I'll 

get you a bed.  And he said, you have to have . . . it'll be three 

or four days before we can get a CAT (computerized axial 

tomography) scan, an operation.  They went away to admit me, 

came back; sorry, they said, there's no bed for you.  Well I 

don't mind that.  I'll wait my turn to die. 

 

But in the same turn, same time, when you're saying there's no 

room, don't say we're going to close 160 beds and 100 over 

here and then close down hospitals in rural Saskatchewan.  

Come on now.  There's no room.  I'm waiting on a bed for quite 

a while to get back into Saskatoon.  No room.  That's all right if 

you weren't at the same time saying that we were wrong in the 

things we did with health. 

 

You people are wrong in what you're doing.  You got the 

wrong agenda.  You're moved off the Tommy Douglas agenda 

where health care is number one in Saskatchewan -- health care 

number one.  I think, Mr. Speaker, that maybe this government 

is going to go like the socialists over in Europe and move right 

in with euthanasia and just let them go.  Let them die.  They're 

heading that way.  They can laugh, but that's the way this 

whole thing's heading. 

 

The socialists in the United States, the same way.  The House 

Leader, the member from Elphinstone, he was down to the 

Clinton nomination. That's probably where this big deal 

happened on what we're talking about today.  He's right in with 

them.  But ah, I see now that they're changing their mind on 

free trade just because Clinton says we've got to go along on 

free trade. 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- I ask for leave to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to the 

member from Arm River for interrupting his address.  I'd like 

to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and through you to all 

members of this Assembly, two guests that are in the west 

gallery.  They are district reps with Sask Wheat Pool: one is 

Warren Crossman who's in Garf Stevenson's district and one is 

Barry Olson who represents my district.  I would like all 

members of the Assembly to welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- They also, Mr. Speaker, made a promise 

that they'd listen to people.  But what did they do?  They 

ignored 



94 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 1993 

all the plebiscite results, ignored chiropractors on user fees.  

They ignored the optometrists on user fees, they ignored nurses 

on cut-backs, ignored farm families on the GRIP changes.  Is 

that listening to the people, Mr. Speaker?  And my friends in 

the Assembly: is that listening to the people?  You've 

double-crossed everybody in Saskatchewan. 

 

There's a member in this House here that used to represent Last 

Mountain-Touchwood.  Gordon MacMurchy is in this House 

now.  And his type of men and people like Wes Robbins would 

never allow this to happen.  I sat with that man for many years 

in this House and there was a man of honour.  I didn't agree 

with his philosophy, but they were men of honour.  But what's 

happened to this young group?  They've lost their honour; 

they've lost their sight; they've lost their goal where they're 

going. 

 

And I'd like just to say, Mr. Speaker, welcome to the member 

from Last Mountain-Touchwood.  He was an honourable man. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- They promised, Mr. Speaker, they promised 

open and honest government; but they had a closed-door Gass 

Commission review.  Patronage appointments to government 

departments and Crowns after promising to eliminate patronage 

-- Mr. Speaker, that's all right.  These people . . . you should be 

entitled to a little patronage.  Mr. Speaker, when they hired 

Jack Messer to come and run SaskPower, that's all right.  They 

kicked out George Hill, that's okay.  And they've hired Walter 

Smishek, Don Ching, the Minister of Justice's daughter.  And 

they've hired Mr. Cowley back.  I think that's all right.  But 

don't say before the election you wouldn't do it.  Don't tell the 

people of Saskatchewan: we will never do like the Tories and 

hire a Tory.  We will just hire whoever's qualified. 

 

Well I'm saying that, Mr. Cowley to his position, whatever I 

see in the paper he was doing, he'd be very qualified.  I agree 

with that.  But don't tell me that if there was a Tory right beside 

him just as qualified, that they would pick him.  We know you 

do it.  Governments do this, but don't be so ridiculous, you 

people, and sit back and try . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Hypocritical. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Hypocritical is a good word for you.  Sit 

there and say to the people of the province of Saskatchewan: 

we don't do it.  Dear Jack Messer, it's nothing to do with his 

politics.  It's nothing to do with him being the minister of 

Agriculture.  It's nothing to do with him being the president of 

the party.  It's nothing to do with him being high profile.  He's 

qualified for the job.  He's qualified for the job. 

 

Come on.  Get off it.  Why don't you admit that you believe in 

political patronage like most governments do.  There's nothing 

wrong with the high profile, the policy-making people 

changing your philosophy. 

 

I think if I was the premier of a province I would be saying 

before elections, or if I was a candidate, I'd say: here's the 

people that will lose their jobs come election.  Executive 

Council, goodbye.  The heads of all departments and 

deputy ministers, goodbye.  But I'd name them so everybody 

would know it when they get their job.  Don't have everybody 

sitting on pins and needles in this province.  Am I going to 

have a job tomorrow?  You got people so upset they don't 

know where they're at, because all you can talk is cut back, cut 

back. 

 

I want to just touch, for a moment . . . I haven't got too much 

more here, Mr. Speaker.  I just want to touch a little bit more 

about what the Premier said this winter about this here '91 

GRIP that made a complete fool of all of us.  And do you know 

what it's did, what it has done out there to the NDP farmers 

themselves that did vote NDP that were supporting you? 

 

They were trying their best out there to try to sell the '92 

program, to stick up for you like the member from Humboldt.  

I was in the Watrous Pool here not too long ago.  And I'll tell 

you, you better listen because I don't think there's one farmer 

that voted for you the last election will vote for you again.  

She's a one term more for you.  Two years, dust.  History. 

 

Some of you honourable people that at least were honest and 

come out and said like . . . You know what you said to me?  

Yes, Gerry, I do believe the '91 GRIP's the best for the farmer. 

 

You said it to me right here.  But I wouldn't go and use your 

name.  I wouldn't do it because that's not . . . that's breaking an 

honour.  But the people that were hypocrites and took off when 

the '91 GRIP being the old . . . being absolutely a nothing, 

Grant Devine thing that's no good -- sorry, Mr. Speaker -- the 

member from Estevan. 

 

Then they always talk, Mr. Speaker, about the third line of 

defence that's been a broken promise from Ottawa.  That's why 

we haven't got any money.  Well the third line of defence -- 

and I was involved heavily when this '91 GRIP was put 

together -- was the third line of defence.  It would have been 

the third line of defence because this government just threw 

about $800 million right down the river, just threw it away by 

cancelling the '91 GRIP. 

 

You don't have the people in Alberta and Manitoba gathering 

in big meetings to condemn their government.  They're having 

a hard enough time there too, but my goodness.  On our farm 

alone between my two sons and myself we're going to be short 

about $90,000 on our farm between '91 and '92, and there's no 

other way out.  There's no other way out.  Because '92 GRIP 

doesn't give you hardly anything. 

 

The third line of defence was this.  And if you had've listened 

to Don Mazankowski and Bill McKnight, those two hon. 

members that would have liked to have done something for 

Saskatchewan farmers but couldn't work with you people.  

They just couldn't do it. 

 

Because what they wanted to do with the '91 GRIP was to 

improve it and then we would have had what we wanted.  And 

what they were going to do to improve it, Mr. Speaker, they 

were going to take whatever your guarantee was of, say, 25, 30 

bushels to the acre -- the farmers here will understand this -- 

whatever your guarantee be, and say it's guaranteed 4.15 a 

bushel.  And 



March 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 95 

that's what you would be guaranteed and not penalize you for 

what you grew over that.  That's what had to be changed and 

then take the premiums off at the elevator and that's what we 

have coming if we had've had a Tory government in this 

province. And you blew it away. 

 

And I'll tell you one thing, that if I had voted Liberal in this 

province I would be having my head awfully low to the ground 

because they caused the problem.  They elected the NDP.  

Nothing against the Leader of the Liberal Party because she's a 

good individual, she does a good job, and she's out there doing 

her best, but with no help whatsoever.  But all it did by her 

working hard is made sure that we elected you people. 

 

(1515) 

 

So it's not going to happen again.  The vote is not going back to 

the Liberal Party.  We are going to be electing a new leader, be 

it one of the two leaders here now, and we are the ones that's 

coming back.  Because all you got to do is go to café to café to 

café to café and see what's happening.  It's not hard.  You 

couldn't buy a vote. 

 

I've got all my friends in my town of Craik where I live that I 

know that some of them, many of them, there's about a 

hundred, for four elections, approximately a hundred -- I'm 

going to go back to my seat, Mr. Speaker -- there's 

approximately a hundred of them voted NDP for four elections 

in a row.  And one by one by one they said, Gerry, I'll never do 

it again.  I'll never do it again. 

 

But the Liberals that I know that forsook me -- I still won -- but 

they up and . . . they won't admit it at all.  They'd come up and 

slap me on the back -- sure glad I stuck with you, Gerry; we're 

with you all the way. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I think the member realizes you 

can't use your own personal name in the debate.  He's done it 

several times and I just want to remind him that that is 

unacceptable in the House. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Yes, I did realize 

that.  Even when I said it I knew I shouldn't have used my own 

name. 

 

Another promise this here government made -- they were going 

to eliminate poverty.  They increased all utility rates, increased 

all taxes, imposed health care costs such as user fees on 

optometrists and chiropractors, tripled deductible for 

prescription plan -- I imagine it's gone in this budget -- 

eliminated senior citizens' heritage program.  Do these actions 

eliminate poverty?  Does that eliminate poverty?  No. 

 

They promised to provide a stable, supportive environment for 

economic growth.  The throne speech last year claimed seven -- 

listen very careful to this now -- the throne speech last year 

claimed 700 companies were planning to relocate or expand in 

Saskatchewan.  Along with these 700 companies, 16,000 jobs 

would be created in Saskatchewan.  Instead, the Saskatchewan 

Bureau of Statistics labour force report states that 

Saskatchewan's labour force decreased by 2,000.  That means 

2,000 jobs disappeared. 

Now what does that mean?  That means that the member from 

Elphinstone, he misled every individual in the province of 

Saskatchewan again.  Everyone was misled again, looking for 

700 . . .  We all knew that couldn't happen.  He was just 

talking, hoping we wouldn't even remember his statement.  But 

well, we're going to remember it for four years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This throne speech that we just went through . . . I've seen 

many throne speeches with very little substance in it because 

nobody gets too much into the throne speech; the budget is the 

main thing we get into.  But this throne speech was kind of a 

joke because the only meat it had in it was from our Tory 

policy.  But the throne speech did promise to maintain -- and 

that's quite a thing, maintain.  Just think of that -- maintain or 

create 8,000 jobs.  Well that's quite a statement.  That's an 

awful difference.  That's a difference between nothing and 

8,000.  So it left themselves quite a . . . it said maintain or 

create 8,000.  What in the world did the throne speech mean?  

Did it mean they're going to create 8,000 or zero?  That's what 

it amounts to.  They don't even know how to write a throne 

speech.  Who's your writers?  Maintain or create. 

 

The NDP track record is not very good in this area, so I've got 

doubts with the member from Elphinstone, the House Leader; 

he can't do this.  He's talking about all these lists of these 

thousands of companies coming into Saskatchewan, but he 

wouldn't let the media see it.  But he probably rolled around . . . 

it's probably a New York directory that he seen when he was 

down with Clinton.  Probably brought the directory back with 

him and he sees all these names of all these companies.  But he 

wouldn't show the directory around long enough to pick out a 

name. 

 

They're just fooling people; holding on.  Because it's not going 

to happen.  But I wish it would.  For the sake of the people of 

Saskatchewan I hope he's right.  But let's sit here a few months 

from now, or six months from now and see if it does happen.  

And I expect the media to be watching these kind of things. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what I've been going through here really is 

broken promises.  We've been talking about broken promises, 

broken promises to no end.  And every time you hear out on 

the street about a broken promise, all you hear is: well the 

Tories caused it by the big deficit.  The Tories caused it by 

their big deficit.  Is that not what you people say? -- the big 

deficit.  You left us in such a mess.  You're still saying it 18 

months later.  Well we can't help it if we have to put your rates 

up.  The Tories left us that big deficit.  You never made a 

promise. 

 

We're going to close on something from Hansard here that's 

very important, that I'm going to be talking about every time 

we ever . . . almost every time I speak in this House for this 

session. 

 

But I want to talk about a few promises.  Just a few.  This 

whole book is full of promises made by us and they were all 

kept before 1982 and after 1982.  But it would take an hour to 

go through that, so I'm just going to talk about a few. 

 

Promise.  Promise made by this government.  Land bank. 



96 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 1993 

Will it disappear?  Yes.  It was a proud day for all of 

Saskatchewan when Eric Berntson stood up on that side of the 

House and said: this was a proud day for Saskatchewan; this 

government will never buy land again. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Farmers owning their own land. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Farmers owning their own land.  And I'd say 

that this six-year lease program of yours is better than nothing.  

But if they had've stuck to what we talked about at election 

time, a lease-to-own gives them initiative.  Get that 

lease-to-own in there.  Don't just talk about . . . because I can 

see what's happening.  It's soon going to be the six years is up; 

the farmer isn't going to have money and somehow the 

government's going to get involved here as landowners or 

something other again.  I can see it happening.  I like to 

prophesy, so I'll just remember that, my friends. 

 

No protection from the 22 per cent interest rates.  This was a 

promise.  And we kept this promise.  You people never kept 

one promise, not one.  Farmers saved over 200 million in 

interest payments through interest reduction programs.  That's a 

promise and we kept it.  No mechanism to help transfer the 

family farm; vendor mortgage protection.  That was a promise 

and we kept it. 

 

When the member from Estevan, the new premier, in April of 

1982, when he said the gas tax would come off, did he break 

that promise?  No.  When he was sworn in as premier out here 

on the step he said, at midnight tonight the gas tax comes off. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Did you people, when you made all those 

promises to get sitting over there with all your members, did 

you stand up here when your Premier was voted in and says, 

tonight at midnight will be all the promises that I made will 

come true tonight?  Instead you've gouged them all.  You've 

gouged every one. 

 

I live up here when I'm in the city at Rainbow Towers.  And 

about half the people, I would say, in Rainbow Towers have 

always had Tory signs in their windows -- and there was less 

last time than before -- and then there's quite a few NDP.  Well 

I'll tell you, there'll never be an NDP vote in Rainbow Towers 

again.  Because they're all seniors.  And I'm telling you, Mr. 

Speaker, that every one of those people on wheelchairs like I'm 

travelling on myself, the people that are well-to-do, the people 

that are just hanging on by a pension, don't ever talk CCF 

(Cooperative Commonwealth Federation) or NDP again.  

Because this government is not the Tommy Douglas 

government.  They have not got a heart.  Tommy Douglas had 

a heart for people but you people got a heart for the NDP. 

 

Now there's some good members over here -- and I could pick 

them out -- some good, solid members that must stand up in 

your caucus and be counted.  Stand up . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well I can tell you, you're not one of them.  

I'm looking at one across here that sure is.  He's an honourable 

member.  I've been with him, known him since 1978.  Stand up 

and be counted in your caucus 

and stop this here government for this wild, crazy stuff they're 

doing.  Stop them. 

 

Or, Mr. Speaker, is that the way of the socialist caucus?  

Maybe it's not the way.  In our caucus I can remember if two or 

three of us would be against something, we could stop it, veto 

it.  My leader, the premier of Saskatchewan for nine years, if he 

couldn't get a consensus, it was down to two or three strong 

people that were absolutely adamant that this was wrong, he 

stopped it.  That's what you call democracy.  Either you people 

that are strong-willed people, either you people that are strong, 

strong-willed can't get your voice heard because you belong to 

a party that two or three from the upper echelon says what it's 

going to be. 

 

Now we know that there's some Bills talked about coming into 

this here House that's been talked about, and I'm not even going 

to bring it up today.  I just do believe that the Minister of 

Justice is getting so many letters on this Bill that he'll pull this 

Bill.  I have faith in him that when it gets down to the 

nitty-gritty, he'll pull it, just as the present Premier in 1980, 

when he was the attorney general, and they brought in a Bill . . 

. Just laughed at 17 Tories, just laughed at us.  Mr. Speaker, I'll 

resume from my seat again.  He laughed at 17 Tories when we 

said it's not right to change the age of consent from 16 to 12.  

Ha!  Well I'll tell you, 17 of us went to work and we got so 

many letters in that he stood up in his seat and he said, there's 

so many people against that I'm going to pull that Bill. 

 

And he did pull that Bill.  And I've got faith that there's enough 

of you people that are strong enough to stand up in what's 

morally right and morally wrong to see that this happens, or 

we're hypocrites just to have that man, the Speaker, stand here 

and give a prayer in this House.  We're hypocrites if we don't 

stand up for what's right.  Don't call ourselves a Christian 

nation and then go out and do things that aren't right.  The time 

has come for you people to stand up and be counted. 

 

Now the last thing I've got to say here is this.  The last thing 

I've got to say, and it's important.  Mr. Speaker, it took me four 

hours one night to get this out of the Minister of Finance.  And 

I never want to hear one NDP member ever get up and say 

again . . . Because I'll go right, straight to your riding and I'll 

send a copy of this to everybody in your riding if you say one 

minute you stand up and say, oh, it's the Tories that got us in 

debt. 

 

Now listen carefully, please, Mr. Speaker, listen.  This goes 

back to Hansard, June 1, 1992.  Here's my last . . . last in my 

paragraph.  I'm speaking to the minister of Finance.  I'm asking 

you a direct question and you, as a minister of Finance, 

shouldn't have to ask anybody because if I was the minister of 

Finance and put a budget together in 1982 and the government 

falls on it, I would have dreamt those figures for the rest of my 

life. 

 

But oh no, he couldn't remember them.  For four days he 

couldn't remember.  But we promised -- we all heckled to him 

here -- if you don't give the member from Arm River this 

figure, we'll be on this Appropriation Bill for days and days 

and days.  What did he do?  He had his whole front row mad at 

him when he got up and said this:  "I can give it to you right 

now," he says. 



March 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 97 

 All told, when you consider the . . . 

 

And he was shaking when he said this, my friends: 

 

 All told, when you consider the sinking funds which are 

provided, and the member will know what that's all about, the 

gross debt for the province of Saskatchewan in 1982 was 

$3.5 billion. 

 

Now why do we have to listen to this here?  And I challenge 

the press . . . Where are they?  Because I carried that in my 

pocketbook when I would tell people on coffee row about this 

$3.5 billion.  Oh, Gerry, that can't be true.  Somebody's giving 

you a bunch of malarkey.  I've pulled this out of my 

pocketbook and I've used it so many times it's worn out.  But 

I'll tell you, they believed it when they read it. 

 

So don't one of you talk about this here big Tory debt.  Because 

I go on to say down here, you take the 3.5 billion, and at that 

time interest was high, and you use a multiplier effect and 

you've got your $15 billion in 1993.  You've got it right there. 

 

But you guys are trying to ride high, but you're not going to 

make it.  Because I can promise you right now, I may not be 

here on the first Appropriation Bill because I'm leaving for 

maybe three weeks to a month. But I'll be here for one of them, 

Mr. Speaker, I'll be here.  And the Minister of Finance is going 

to say those very same words or that Appropriation Bill will 

never pass if it takes months -- never pass. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do believe that this is going to be a tough 

session for us, and I mean tough.  Because if you thought these 

10 people sitting here . . . And I'm going to give some credit 

also to the member of the Liberal Party.  We're all opposition 

members sitting here.  I'll give her some credit.  We are going 

to be 11 people that's going to make you people wish you never 

were born.  You're going to wish you never, ever heard of an 

NDP ticket.  You're going to be so ashamed of yourselves, 

you'll be crawling out the back doors. 

 

(1530) 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to close on a solemn note.  I'd like 

to close on a very sincere message.  We'll just talk about 

something else for one moment.  I'm going to be gone for an 

operation.  I have to have a disc . . . I had a disc removed from 

my back in early December, and they found out there's a piece 

of disc left in here.  I'm leaving tomorrow to Saskatoon, and on 

Monday they're going to go in and remove that disc.  So it 

could be approximately a month before I get back. 

 

But I do want to thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the privilege you 

did and your people -- I understand the Leader of the Liberal 

Party and the House Leader -- is to give me the right to speak 

sitting from my seat and standing up.  And I want to thank all 

the people that were so kind to me in the halls.  They said, 

what's happened, Mr. Muirhead?  And I felt sincerity. 

 

I had some of your members that phoned me at home. 

And I do believe that.  I do believe that when you take all the 

politics out of life, we're still individuals and we still have a 

little feeling for one another. 

 

I just say, let's have a good session.  God bless you all.  Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

take this opportunity to acknowledge the outstanding and 

honourable service of the Lieutenant Governor.  The Right 

Honourable Sylvia Fedoruk symbolizes dignity, achievement, 

compassion, and commitment.  And we've been blessed to have 

the tireless service of such an accomplished and caring person 

in this most respected role. 

 

And this is the first time as well, Mr. Speaker, that I'm able to 

wish you well in this new session.  I respect your position and 

the challenges that you face in ensuring a sense of fairness in 

this Assembly. 

 

In my responsibilities as a member of the Legislative Assembly 

for Saskatoon Greystone, the largest urban constituency in 

Saskatchewan, I have extensive contact with a diverse 

constituent population.  The interests of my constituents range 

from small business to child care to farming and university 

research.  The people who pay me through their taxes to 

represent them are people who work as doctors and lawyers, 

store clerks and carpenters, and some do not work at all -- 

many of those because there's no work available.  Some are 

retired; some are on welfare. 

 

I represent people who speak English and French, Ukrainian 

and Chinese and Arabic.  Almost half of my 12,000-plus 

constituents voted Liberal, but I represent everyone, regardless 

of their political affiliation, with the same level of commitment.  

The economic status, race, religion, or position on an issue 

does not influence the level of service I attempt to provide, 

because each of those individuals employs me to do a job, and 

each of those individuals has expectations of me as an MLA. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is what life is all about -- expectations.  

People spend their entire lives trying to meet the expectations 

which they or others have set for them.  Politics is about 

creating expectations.  Good government is about meeting 

them.  The members of the New Democratic Party in this 

House did an outstanding job of creating expectations during 

the election campaign of 1991.  It is most regrettable that those 

same members have been so ineffective in meeting those 

expectations at every turn. 

 

An election is about trust.  It is about signing a contract with 

the electorate -- a simple handshake deal.  And politicians 

shake many hands during a campaign.  The contracts made are 

just like any other contract.  If I say, you vote for me and I will 

do the following, and you shake my hand, we have a deal.  If 

politicians appear on television or before live audiences and 

make promises, then those politicians should respect their 

commitments as they would any other verbal contract.  I 

believe in it so strongly that I wish there were legislation that 

would render it illegal to make promises during an election 

campaign if one cannot or does not keep these promises 



98 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 1993 

once in office. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, the NDP government created high 

expectations.  And it is because of their not meeting those 

expectations that so many people in our province feel betrayed 

-- betrayed by a Conservative administration that misused and 

abused the hard-earned taxpayers' dollars while in power, and 

the current administration for misleading the public when they 

knew the cupboard was bare. 

 

On page 1 of the Speech from the Throne, the Premier and his 

government talks of urging the people to join in, and I quote, ". 

. . a journey to right the wrongs of the past . . ."  Mr. Speaker, if 

the NDP had been serious, the first legislation introduced 

would have included a code of ethics, anti-corruption 

legislation, fixed election dates and budget dates, and 

free-standing votes in this legislature.  Price tag, zero; cost to 

the taxpayer, zero; value, a major step to restore faith in our 

political system. 

 

And what has this NDP government implemented after more 

that 15 months?  Zero.  That is not a commitment to political 

reform, Mr. Speaker; that is a commitment to a calculated 

political agenda which puts politics and political best interests 

far ahead of the interests of the people of our province, the 

taxpayers of this province.  This is not asking people to join in 

a journey, Mr. Speaker.  It is taking people for a ride. 

 

In the election of 1991, there were a great many handshakes 

exchanged, many promises made to people in exchange for 

their support.  Far too many citizens and taxpayers have been 

left feeling that those handshakes weren't worth much after the 

NDP government took office.  And I regret that I must agree. 

 

And now, 15 months after the election, I'm responding to a 

third Speech from the Throne and I'm wondering whatever 

happened to the value of a handshake. 

 

This government talks about investor confidence.  The Finance 

ministers have talked about maintaining the confidence of New 

York brokers and bond dealers.  The Economic Development 

minister talks about needing the confidence of foreign 

investors.  But who's talking about restoring the confidence of 

the Saskatchewan people, the people who pick up the tab for all 

of this talk? 

 

How can this government show such blatant disrespect for the 

trust and the confidence they sought from people just 15 

months ago?  People did not expect much from the first NDP 

Speech from the Throne in November of 1991 -- I didn't either 

-- and they did not get much. 

 

People expected far more from the second Speech from the 

Throne, and there were some very broad statements made.  The 

government made promises which again raised the expectations 

of the people -- statements about improving the safety net 

program, Mr. Speaker; about reforming government; clearing 

out a direct path for health care and education; and creating an 

economic plan and providing jobs. 

 

People became for a brief period of time cautiously optimistic.  

In fact, I believe that was the term used by the 

Association of Saskatchewan Taxpayers after the throne speech 

in April of 1992.  People were cautiously optimistic that 

something would actually change for the better after they 

ousted the incompetent previous administration. 

 

But that cautious optimism quickly dissipated after the first 

budget.  Confidence surrendered to uncertainty.  Optimism was 

replaced by cynicism.  Trust gave way to feelings of betrayal. 

 

Saskatchewan people have become angry and frustrated with 

the absence of a comprehensive strategy.  They are infuriated 

with the complete inability of this administration to deliver on 

its promises to meet the expectations it created in people some 

15 months ago. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, it has been 15 months of having 55 

MLAs sit on the government side of this Assembly.  Taxpayers 

have been paying them and all of their advisers and all of their 

secretaries and consultants and ministers and deputy ministers 

and economists and analysts and political hacks for 15 solid 

months. 

 

We've seen the cabinet increase from 12 to 19 just to satisfy 

political rumblings in the New Democratic Party.  We've seen 

portfolios tossed around like hot potatoes.  Energy, agriculture, 

gaming, and finance -- people can't get away quickly enough 

from the heat this government is taking in every major policy 

area.  Not because they are making tough decisions.  The 

ministers are under fire because they are making thoughtless 

decisions -- thoughtless decisions like initially cancelling 

FeedGAP (feed grain adjustment program), delaying the 

signing of the AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.) deal, and 

fumbling the ball on agriculture and gaming and health care 

and taxation. 

 

And what do we have before us now, in the midst of the 

economic, social, and agriculture crisis facing our province?  

Well we have yet another throne speech -- another throne 

speech filled with empty rhetoric.  We have vague allusions to 

soon-to-be established committees to examine the viability of 

future projects. 

 

This is it?  This government spent hundreds of millions of 

dollars on salaries and wages and resources to produce certain 

results, and nothing recognizable has emerged from any of it.  

Thousands, thousands are out of work; hundreds of farm 

families are losing their farms; businesses are closing; "for 

lease" signs are the fastest selling commodity in commercial 

real estate, and we get twelve and a half pages of possibilities 

for action from a government more than a third way through its 

mandate. 

 

I am quite simply astounded, and very, very disappointed.  I 

truly cannot express how inadequate this document is to 

address the serious problems facing every citizen in our 

province of Saskatchewan today.  And it is beneath my lowest 

expectations. 

 

The NDP government spoke of bringing new hope to the less 

fortunate.  Every day, Mr. Speaker, I get calls at my office 

from the less fortunate in my constituency, and I get calls from 

the less fortunate in the constituencies of the members opposite 

who have completely given up on 



March 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 99 

what they thought was their government. 

 

And believe me, Mr. Speaker, these people do not have any 

new hope.  They have no hope at all.  Not only has this 

government cut basic necessities out from under the people 

through cuts in health care, increases to every utility and every 

item taxed under the E&H (education and health) spectrum, 

they have scared people in the province into program paranoia 

and deficit depression by preaching doom and gloom 

everywhere they go. 

 

What is wrong with them?  Can they not see the pain and the 

instability that they are inflicting on people who do not know 

how they're going to pay the rent and the grocery bill, never 

mind the provincial deficit and debt?  Do the members opposite 

not spend any of their time taking calls from taxpayers in this 

province and meeting with the people whom they have further 

placed in desperate situations? 

 

They are not just constituents who are hurting, not just mine; 

these are their constituents -- their neighbours, the people they 

shook hands with in the last election and made personal 

commitments to deliver a strategy which would produce 

results.  So far the results have been very negative. 

 

The throne speech says that: 

 

 Of the hundreds of new, expanding and potential business 

projects in the province (none of which are identified), more 

than half are outside Regina and Saskatoon. 

 

This is empty, unsubstantiated rhetoric, Mr. Speaker. But this is 

fact: in one year thousands upon thousands upon thousands of 

people have lost their jobs in Saskatchewan.  Even if what the 

NDP government says is true about new jobs, we would barely 

get back to where we were before they took power in 

November of 1991. 

 

The government proudly boasts of the implementation of the 

community bond program which was proposed initially not by 

the Conservatives, as they would have you believe, but by the 

Saskatchewan Liberal Party in the 1986 election.  

Unfortunately the taxation policies of the New Democratic 

government have been so brutal that many bond issues will 

experience the same difficulty in closing as the city of 

Saskatoon did recently, because investors have been losing 

faith in this government's ability to generate economic 

development and create the necessary wealth to expand the tax 

base. 

 

The Saskatchewan government has long been in a state of 

euphoria over the response to the Saskatchewan savings bonds 

issue which was floated last year at a 7 per cent yield to 

investors.  I would ask, Mr. Speaker, that some of the members 

perk up their ears at this point because obviously they didn't 

know about this. 

 

The reality surrounding those bonds is that the government 

offered an interest rate at 7 per cent when the competitive yield 

of this type of issue was running between 6.5 and 6.75 per cent.  

That interest rate differential, along with a very expensive, 

glossy marketing program, cost the people of Saskatchewan not 

hundreds of dollars, not thousands of dollars, but millions of 

dollars. 

 

(1545) 

 

When the bond issue was floated, Mr. Speaker, the government 

made a decision between politics and good business.  Good 

business dictates that you don't give any better deal than you 

have to.  Politics says, give away whatever you have to in order 

to improve your image. 

 

Experts agree that the government was at least one-quarter 

point, possibly a half a point higher in the interest rate offered 

than was necessary.  Therefore in its eagerness to guarantee 

overwhelming success in the bond issue, success which the 

NDP tried to pass off as support for government policy, the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan are now going to be paying out 

millions of dollars in unnecessary interest.  Granted, 

Saskatchewan investors will be the beneficiaries of some of 

that interest, but much of it is going to be paid to investors 

outside of our very province. 

 

There's another aspect to this, Mr. Speaker, which often goes 

unnoticed.  When times are good, Saskatchewan had a good 

supply of lenders and money markets we could tap into for 

financing.  As things got progressively -- I pardon the pun 

please -- worse. The number fell to about 25.  Now those 25 

major players are watching every single move that this 

government makes. 

 

Deficit reduction is only one aspect.  They review the savings 

bond issue and they ask, what would be the reasons for setting 

the yield rate at a quarter to a half per cent higher than 

necessary?  Is this bad management, more politics, or are they 

desperate to attract capital? 

 

The worst message that we in this province can convey to 

domestic and international money markets through errors like 

this is that we are desperate.  If money markets and financiers 

think that the NDP is making silly deals and floating bond 

issues at inflated interest rates, one of two things will happen.  

They may refuse to deal with us or they will see us as more 

desperate than we should be perceived.  That could put us in a 

precarious position for paying more for our credit. 

 

The government's memory is not only distorted on its role in 

the community bond issue and the Saskatchewan savings bond 

issue.  There are other perspectives which seem a bit skewed as 

well.  Obviously short on future promise, the government even 

uses the traditional look-ahead format of the throne speech to 

fondly pat itself on the back for the AECL deal.  This was a 

deal, Mr. Speaker, for which all credit must go to the business 

community and other supportive organizations who refused to 

let this government kill it while under pressure to put politics 

ahead of progress in Saskatchewan yet again. 

 

And the government's obsession with keeping its own party 

back benches in line sent waves of instability undulating 

through the research and investment communities while they 

were watched to see if Saskatchewan's NDP government would 

ever make up its mind on nuclear research and uranium mining. 



100 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 1993 

They're still watching nervously on the second count. 

 

The height of contradiction appears on page 3 of the speech, 

Mr. Speaker, when the NDP attempt to convince us that the 

expensive little booklet entitled Partnership for Renewal -- A 

Strategy for the Saskatchewan Economy, actually sets out to, 

and I quote: 

 

 . . . create a positive environment for economic renewal, to 

build on existing . . . strengths and to seek full employment. 

 

Obviously the authors of those words are not familiar with the 

onslaught of taxes and increased costs levied by the NDP on 

businesses and consumers, all of which are guaranteed by even 

the most amateur economists to have the opposite effect on our 

economy. 

 

In keeping with the NDP philosophy of quote, government 

knows best, end of quote, the government has named a 

Provincial Action Committee on the Economy.  If government 

wanted a true working relationship with business, why not have 

the chambers of commerce and other recognized institutions of 

free enterprise elect their own representatives to such a 

committee?  And if government were truly serious about taking 

instead of giving advice, perhaps it would be wise to give these 

committees some authority to implement their 

recommendations as well. 

 

I do commend the government for cleaning up The Economic 

Development Act.  I suggest that there are many others which 

could be looked at with that objective in mind. 

 

I'm sure that the many communities who depend upon or could 

benefit from increased tourist activity will be pleased to hear 

that tourism will be, and I quote, "a key part of Saskatchewan's 

economic future."  Actually it is already a key part of our 

economic present, and I wonder if the Department of Tourism 

has been doing . . . what they have been doing for the past 15 

months, if the government is only now proposing, and I quote 

again: 

 

 . . . (to) explore options for future partnerships in developing 

and marketing tourism opportunities. 

 

In case the government has not noticed, there is a sense of 

crisis, a sense of urgency, a sense of emergency in our 

province, about jobs and economic development.  Since the 

New Democratic government has deliberately created what I 

call deficit depression, perhaps the government could 

deliberately put some of the members opposite from the back 

benches to work exploring future options, not in the future, but 

right now.  Saskatchewan may be next year country, Mr. 

Speaker, but this government should not interpret that to mean 

that we can wait until next year for something positive to begin 

to happen in our province. 

 

The government acknowledges in the throne speech that we are 

more dependent on international trade than any other province.  

So what did they do to exhibit that understanding?  Well they 

closed the trade offices overseas.  They didn't get rid of the 

Conservative patronage appointments with little to offer.  And 

have 

these trade offices become effective?  No.  They closed them.  

They were so ignorant of international trade protocol that they 

didn't even know, Mr. Speaker, as people have told me from 

Hong Kong, that they actually insulted the people and the 

officials of Hong Kong by doing so in the manner in which 

they did it. 

 

In the meantime, groundwork previously laid by companies is 

being threatened because there are no agents of the 

Saskatchewan government there to open diplomatic doors for 

entrepreneurs trying to establish working relationships with 

offshore trading partners.  Unless the Minister of Economic 

Development plans to commute between Europe, the Pacific 

Rim, South America, and this legislature, I would suggest that 

this government rethink its decision to leave Saskatchewan's 

foreign trade in the hands of the federal trade representatives or 

the minister's travel agent for that matter. 

 

There are a great many jobs to be created through overseas 

trade, but we must have competent and experienced trade 

emissaries who can establish and -- mark this -- maintain 

continuous rapport with our contacts around the world. 

 

While the government assures us that it will continue to 

develop a comprehensive energy strategy, I remind the Premier 

and his cabinet that a great deal of time and scarce taxpayers' 

money has already been invested to date on reports, 

commissions, and studies which have so far not translated into 

any results. 

 

And now to the topic of agriculture, Mr. Speaker. I don't know 

who organized the priorities in the throne speech, but I would 

suggest in the future that agriculture come under "a"; not after 

tourism and foreign trade, not after . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Why is the member on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. Cline: -- I wonder if I might ask for leave to introduce 

guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, seated in the west 

gallery are three members of the IBEW (International 

Brotherhood of Electrical Workers) Local 2067 bargaining 

committee: the chairperson, Gordon Gunoff, and members 

Gordon Laverdiere and Ken Wawryk.  And those gentlemen 

are putting a lot of time in on behalf of their members at a very 

challenging time and I'm sure that all members of the 

legislature would join with me in welcoming them to our 

Chamber today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

(continued) 



March 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 101 

Ms. Haverstock: -- The degree of importance being placed on 

agriculture in Saskatchewan is simply unacceptable, Mr. 

Speaker.  The Premier of our province should be making a 

daily call to the Prime Minister of Canada.  He should have 

long ago called a prairie agriculture summit to develop a 

solution for the problems of our prairie region. 

 

But what has the NDP done?  After three speeches from the 

throne we find the government calling for a, quote, national 

solution, although no leadership has ever been shown by the 

Premier or his Agriculture ministers to initiate such a solution. 

 

The government says it will do all within its power to rebuild 

the province's farm economy.  What exactly does that mean?  

Raising taxes?  Dragging their feet on safety net revisions?  

This government, which has broken every promise it made to 

farmers since day one, is now insisting that, and I quote: the 

federal government stand by its promises and fulfil its 

responsibilities. 

 

And I ask what this government is proposing as a solution if 

Ottawa were to agree to contribute.  Do they have a plan 

already in place for a new safety net program?  Have the 

producers approved it through a producer-elected committee in 

keeping with the wishes of the 12,700 farmers gathered at Sask 

Place?  Has the government circulated the many proposals 

which have been developed by producers to allow farm 

families to consider the many options and offer their feedback?  

Does this government even care whether farm families have a 

say in what program will eventually determine the way they 

farm their land or if they can continue to farm their land? 

 

Where is the process?  Where is the mechanism?  Where is the 

proposal that Saskatchewan is taking to Ottawa, where political 

parties are gearing up for an election, willing to talk about 

making a commitment?  How does the Minister of Agriculture 

propose to negotiate with Ottawa when he hasn't got an 

approved bargaining position from the farmers of the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

The government speaks of the devastating effect of the falling 

net income on Saskatchewan farms and the further predicted 

drop in 1993.  I wonder if the government has made the 

connection between falling net income and increases in fuel 

tax, sales tax on fertilizer, seed, machinery, parts, and family 

living expenses such as power, heat, telephone, and insurance.  

Surely the government is aware that net income is calculated 

after expenses and that its own taxation policies are directly 

responsible for some of that income shortfall. 

 

I had a wonderful letter the other day from one of my 

constituents in rural Saskatchewan.  And I call them all my 

constituents, you see, because there's so many people who 

simply won't talk to the parties they used to support, so they 

call my office. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, you wouldn't believe the amount . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . I'm so grateful, Mr. Speaker, that 

they're actually listening when they're trying to act like they 

weren't.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, you wouldn't 

believe the amount of contact we have with people who used to 

support the members across from me and on either side of me.  

I really am never really alone in here.  Everyone in this 

Assembly is doing a great job of increasing the Liberal support 

and I'm actually enjoying that. 

 

In any case, I received a letter from a constituent from D'Arcy, 

Saskatchewan, who had taken the time to explain what many 

here should be reminded of.  So I'm going to take advantage of 

some of this time I have today to share this with you, Mr. 

Speaker, and the members of this Assembly. 

 

This young farmer writes: 

 

 I am and have been an RM councillor for 11 years and a 

school board trustee for seven.  I'm currently arrangements 

chairman for Ducks Unlimited, member of Saskatchewan 

Bison Association, Saskatchewan Game Farmers 

Association, and numerous other groups.  I helped to 

organize the Rosetown rally. 

 

 With my wife and four children, I farm six sections of land, 

have 50 cows, 20 bison, and 15 elk.  We diversified in 1986 

into livestock.  I am presently negotiating with the Farm 

Credit Corporation, after receiving foreclosure notices on 

four sections of land last week.  I am 38 years old.  Now that 

I've introduced myself to you (he writes) I'd like to share 

some thoughts with you. 

 

 First, I detest having to seek help from other sources, 

especially government plans.  However, it would seem 

appropriate at this time in Canadian agriculture to do so as 

the market-place is not adequate for our needs. 

 

(1600) 

 

He goes on to talk about the world trade situation and how 

farmers in Canada are quite defenceless, that people must 

support agriculture during this time.  And he continues.  And 

this is what I would like for all of us, Mr. Speaker, to be able to 

take as a message to all of those in Canada who don't 

understand the contributions of agriculture to our nation and 

our province.  And I quote him: 

 

 We must convince the country that we are really just asking 

for our own money back.  Let me explain.  I did some Jethro 

mathematics the other day to try and get a handle on how 

much tax my farm produces for all three levels of 

government each year.  I was very surprised at my findings. 

 

 First of all, I pay about $12,000 property tax to my RM, of 

which $8,000 goes to education, and another $1,000 to 

hospital 

 

 I pay sales tax on the majority of items that my farm and 

family requires to operate.  That amount is 8 per cent of 

$150,000, or another $12,000.  My farm uses $25,000 worth 

of fuel each year, of which 90 cents a gallon is tax.  That 

equals another 



102 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 1993 

$11,000.  My chemical and fertilizer run at about $30,000 per 

year, on which a hidden tax is paid.  The tax is paid by the 

company but passed on to me, which is about $7,500.  On an 

average year I pay about $3,000 in income tax, although I 

won't pay anything this year. 

 

 I get my GST (goods and services tax) back, but the products 

I use have hidden GST which is paid by someone else and 

passed on to me, so I estimated this to be about $2,000 per 

year.  The total is approximately $47,500 per year, and this 

about equals $13 per acre on my farm. 

 

 I also pay $3,000 for licences; $500 a year for my radio 

licences.  My GRIP premium was $14,000, and my crop 

insurance 3,600 acres . . . and my crop insurance was 

$14,000.  All of this money too goes to government coffers.  

Another $31,000 or $8.50 per acre. 

 

 My farm also generates huge amounts of money for people in 

Canada.  My farm delivered five cars of barley to the 

Canadian Wheat Board.  That's 18,000 bushels.  According to 

the Wheat Board, that would make about 6 million bottles of 

beer.  But if we assume that 90 per cent of that barley were 

exported, I would still contribute to the direct production of 

600,000 bottles of beer on the domestic markets. 

 

 Do governments tax beer?  You bet.  A conservative estimate 

would put $500,000 directly into government coffers.  Now 

that's a small "c" conservative so we can trust the figures. 

 

 To produce this finished product the truckers, the malters, the 

bottle manufacturers, the cardboard box people, ad agencies, 

Liquor Board employees, hotel owners, bar maids, bottle 

collectors, and even the .08 machine technicians all pay 

income tax that would not have been paid if my farm had not 

grown wheat to be shipped off to Timbuctoo.  What figure 

should be put on this most impressive list? 

 

 By the way, I forgot the taxes paid by the seed developers at 

the U of S that develop the good malt barley.  Also the ag 

reps, the secretaries, and the brothers-in-law of politicians at 

the Canadian Grain Commission.  Let's not leave out Prairie 

Malt's owners either.  Garth probably pays a little income tax. 

 

 Anyway, my point is clear.  My farm contributes huge 

amounts of cash to my country's lawmakers.  All this I will 

put at $100,000, which is conservative.  That gives a total of 

$188 per acre in taxes paid, generated one way or the other.  I 

want at least $30 an acre back, thank you very much. 

 

 I think this course of action would be much more successful 

and more gratifying than simply asking for money.  I know it 

will take some time for my thoughts and proposals to take 

effect.  It took me three days to write this letter, Lynda 

So, Mr. Speaker, I ask the Minister of Agriculture: when do we 

begin to involve farmers like this in developing our approach to 

negotiations?  The commitment "to engage farmers and their 

organizations in a positive dialogue leading to the adoption of a 

new agriculture strategy" is very little and very late. 

 

Priorizing producer input into the agriculture crisis should have 

been the first thing on the table after political reform in 1991.  

And this government should be ashamed and it should be 

embarrassed by the colossal abandonment of their primary 

obligation.  It is simply not good enough to adopt a 

government-knows-best attitude once again and appoint a new 

Farm Support Review Committee.  Farmers are getting ready 

to seed.  And the government is now sending out another 

travelling road show to gather input and scurry back behind 

closed doors to emerge with another made-in-government 

proposal. 

 

Has this government not learned anything from last year's 

bell-ringing experience?  If the government wants cooperation, 

they must let members from all parties be involved.  And I urge 

the government to set up an all-party committee to work with -- 

and I quote -- a producer-elected committee to allow them to 

jointly recommend directives to the Minister of Agriculture.  

Whatever the committee decides will still have to pass in this 

Assembly, but at least we will emerge with an agriculture plan 

that is supported by the majority of farmers, not the majority of 

NDP MLAs. 

 

The government seems to want to do the right thing, but their 

actions continually contradict their words.  They say that they 

want to create jobs, and yet they began by cancelling different 

things that would lose jobs.  The government claims that it 

wants to develop an efficient, effective, and affordable 

transportation system.  However the government . . . the NDP 

are not willing to take an open-minded, unprejudiced look at 

the existing transportation system that goes beyond paying the 

producer or paying the railway. 

 

One of the most serious concerns arises from the NDP 

approach to long-term strategic research versus short-term 

demonstration projects.  Without the money which was pirated 

from the Agriculture Development Fund to reinstate FeedGAP, 

we do not have the funds to sustain long-term strategic research 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

I can't believe that the positions that are now gone from our 

own College of Agriculture happen to be those in the long-term 

research of sustainable agriculture.  It's absolutely astonishing. 

 

I checked the Partnership for Renewal paper to see what role 

agricultural research and agriculture in general will play in 

economic renewal.  But agriculture didn't even merit its own 

paragraph.  The only action taken by this government so far 

with respect to research has been to butcher the Ag 

Development Fund and to disband the department of science 

and technology.  Hardly signals that we're getting ready for the 

21st century or that we're preparing to become centres of 

excellence in research and development where agriculture is 

concerned. 



March 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 103 

If the province of Saskatchewan can show a true commitment 

to developing a solid agriculture strategy which has the support 

and commitment of all of the majority of the players, then we 

can take a leadership role in developing a prairie agriculture 

strategy to take to Ottawa and use the three prairie provinces -- 

the producers, the political parties from across these Prairies -- 

so that our demands can be heard. With all-party input and 

producer approval we will have an agriculture plan which can 

withstand the test of federal and provincial elections because 

long-term agriculture policy will then react to changes in the 

market-place, not in the polling booths. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, the throne speech really is very short on 

substance.  And I am quite shocked that a government which is 

preparing to deliver what appears to be a very bitter-pill budget 

would not do a better job of offering more concrete plans in the 

Speech from the Throne.  The degree of vagueness is most 

disturbing. 

 

And we pick this up again in the section on health care.  People 

were initially anxious to hear about the wellness model.  And 

in spite of their understandable apprehension, I think they did 

have a very open mind about the concept at the outset.  

Unfortunately the government's blurred vision of health care 

has caused considerable upset in our province.  Health boards 

are making decisions in a vacuum-like environment.  And this 

has gone on for 15 months -- not sure what level of funding to 

expect, not sure who will be on the board, not sure whether to 

amalgamate or hold off in case the government changes its 

plans.  And 15 months and 3 days after taking office, after 

hundreds and hundreds of hours of meetings by concerned 

citizens, the minister holds a news conference to give another 

tidbit to the public. 

 

This is a very risky and most unfair way to treat the people -- to 

treat the people who work so hard to deliver efficient medical 

care in Saskatchewan and particularly in rural areas where it's 

very challenging.  I fail to see how a vision for health care, 

wellness, and health reform is such a secret thing, that the 

people to whom this system belongs will be unable to see more 

than an ad campaign until it is finished.  It reminds me too 

much of the fable of "The Emperor's New Clothes". 

 

This is our health care system, Mr. Speaker.  People deserve to 

see the stages, understand what is expected of them, participate 

in the process, where the government can say: this is where 

we're going; this is stage one; this is stage two; this is stage 

three; and this is where we are, in meticulous detail, before any 

changes are made. 

 

People want to be participants in the process and they will 

know how to adjust to change, the fear of the unknown, if in 

fact they know that the government is taking them someplace 

where they actually know they're going.  We do not evolve 

through these stages, Mr. Speaker.  They must be carefully 

planned and implemented with full knowledge and support of 

the participants. 

 

I was pleased to read the approach to education and find that 

the government is working to keep the focus of the education 

system on the child.  I made it clear in my 

speech to the Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation last week that 

the focus must remain fixed on the child if we are to produce 

well-balanced adults for the future.  Unfortunately there seems 

to be some difficulty with communications from the provincial 

level to the local level. 

 

It's fine to talk about keeping the focus on the child, but in 

reality good schools in our province are closing and this is not 

related at all to the numbers of children in the school.  

Decisions made by the provincial government are passed down 

to the local boards and funding cuts are shifting the focus from 

the child to the bottom line, when the child should be the 

bottom line and the top priority item of education. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I get a tremendous number of calls from 

university students trying to struggle through school on student 

loans.  There may have been a time when students could 

survive on the provisions of student loans, but the fact is that 

there just isn't enough money available to students through 

loans, forgivable grants, research fellowships, and employment 

income during the summer.  The cost of rent, telephone, 

utilities, and car insurance is up for students just as it is for 

every one of us.  The additional sales tax affects students just 

like everyone else.  Tuition costs have gone up, the price of 

books has risen, and all taxes are higher than ever before. 

 

There are fewer summer employment opportunities, and 

prospects for graduates are ever diminishing.  And as I 

commented yesterday in question period, Mr. Speaker, 20 per 

cent of our young people between the ages of 20 and 24 are 

without work.  In eight weeks university students are going to 

be leaving their classes and searching for employment. 

 

What do we see in this throne speech to address those 

problems, serious problems which will determine whether our 

young people stay here or have to leave our province?  The 

speech does contain very, very few hopeful words for the 

young people of our province. 

 

It does not contain any glimmer of encouragement for the 

parents with whom I met from Grosvenor Park School, who 

watch in frustration and helplessness as a good school, a model 

program, and a viable student base, is likely to be moved from 

their neighbourhood to prop up a sagging student body many 

blocks away. 

 

I commend the initiative of the minister on the action plan for 

children, but this really appears to be a re-launching or a 

delayed launching of a program that was promised in the last 

session.  Children in this province also need an advocate, a 

child's ombudsman, and the implementation of that action is 

overdue. 

 

The NDP government has long been viewed as the government 

of those who have been taught to rely on government to look 

after them.  Unfortunately those people who trusted their 

government -- this government -- to take care of them, there are 

some very painful realities that have become evident.  I talk to 

a great number of these people every day.  The workers in the 

SGEU (Saskatchewan Government Employees' Union) who are 

supposed to administer the services to people on 



104 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 1993 

social assistance are walking the picket lines.  People in need 

of assistance are talking to answering machines instead of real 

people.  And they are talking to me.  There is confusion in the 

system and nobody seems to be accountable. 

 

(1615) 

 

The cost of living is going up and benefits are not.  

Unemployment has reached an unprecedented level and 

thousands are turning to social assistance when unemployment 

insurance and workers' compensation runs out.  Yet nothing is 

happening to create jobs and generate wealth to support this 

tremendous pressure on our social safety nets.  It is becoming 

painfully obvious that the NDP simply cannot generate the 

economic activity to get people working again. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this government promised jobs in the 

environment sector.  Well people are desperately waiting for 

some of the many hundreds of jobs relating to the environment 

that they promised during their campaign and their economic 

white paper. 

 

They propose to follow up the environmental round table of 

1992 with what?  Well, Mr. Speaker, a new round table on 

sustainable development.  Saskatchewan taxpayers have now 

financed a round table on conservation strategy for sustainable 

development in Saskatchewan; hearings on the environmental 

charter of rights and responsibilities Act, which is scaring rural 

business and farmers half to death; and numerous studies on 

energy and the environment of uranium mining; and as we say 

from the musical "The King and I," et cetera, et cetera, et 

cetera. 

 

But we are still waiting 15 months later for the jobs.  Is it 

completely unreasonable to expect that after nine and a half 

years in opposition and 15 months in government that this 

government could have flushed out one job creation program? 

 

During the constitutional talks, the Premier and the Minister of 

Justice seemed willing to do whatever it took at the bargaining 

table to fight for aboriginal self-government and 

empowerment.  Well it's been 15 months since they were 

elected and we've not seen any significant moves towards 

empowering aboriginal peoples to develop a long-term 

economic plan which will ultimately ease the pressure on the 

rest of society. 

 

Either this government acknowledges the need for aboriginal 

peoples to control their own affairs or it doesn't.  The throne 

speech says one thing, but the government's recent actions with 

respect to gaming are totally contradictory.  I view the lack of 

government leadership in this area as extremely irresponsible, 

Mr. Speaker.  Which is it going to be? -- the words out of the 

left sides of their mouths last September in the constitutional 

debates, or the words of the right sides of their mouths that they 

speak this week? 

 

I can assure the government that paying lip-service to the needs 

of aboriginal people will not generate any positive effect for 

Saskatchewan.  If this government is committed to real change 

in living conditions for first nations people, 

then one paragraph of political rhetoric won't get the job done. 

 

By this point this government should have produced a concrete 

plan of action that incorporates job creation, housing, improved 

services in education for aboriginal peoples.  And to date we've 

seen nothing.  For most of these individuals, Saskatchewan is 

not next year country, it is never-never land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government talks of hope and opportunity.  

They talk of honesty and openness, but their actions speak far 

louder than their words.  People feel betrayed; they feel shut 

out.  Local governments, farmers, educators, health care 

workers, ordinary taxpayers, government employees see 

evidence every day that this government is not listening to their 

problems, not really inviting them to be part of the solutions. 

 

This is a government that is saying to people, we know best.  

Just send in your money and we'll do the rest.  The people have 

sent their money, Mr. Speaker.  Taxpayers are sending part of 

their incomes as a deficit tax which the government is in no 

way obligated to apply to the deficit.  Taxpayers are paying 

more at the gas pumps to drive on deteriorating highways. 

 

Farmers are paying more for fuel and are still getting less for 

their crops.  Everyone is paying more for power, for energy, for 

telephones, for car insurance.  Businesses are paying higher 

wages and are facing increased costs for workers' 

compensation premiums.  Their customers have less disposable 

income due to excessive taxation. 

 

Every single thing we buy in Saskatchewan costs more than if 

we bought it somewhere else.  And people are asking 

themselves, what are the advantages of living here?  And that is 

a very sad day when Saskatchewan people wonder why they 

live in their own province. 

 

I had a call the other day from a man in Saskatoon who typifies 

the way people are feeling.  And he said, Lynda, I want you to 

stand up in the legislature and give this message to the Premier 

and everyone else in there.  I apologize, Mr. Speaker, for using 

my name. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, through you, I will comply with the wishes of 

the constituent of the MLA for Saskatoon Riversdale.  Mr. 

Lindsay Popoff of Avenue M in Saskatoon wants the Premier 

to know that he considers himself a poor man, but he has 

always managed to support his family on one income.  He has 

always voted for the New Democratic Party, but he says he will 

never do so again. 

 

He says that his party has betrayed him.  He believed the 

Premier when he promised that he would not raise taxes.  And 

he has raised every tax there is.  Mr. Popoff doesn't care about 

the government's excuses.  He believes the NDP must be 

responsible for what they told people.  He feels hopeless 

because he's the only one who works in his family and his pay 

cheque simply does not cover the bills. 

 

None of this is his fault, Mr. Speaker.  This government has 

raised his power, gas, telephone, his insurance, his income tax, 

the cost of his family prescription drugs.  It has increased the 

sales tax on everything he buys.  Mr. Popoff 



March 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 105 

wants his MLA to tell him that if you do nothing else, he wants 

a straight answer to one question in return for his years and 

years of support. 

 

And here through you, Mr. Speaker, is the question on the 

mind of Lindsay Popoff and every other person in 

Saskatchewan today, and I quote: What am I supposed to do 

when my pay cheque just won't cover the bills any more 

because the taxes and increases to my cost of living don't allow 

me to do so?  Tell me, what do I do? 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I ask this government to take a hard 

look at the budget it is about to bring down, and to show the 

people of this province that their faith in the government was 

not 100 per cent misplaced.  The citizens of Saskatchewan see 

the NDP in a round bin trying to find solutions in a corner.  If 

they really care about finding solutions, they must listen to the 

people, not simply go through the charade of consultation. 

 

If they really want the Liberal Party's ideas on job creation and 

economic development, then provide an opportunity for me in 

this Assembly every week to share them and to introduce fair 

taxation policies that would allow them to come to fruition. 

 

On behalf of Lindsay Popoff and everyone else in 

Saskatchewan who is suffering from the irresponsibility of the 

Conservatives and the lack of concrete wealth creation ideas 

from this NDP government, I pray that they will abandon their 

bent for tax increases, put the focus on job creation and 

economic growth in order to restore the hope in the hearts of 

our Saskatchewan people.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm proud to join 

in to this throne speech debate.  Due to the lateness of the day, 

and I know there's other speakers wanting to speak yet today, 

I'll make my comments brief. 

 

Hearing speeches from the members opposite over the last few 

days, I felt that it was important that I respond to some of the 

things that they have been saying.  I know that members view 

the throne speech in many different ways.  And later on if I 

have some time I'll touch on a few of the aspects of the throne 

speech that are very important to myself. 

 

But first I'd like to respond to some remarks made yesterday by 

the member from Wilkie.  And as I watched the member and 

listened to the member from Wilkie speak on the throne 

speech, I guess what this member saw important was to address 

the deficit and the debt. 

 

And what came to mind as I was listening to him was it 

reminded me so much of the old Social Credit fellow that used 

to be on every Sunday morning.  And he stood there with 

charts and he was able actually to balance the books of Canada 

just within an hour or so if you followed his mathematical 

wizardry.  And I think the member from Wilkie was trying to 

emulate this fellow in justifying his arguments. 

 

And back then I remember my parents used to get up and 

turn the TV off, and I'm sure that happened again yesterday 

with most of the TVs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Don't confuse us with facts. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- No, I won't confuse you with facts. 

 

So I'll take a few minutes to help the member from Wilkie and 

also the member from Arm River who spoke just a while ago, 

and spoke about the debt situation of the province. 

 

And of course he made mention that there was a great deal of 

debt when they took over the province, and he carried on and 

on to say that should this ever be challenged he would then 

take it upon himself to use his communication allowances to 

send out replies into every constituency and make his case 

heard. 

 

Well I can't wait to see what he's going to send out.  Because 

what I have here . . . I took the liberty this morning to go up to 

the library and look for myself just what the situation of the 

province was back in July 1982. 

 

And just so that the members opposite that I'm referring to can 

follow along, I have copies if the page would care to take these.  

I have copies so that the members can follow along.  And I've 

taken the liberty to highlight a few of the sections so that they 

could always refer back to these sections maybe when they're 

giving speeches, you know, on the budget and such. 

 

But we'll just touch on a few of these.  Right off the bat, 

economic and financial position, July 1982.  This document 

was tabled by then minister of Finance, Bob Andrew.  And I'm 

sure that back then those two members were on the government 

side.  They were members of the government of the day and 

they supported this, and there's no doubt they would have only 

voted for this stuff to go forward had it been correct. 

 

So I just want to comment just a few lines out of here that I've 

highlighted for the members opposite and myself: Revenues for 

the Consolidated Fund were also higher than expected, making 

possible a surplus of eight million bucks. 

 

It goes on to talk about some surpluses that the . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Haven't seen one since. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Haven't seen one since.  Heritage Fund 

revenues increased by four and a half per cent in 1981-82 to 

$832.9 million. 

 

But here's the one I find most interesting, because the members 

opposite keep referring to this supposed debt that was there. On 

a combined basis the Consolidated and Heritage funds showed 

budgetary revenues of 2.66 . . . 3.8 million -- billion is what it 

should be -- expenditures, and two and a half billion, with a 

combined surplus of $139 million. 

 

Now this is signed by then minister of Finance Bob 



106 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 1993 

Andrew, tabled in this House, supported by those members 

who keep referring to this huge debt that was on the books. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- How much surplus? 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- A hundred and thirty-nine million dollar 

surplus. 

 

Just to read on, a few columns here that I highlighted: As I 

announced in June, more recent estimates indicate that the 

budget being passed and implemented, the province would 

have experienced a combined budgetary deficit of 

approximately 200 million.  This turn-around is largely the 

result of oil and potash revenues being $250 million lower than 

estimated and in Consolidated Fund expenditures being 100 

million higher than estimated. 

 

I guess what they're getting at is that sure, there's going to be 

some debt; they're going to run a deficit the first time out of the 

chute.  But it doesn't say there that it was because of the land 

bank, as the member from Wilkie and Arm River refer to.  And 

it doesn't say it was as a result of debt that the government of . . 

. the previous government before pre-1982 had left them with.  

They didn't say anything about the debt back then when they 

had access to the books. 

 

(1630) 

 

Let me read on just a moment: a deficit situation for the current 

fiscal year is therefore unavoidable. However, the government 

intends to move a balanced budget over the term of its office 

 

Well we waited.  Which government were you referring to?  

Because you didn't deliver it.  And I hope the member from 

Wilkie will keep that document just so he can refer to it while 

he's making statements in the House, as he did yesterday. 

 

I picked up a copy of yesterday's Hansard, Debates and 

Proceedings, and I was looking through trying to figure out in 

my own mind what point he was making, where he was going, 

because I don't think anyone was really aware of that.  There 

are so many figures and facts.  I just hope that he saved the 

charts, as the old Social Credit fellow used to do, so that maybe 

we could revisit this at some point and get a clearer 

understanding of where he was going.  And maybe this sums it 

up though, from his own words, after all the facts and figures 

have been used.  It says: 

 

 Wonderful, wonderful.  Whoopsy do and how do you do.  

Well, golly gee. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Well, whoopsy do all right.  And that takes 

care of that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on a more serious note, I would like to make a 

few brief comments on the throne speech, the theme of the 

throne speech -- the goals of this administration. 

 

One being restore accountability, fiscal accountability to 

the province.  That's what the people of this province wanted.  

That question was put to them in the fall of '91.  They rejected 

what the Conservatives had done in the past 10 years.  They 

chose the NDP to correct it.  They chose our government to 

correct it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- And we will.  This spring is going to be 

another budget come down.  And it's not going to be an easy 

budget, I suspect.  But we're asking that the people of the 

province share in the pain and the responsibility to turn around 

the situation that the former financial wizards left us in. 

 

Another highlight of the throne speech, Mr. Speaker, was to 

restore faith and respect of the institution and those who serve 

it.  And this is quite important as you can tell by travelling 

around in our constituencies, the feeling that people have 

towards politicians today because of what happened in 10 years 

of Conservative administration. 

 

I'm proud when I look at Bill No. 1 which was tabled 

yesterday, I believe.  It was tabled yesterday in the House.  An 

Act respecting the Conduct of Members of the Legislative 

Assembly and Members of the Executive Council, respecting 

Conflicts of Interest and to enact Consequential Amendments 

resulting from the enactment of this Act. 

 

I just want to highlight a few of these.  And I guess it's because 

the people of Saskatchewan saw a need.  They saw a need that 

this type of government should come forward and bring 

forward these sort of Acts and clean up and restore that faith 

that the people once had in store for the members who served 

this province. 

 

Under the Act, all members of the Legislative Assembly will 

be required to disclose all their personal and business interests 

and the personal and business interests of their spouse and 

dependent children for preparation of a disclosure statement 

that will be available for public inspection -- and I'm told this 

goes far and beyond what other provincial legislatures and 

governing bodies of this country have brought forward 

themselves; required to immediately declare a conflict of 

interest when an issue or subject arises in the Legislative 

Assembly or cabinet or a committee or of either, and absent 

themselves prior to discussion of the issue and any decision 

taken regarding the issue. 

 

And there's a whole host of measures being taken under this 

Act and much needed, of course.  And I commend the Minister 

of Justice for bringing forward this Bill yesterday. 

 

One other point I'd like to touch on in regards to restoring faith.  

It's to do with the news release that showed up in the paper just 

recently: MLAs welcome to the real world.  And I was reading 

this the other day.  It says that changes will not surprise anyone 

who is used to expense accounts.  In fact the only surprise will 

be that MLAs have until now been operating without the basic 

minimum standards of accountability. 

 

The changes introduced last week include, and just a few of 

these points:  expense receipts have to list specifically 



March 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 107 

what goods or services were bought; MLAs can't operate their 

constituency offices through management firms -- it used to be 

that MLAs could submit one general invoice up to 40,000 

without giving receipts for items like rent and furniture.  MLAs 

can't hire members of their immediate families for constituency 

work or can't run their constituency office out of their homes.  

They must show receipts for all their telephone expenses. 

 

Well I like to respond to the constituents I represent.  All the 

things that are being listed here are things that I've done since 

day one of becoming a member of this legislature.  I don't have 

any reimbursements that the legislature didn't have a detailed 

bill of what they were all about and why they were being 

brought forward. 

 

Another focus of the throne speech is helping those in need.  

And once again, as in last year's throne speech dealing with 

hungry children, the unemployed, it deals with bringing people 

together.  And we have a few, just to name a few of the 

consultation documents: Partnership for Renewal -- A Strategy 

for the Saskatchewan Economy, our health care vision, and 

many more. 

 

But as I said before, regardless of whether we're talking about 

reforming health care, bringing back some fiscal 

accountability, economic renewal, or job creation, the question 

was put to the people of the province in '91 and they chose this 

administration to take care of those problems.  They knew they 

hadn't been dealt with fairly before, and they wanted it opened 

up and dealt with in a respectable manner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say just a few words on agriculture.  

And I notice in the throne speech . . . (inaudible) . . . I'm going 

to pull out a few lines. 

 

 Provincial net farm income in 1993 is projected to sink to 

$241 million, the lowest level since 1970.  My government 

stands firmly with the farmers in their demand that the 

federal government fulfil its promise to deliver a third line of 

defence. 

 

That is a good statement.  Because what we're looking at is 

commitment to agriculture.  We had a Prime Minister who, 

along with the former premier of the province, boasted all the 

time about the commitments they were making to agriculture. 

 

The Prime Minister is on record as standing behind farmers.  

For a few years he was in all the newspapers, being quoted all 

the time that he would go to the wall for the farmers.  Well 

where is he today?  We know that when we were joining up in 

1991 GRIP that spring, the farmers knew they were being 

cajoled into joining.  There weren't people joining up to that 

program. 

 

So what was being happened was reduced premium costs.  The 

federal government picked up a good share of the producer's 

premium and the province's premium.  When that wasn't 

enough, they started referring to future program payments, 

third line of defence payments.  If you don't join, you're not 

going to be collecting.  But there was reference made to that.  

There will be third line of defence monies coming out. 

And there's members opposite, like the member from Morse 

and the member from Wilkie, who were around campaigning at 

that time and kept referring to those dollars that were coming 

out.  In fact, they're referring often to the dollars that were 

coming out in western grain stabilization, probably knowing 

full well at the time that those dollars weren't coming out. 

 

The other day the member from Humboldt brought forward a 

motion dealing with asking the federal government to reverse 

its decision on increasing grain transportation costs for 

Saskatchewan farmers by $80 million in the Bill -- I believe it's 

in second reading in the House of Commons right now -- and 

also dealing with the third line of defence $500 

million-minimum question. 

 

Well that was the first motion brought forward in this session.  

It was brought forward by the member from Humboldt, 

seconded by myself.  It's very similar to a motion that I brought 

forward myself in the last session.  The member from 

Humboldt and myself spoke at length on this motion -- the 

need -- and in our speeches we asked for cooperation from the 

opposition and we offered to set politics aside, get the help for 

the farmers.  There's spring seeding coming up; there is very 

little money out there.  And we're asking that you work with us. 

 

But what happened was that the opposition decided that instead 

they would use stalling tactics.  First motion of this session 

dealing with such an important issue -- and they had agreed to 

bring the motion forward, to let us bring the motion forward -- 

but they used stalling tactics so it would never come to a vote.  

That's not responsible.  That's not what we're asking for when 

we're saying we want to work in cooperation to help get over 

some of these problems. 

 

Mr. Speaker, somewhat dealing with that motion but also it 

was dealt with in the throne speech: 

 

 Saskatchewan's farm income is under . . . attack by the 

federal government's recent proposals to change the current 

method of paying grain transportation assistance and to speed 

up rail line abandonment.  Changes must indeed be made to 

develop a transportation system which is effective, efficient 

and affordable.  But my government firmly believes that this 

can be done while maintaining the current method of paying 

the Crow benefit. 

 

Well we wanted that dealt with the other day but the members 

opposite chose not to bring that to a vote.  Through stalling 

tactics once again they wasted away the day so that they 

wouldn't have to put themselves on record as to where they 

stand in case it was contrary to one of the leadership 

contenders, to one of the leadership contenders of the federal 

government, of the federal Conservative Party. 

 

Now of course, looking at the newspaper that came out 

yesterday, Leader-Post, Crow may be used as a safety net.  The 

Crow benefit they're referring to.  Let me just quote from here a 

moment: 



108 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 1993 

Agriculture Minister Charlie Mayer is considering a plan to 

pay farmers the Crow benefit through a farm support 

program . . . 

 

 Under the new proposal, the government would put the 

subsidy money into a "NISA-like account." 

 

Well is that what . . . when all those meetings were being held 

last year, and I think it was Peat Marwick that the federal 

government had going around the province holding meetings 

asking farmers what their views were on how the Crow benefit 

payments should be handled, I didn't remember hearing anyone 

say that it was a NISA-like account would sure do the job. 

 

 Farm subsidies would be paid out of such a new account by 

two "triggers," said Mayer, one set off by rising 

transportation costs, (oh we'll get back to that one) and the 

other by falling net income. 

 

To me that sounds like dilution of the payment all together.  

You know it's . . . regardless of the dilution when you're 

bringing in those that are in the beef industry and such.  But 

here we're tying it to net incomes. 

 

 Since the money would be paid to these accounts rather than 

the railways, the railway companies would immediately raise 

their rates . . . 

 

You members opposite are going to have to soon make a 

decision of who you're representing -- federal Conservative 

leadership contenders or the farmers.  You're from rural areas.  

You know the problem that is going to arise here, so where do 

you stand? 

 

I notice the member from Maple Creek is doing a lot of 

chirping.  But why doesn't he go out to his constituency and tell 

them where he stands?  If he wants this thing diluted, why 

doesn't he go and tell them?  Because I know from attending 

meetings out in his area . . . 

 

(1645) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- I know from attending meetings out in his 

area, that's not what the farmers were saying.  In fact if you 

went to the meeting in Medicine Hat, they even rejected any 

change to the method of payment; not just in our own province 

which was overwhelming support for status quo. 

 

I don't see . . . I can't agree with you that somehow when we 

raise the rates, transportation rates, that we're going to help 

farmers.  You know, you raise the rates so the triggers will 

work and then get a pay-out, it doesn't matter because the 

money will have gone to the transportation companies. 

 

Since those proposals were put to a federal-provincial 

Agriculture ministers meeting last fall, Mayer admitted they 

have met with not a lot of enthusiasm.  And that's an 

understatement, Mayer says.  The Saskatchewan government, 

our government, because the members opposite have yet to 

come onside to defend the people, to defend their constituents 

who were quite clear last fall, 

our government rejected Mayer's idea outright, but the 

members opposite are yet to be heard on the issue. 

 

 Mayer admitted if he plans to move on either issue he will 

have to do so quickly to get legislation passed before an 

election. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- He won't be able to do it after the 

election, I'll tell you that. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Well isn't that the truth.  They've only got 

one chance at this one. 

 

So what he's saying here, what he's saying here is that they're 

going to ram it through.  And there's no doubt that the members 

opposite could be tabling letters of how they're lobbying their 

counterparts on Ottawa to stop such ram-through legislation.  

Surely you've taken a position on it as a caucus or members.  

You are going to support your constituents, I hope. 

 

And the next article from that same page is: "Farm groups 

oppose the latest "NISA" idea".  And I know, from looking at 

many of the resolutions brought forward by SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) and 

SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) and 

NFU (National Farmers Union) and the Wheat Pool, they're all 

firmly onside of this issue.  I think you guys are left out there 

pretty much on your own. 

 

But something that you must keep in mind, like this . . . There's 

two leadership races that you have on the go here.  One federal 

. . . and I understand why you want to stay out of this debate so 

that you don't maybe push forward the wrong federal 

leadership contender, but your own leadership. 

 

I mean, Harold, you're . . . or the member from Morse.  I 

apologize now, Mr. Speaker.  The member from Morse has a 

lot of . . . the member from Morse no doubt has his eye on the 

leadership.  And I ask that member: don't you think it's about 

time you're going to take a position on this? 

 

Now the member from Rosthern, have you talked this over 

with the member from Morse to see if you're both on the same 

side of the issue?  Or maybe you'll run on it. I don't know.  If 

you know the member from Morse is opposing it, maybe you'll 

take a crack at it here. 

 

 Leroy Larson, the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool's second 

vice-president, said the new federal proposal looks expensive 

and complex. 

 

That last line usually draws your guys' attention.  But in this 

case it's negative. 

 

 If it is changed, farmers would have to pay that extra cost and 

that would be disastrous . . . 

 

The article is quoted. 

 

 Because of that there would be a jump in the amount of 

money going to Alberta with its larger livestock industry and 

a drop in the amount going to the farmers in Saskatchewan, 

he said. 



March 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 109 

Well I'm going to have to ask the member from Maple Creek 

because he's right over there along the border, Alberta border: 

is this what you're after?  Is this what you're telling your 

constituents?  You know, when you go into Alberta to visit, 

it's nice to see a lot more enhanced red meat industry over 

there, not here.  You're soon going to have to make a 

statement on that one, I'm afraid. 

 

And in another news article, this one is in The Western 

Producer, September 19 of '91:  Liberal leader says election is 

about more than agriculture.  But what does the Liberal leader 

say about it? Grain handling and transportation: the Crow 

benefit should be paid directly to farmers rather than to the 

railways.  The Liberals generally favour less regulation in the 

industry. 

 

Now this statement goes against those farmers that are writing 

letters from all our constituents to the private member from 

Greystone.  But I don't know if this is the position that the 

federal Liberal Party is going to take, but it's not one that is to 

the benefit of Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

And I'm just back to the theme of the motion of the other day.  

Why not work in cooperation to help the people we represent?  

Why then to help our federal parties?  It just makes common 

sense. 

 

The federal government have been doing a great deal of 

offloading.  In the last session the members opposite would not 

support us in opposing that federal offloading.  This time I 

hope they will listen and support. 

 

Other provinces are opposed to that offloading.  They're 

opposed to the changes in the method of payment.  And yet our 

own members opposite aren't supporting their farmers. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, my government strongly believes that 

we must build on the success of the Canadian Wheat Board. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- And not undermine its mandate.  Well the 

Canadian Wheat Board has been under attack for some time 

from the Tories, especially federal Tories, but not opposed by 

the provincial members opposite of their same . . .. And I look . 

. . the private member from the constituency of Greystone, her 

comments on the Canadian Wheat Board.  And I quote: 

Haverstock has at times been critical of the degree of control 

exercised by the Wheat Board over the grain marketing system.  

She says Saskatchewan must be more self-reliant and farmers 

should be more directly involved in marketing their own crops. 

 

That isn't what I hear the farmers saying.  It must be different 

farmers writing to members opposite than what deal with 

myself on a daily basis because they're not saying that. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What did they pass in Saskatoon?  What 

did they pass in Saskatoon rally? 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Exactly, 12,700 members that were 

referred to earlier stood up, there was a standing ovation when 

it said we must support the Canadian Wheat Board and 

single-desk marketing.  That's what they were saying. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- I didn't hear anyone stand up and say we 

should get out of supporting Canadian Wheat Board and its 

policy of single-desk selling.  But where does the member from 

Maple Creek stand on that issue?  He must be anxious to get 

into this debate.  He's chirping but he doesn't chirp it to his 

constituents.  But soon you're going to have to take a position 

on where you stand. 

 

What the farmers are saying is that they want to retain barley 

under the control of the Canadian Wheat Board.  What I hear 

them say is that they want oats reinstated under the control of 

the Wheat Board. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Yet I don't hear what the member from 

Morse said.  Not a word.  And he's from the same area of the 

province that I am from.  The railroads down there are so 

important and we fear what's going to happen through the 

policies of deregulation and changing the method of payment.  

The writing's on the wall, and he knows that by having 

travelled into the northern states many times.  Take a trip down 

to North Dakota and have a look and see what you guys are 

wanting to do up here.  You got elevators you could throw a cat 

through.  They're not supporting that system. 

 

You've got closed rail lines.  And if you think the short-line 

railroads are going to handle it, well we also have 

communication recently with people from Southern Rails 

Cooperative, saying don't let it go, because it can't be handled 

by short-line railroads. 

 

You've got to take a stand on it and you've got to decide . . . the 

member from Morse has got to decide whether he's supporting 

his constituents, the people that need this support especially 

today when they're in such a financial crush and the financial 

burden that's upon them and the stress out there.  And you want 

to add to it.  You want to add to it.  You want to have southern 

Saskatchewan looking like North Dakota, northern North 

Dakota.  Well I oppose that. 

 

Perhaps when the member from Arm River does this supposed 

mail-out that he's starting to do, you just staple on a little 

position statement from yourself and . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Maybe the member from Rosthern could 

staple on his position too just in case there's some election . . . 

(inaudible) . . . between you when you're running for the 

leadership.  You might as well get at her.  I do ask though, I do 

ask that you support us.  The fight will soon be in front of us, 

both the Canadian Wheat Board, but on the method of 

payment. And I think as members of the Saskatchewan 

legislature, I think we've got to stand together and work in 

cooperation to do what's right for the industry, support our 

constituents, and leave the politics out of it -- just for a while. 



110 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 1993 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'll adjourn debate for the day. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:58 p.m. 



March 3, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 111 

CORRIGENDUM 

 

On page 57 of Hansard No. 4A Tuesday, March 2, 1993, 2 

p.m., right-hand column last paragraph, “and discussed” should 

read “in disgust”. 

 

We apologize for this error. 

 

 


