




















































Hansard: March 18, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 417 

 March 18, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order, the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7), they are hereby read and 

received: 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to reverse 

the government's decision to close hospital facilities. 

 

And 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to single out diabetics in 

the drug plan. 

 

And 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to allow the 1991 GRIP program to stand for this 

year. 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Government Deficit 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, it is nice to have so 

many guests in the Chamber today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier.  Mr. Premier you 

got elected Premier of this province by telling people that $4.5 

billion was enough to run this province on. 

 

You knew, because your personal financial adviser, Mr. Don 

Gass, told you, that the total debt of this province was $14 

billion.  And yet you said at that time, four and a half billion 

was enough.  You cancelled tax harmonization, you promised 

more money for health and education and agriculture, and you 

absolutely decried that there would be any offloading on 

Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 

The question, Mr. Premier: are you telling us today, Mr. 

Premier, that you didn't know that the debt of this province was 

$14 billion?  Or did you just make those reckless promises in 

order to get the very chair that you're sitting in?  Is that the way 

it was, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 

Leader of the Opposition for that question and say to him that 

not only did I not know what the true size 

of the deficit was, but I suspect that he himself didn't know 

what the true size of the deficit was either. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Given the fact that the Treasury Board 

in the former government had not met for over 11 months prior 

to the election of the government, I doubt that he knew or any 

of the other cohorts who sit beside him knew. 

 

I said 4.5 billion should be enough to run a government.  We 

budgeted 4.25 billion last year.  You know why we're in the 

deficit?  Because of $800 million interest payments occasioned 

by the massive debt that you and your colleagues incurred from 

1982 to 1992, swallowing up the surplus and putting us in a 

deficit position. 

 

I say, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, join us in our task.  

Interest payments on the public debt rob our people of jobs, 

hope, and opportunity.  We have to eliminate the deficits to 

give the people jobs, opportunity, and hope, and that's what 

we're doing.  Join the building. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question's to 

the Premier.  Mr. Premier, you felt quite confident in going in a 

leaders' debate during that election campaign on province-wide 

TV, and you said at that time that the debt was over $14 billion.  

And you knew full well as the Premier of this province that 

there would have to be some costs associated with servicing 

that debt, or you wouldn't have had the gall to stand on 

province-wide TV and talk about that number.  So you knew.  

And you knew that debt servicing was part of the equation. 

 

But you were going to do it smarter and do it better.  You were 

going to help people.  Remember that?  You were you going to 

help farmers get more money. 

 

Well, Mr. Premier, those same people are feeling betrayed 

today.  Why did you make those promises -- hospital workers, 

teachers, students, farmers -- when you knew the size of the 

debt?  Why did you lead them down that garden path?  Was it 

only because you wanted to be Premier of the province?  Is that 

it, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the Leader of the 

Opposition for that question.  And I would say that when he 

ended up by saying, is it only because I want to only be the 

Premier of the province of Saskatchewan, I want to tell you 

after 16 months, after having opened up the books and seen the 

mess that you have left, believe me that is not the objective in 

the October election.  So put that out of your mind. 

 

I repeat again, because this is an old line of questioning, what 

we promised is set out right here in "The Saskatchewan Way, 

and it said this:  "First Things 



418 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1993 

First -- Common Sense Financial Management"; "Open the 

books"; "New Directions, New Priorities"; "A Better Quality of 

Life"; "Fighting for Agriculture . . ."; "Open, Honest and 

Accountable Government".  It's there in the brochure.  That's 

what we did. 

 

But more specifically to the Leader of the Opposition's 

question, he says that we knew the numbers.  Will the Leader 

of the Opposition acknowledge once and for all that his former 

colleague, the then minister of Finance, Mr. Hepworth, on 

behalf of the then premier of the day, wrote to me a letter -- and 

I believe to the Leader of the Liberal Party -- saying that the 

deficit for '91-92 would be no more than $225 million.  He 

assured me of that when in fact we found out after we got into 

office and opened the books that the debt was not 225 million 

but $1 billion.  So please, I think most people in this legislature 

and in this province understand what it is exactly that we have 

to face and why we were misled by you and your 

administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question's to 

the Premier.  Mr. Premier, what they understand is the size of 

the betrayal.  If you'd like to take the opportunity to look on 

page 133 of the '91 budget address, I think you'll find a number 

that's the same one you used a year later as to what the size of 

the debt was, same number, sir.  Same number.  Why don't you 

check it out? 

 

Mr. Premier, in the face of that, you have hiked personal 

income tax, sales tax, utility rate increases, savaged farm 

programs, the drug plan, all of those things; even though you 

said, I can live on $4.5 billion, before the campaign.  Mr. 

Premier, I say to you because you did know the numbers -- the 

numbers are the same in your budget as it was in ours -- that 

you simply betrayed Saskatchewan people because you wanted 

to be Premier of this province.  The politics, sir, was more 

important to you.  The politics was more important than the 

lives of people.  Don't you agree, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I might add in response 

to that question with respect to politics, unlike of course the 

position taken by my colleague and the former premier over 

nine years: politics was never important to you people, was it? 

 

Here is the letter from the Finance minister of the province of 

Saskatchewan, sir, exact words, September before the election, 

quote: On balance, however, Mr. Hepworth writes to me and 

the Leader of the Liberal Party, I see no reason to alter our 

target of a $265 million deficit. 

 

Now I want to tell you the mathematics.  We brought in last 

year's budget at 4.25 billion.  If we had had the deficit of 265 

million, it would have been 4.5 billion.  You know what 

happened?  We had to face the $800 million interest payments 

on the public debt that we pay every year.  So the surplus on 

our budget of 225 

was swamped by the 800 million on the interest rates, leaving 

us with the deficit of 517. 

 

Now the former premier chirping from his seat says . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier.  Mr. 

Premier, you boasted for weeks in this province that you were 

going to lead the way.  People around the province today see 

that in Ontario we've got 20,000 jobs being cut in the Ontario 

government; 7,000 jobs being cut in Quebec; 1,000 jobs being 

cut in Newfoundland.  Yesterday you went out in front of your 

budget process and announced $5 million in savings and a few 

jobs. 

 

Mr. Premier, people expected you to lead from the top.  That 

you no longer would have 18 cabinet ministers because 

Saskatchewan couldn't afford them.  Mr. Premier, if you'd even 

started doing away with some of the friends that you've hired in 

the last two years, you could have saved Saskatchewan 

taxpayers millions of dollars. 

 

Mr. Premier, tell Saskatchewan people how you're going to 

lead from the top.  Tell us today which of your cabinet 

ministers you're going to deal with so you can show 

Saskatchewan families and taxpayers that you're prepared to 

show the leadership that goes with that chair.  Would you do 

that, Mr. Premier? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, here we go again with 

the same old line of questioning of the last two or three days.  

And I give the same answers to the hon. member and he refuses 

to accept them, or perhaps refuses to understand them. 

 

I want to tell the hon. member that we have made a significant 

reduction.  Do you remember the time . . . Maybe you don't 

because there were so many members sitting around the cabinet 

table during your administration you probably wouldn't know 

some of them, there were so many that were there. 

 

There were 25 ministers, 14 legislative secretaries.  Everybody 

had a job in official pay salaries over and above MLAs 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) except for poor old 

Lorne McLaren from Yorkton.  I still can't figure out what was 

wrong with Lorne.  Why was he excluded?  Why didn't he get 

the job? 

 

We moved from 25 to 18.  We have one of the lowest cabinets 

in Canada.  And I said to the Leader of the Opposition 

yesterday as I repeat again, the next step is to take a look at the 

size of the Legislative Assembly, which we intend to do at this 

session, and the size of the cabinet in due course. 

 

But please, sir, it is lacking total credibility for you to be 

getting up in this Chamber and lecturing us about the size of 

government after you racked up a deficit of $15.5 billion.  

Shame on you! 



March 18, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 419 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Premier.  It's funny how the Premier's version of history 

and mine is somewhat different.  Neither the Premier nor I, 

neither the Premier nor I were in this House when there was 25 

cabinet ministers because voters of this province gave him a 

rest between 1982 and 1986 because he was picking the 

pockets of Saskatchewan people through the family of Crown 

corporations as he's doing it today. 

 

Mr. Premier, my question is, you promised that you would not 

offload on Saskatchewan people.  Last year we saw offloading 

like this province has not seen in decades, by your government, 

on Saskatchewan taxpayers, hidden taxes. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you assure the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 

today that we won't see the massive offloading continue in the 

sectors of health care and education and other places where 

you're expecting Saskatchewan taxpayers to suck up?  Would 

you promise them today, Mr. Premier, that that won't occur? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, as the hon. member 

obviously knows, the budget will be presented in a short few 

moments and the details of the budget will be known to him 

and to the people of the province of Saskatchewan.  But I do 

want to say before I take my place with respect to this question 

that it's interesting again the line of questioning from the 

Leader of the Official Opposition.  From 1982 to 1992 you 

racked up, sir, 1 billion -- it's like McDonald's hamburgers -- 

$1 billion of new debt each and every year at a time when 

revenues were declining. 

 

I don't blame your premier for some of the declining revenues, 

grain wars and the grain prices.  He did the best that he could in 

that circumstance.  And I pay him tribute for that.  But the 

reality is you did not live within your means. 

 

If you now say that we are asking everybody to share in the 

result of your mismanagement, we have no choice but to do 

that. You should have thought of that, sir -- the downloading, 

as you criticize that -- you should have thought of that between 

1982 and 1991 and lived within our means and we all would 

have been better off as Saskatchewan people today.  You 

didn't.  That job is ours now.  That job is ours now and we are 

determined to help everybody and to plead for everybody's 

support and sacrifice as we get on to rebuilding the province of 

Saskatchewan, something that you should have done in your 

term of power. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Health Care Cut-backs 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Premier, after listening to your convoluted 

reasoning which only a lawyer could come up with, I'm amazed 

at that.  I'll tell you, sir, that in my youth I thought about 

becoming a lawyer for a while, and then I thought better of it 

and decided to become a productive member of society instead. 

 

Now, sir, you talk about cabinet, you talk about cabinet.  You 

promised, sir, that you would have a war cabinet of 10 cabinet 

ministers and you would only increase it after you had enough 

money to pay for more, sir.  I remind you that you have an 80 

per cent increase -- an 80 per cent increase in your cabinet 

ministers in one year.  That, sir, does not speak well of 

management. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it's obvious from the Premier's answers so 

far that their real plan of deficit reduction is simply more taxes, 

more offloading -- back-door taxes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I direct my question now to the Minister of 

Health.  Will the Minister of Health today deny what she said 

on October 21, 1989, in this legislature, and I quote:  The NDP 

are going to fight these health care cut-backs and these changes 

to medicare. 

 

She then stated that when the NDP (New Democratic Party) 

got elected that the public isn't going to have to worry about 

these problems.  That's what you said, Madam Minister. 

 

Will the minister guarantee that the drug plan and the dental 

plan will survive in their current form and that no more 

offloading will take place in this budget.  Will you restore the 

faith of the people in you, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm going to take the 

question from the hon. member on this occasion, to say to him 

that with respect to 1988-1989, the quotation that he cites I 

have no doubt is accurate. 

 

And I want to tell you that I subscribed to it then and I 

subscribe to it now.  Because then we were saying to you, you 

are making choices in your budget and your choices are 

cut-backs in health care.  But diversion of the money to all of 

the megaprojects which you have engaged in, whether they 

were Weyerhaeuser, whether it was the NewGrade operation or 

whether it was the Saferco project -- $369 million; all of us in 

this Chamber are committed to the Saferco project - 

_ and we kept on saying to you, sir, the priorities have got to be 

put into balance.  You have to have economic development, but 

please do not attack the social safety net.  And you did 

relentlessly; and in doing so you diverted the money to these 

projects; and in doing so, as the independent accountants have 

shown us, have put the province in a $15.5 billion hole. 

 

Those comments are just as relevant today as they were in 

1988-1989.  What we are forced to do is protect the core 

services of health care in Saskatchewan, to re-design a new 

system of health care which will once again put this province at 

the 



420 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1993 

leading edge of all of Canada. 

 

Why don't you fess up to the error of your ways and join us in 

this great task instead of criticizing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I will try to, unlike the Premier, 

remain calm so that we can have a rational discussion here this 

afternoon.  Mr. Speaker, I want the people to notice that the 

very items that he listed as being part of the deficit are exactly 

those initiatives of our government that they are also in their 

paper saying are such wonderful things that have created job 

and economic stimulation within this province, Mr. Minister. 

 

But I refer again to the Minister of Health.  You, Madam 

Minister, and you, Mr. Premier, it has been categorically shown 

were cognizant and fully aware of a $14.2 billion deficit.  Yet 

in spite of that, you went before the public during the election 

and you committed to spending more money in health, more 

money in education, more money for universities, and at the 

same time, cut taxes.  Your minister there from Regina, your 

toy minister who is the Finance associate, said no new taxes for 

the next two years, Mr. Premier.  Well when are you going to 

keep your promises, Madam Minister?  When are you going to 

keep your promise that you will maintain and restore, in your 

own words, the benefits of the health care system? 

 

Madam Minister, can you get up and reassure the citizens of 

this province that medicare will stay in the same condition that 

we left it in -- one of the best health care systems in Canada? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Now, Mr. Speaker, this questioning is 

descending from some element of ludicrous nature to almost 

fantasy land. 

 

Because when a statement of this nature says, the best . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . The member says that I should 

remain calm.  I say, you should remain calm. 

 

When you get up with a straight face and say that the PCs 

(Progressive Conservatives) protected medicare and health care 

in Saskatchewan, well that's something like akin to colonel fox 

getting in there and saying, I'm protecting the chicken coop. 

 

Nobody would trust the Tories with medicare, health care, and 

they didn't based on all the attacks that you've conducted. 

 

I want to read to you, Mr. Speaker, as answer to this question, a 

letter which we have received from the Pan American Health 

Organization, World Health Organization, reviewing our 

policy, our revision of health care. 

 

Quote:  We have reviewed the new policy in health, a 

Saskatchewan vision for health, and congratulate you 

for this excellent work.  We're very interested in knowing your 

plans for its implementation.  We would appreciate receiving 

additional information.  We believe that the efforts being 

undertaken in Saskatchewan could serve as an inspiration and 

impetus for change in our member countries. 

 

And there are many like that, because we are on a revolution 

which puts medicare now the core services being protected, 

occasioned by the debt and occasioned by new vision. 

 

We are repairing the damage that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . 

. Yes, it is a two-stage process.  We are repairing the damage, 

but we're building, we're providing hope.  This budget has 

turned the corner.  We see daylight in health and in social 

services. 

 

We're asking the people of Saskatchewan to pull together with 

us, all of us.  We even ask you to join us, and together we can 

beat it; we will beat it.  We're going to have the finest health 

care system again in all of Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Premier, the fact of the matter, the basic 

fundamental fact of the matter is, that prior to today, prior to in 

fact the embarkation upon your Minister of Health, upon orders 

from you, sir, and the Minister of Finance to start gutting the 

health care system, we did have the finest health care system. 

 

And what I'm trying to do this moment for the people of 

Saskatchewan is to ensure that you will have last-moment 

hesitation and second thoughts about dismantling the health 

care system any further than you are doing right now, sir.  You 

are offloading.  You are offloading responsibility. 

 

The Madam Minister is making decisions to cut funding.  Then 

she's got health boards around the province that have to be the 

axe people, the axe men to take the brunt of it. 

 

But not only that, are you offloading responsibilities, sir, you 

are also offloading funding to SARM (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities), to SUMA (Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association), organizations that are 

pleading for you not to do that, not to add more burden to the 

property taxpayer. 

 

And that, sir, and Madam Minister of Finance, and Madam 

Minister of Health, is your motivation and that is your goal.  

You are going to . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Does the member have a 

question?  I'd like the member to place his question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Why don't you admit that your goal in this 

process that we are going to embark on in a few minutes is 

simply to offload funding, to give yourself a better 

balanced-book appearance and put the onus on the people of 

this province -- higher taxes, more taxes, and literally, Madam 

Minister, no hope. 



March 18, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 421 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, with the consent of the 

Minister of Health, I'd like to answer that question as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to answer the question very briefly by this 

first quotation to begin with: we believe that all governments 

must work in concert to reduce budget deficits -- all 

governments.  Failure to accomplish this will force harsh 

financial penalties on our children.  It is inevitable that 

mounting deficits will result in unwanted reductions in 

government services and tax increases.  End quote. 

 

I'd like to ask the hon. member if he could tell us in a 

supplementary question who he thinks said that.  Well just in 

case he doesn't know I'll tell him.  Who said it was Mr. Bob 

Andrew, the minister of Finance in 1984.  You were a part of 

that government.  How duplicitous it is of you now to be a part 

of the government that says in 1984 all governments must 

share in the burden. But today now that you're sitting in 

opposition benches, all governments shouldn't share in the 

burden.  What is it? 

 

Do you believe what your government and your premier 

advocated, or whether or not you believe in the political stance 

that you take.  I say to you, sir, consistency is necessary in 

order for you to regain your credibility.  This is a problem 

which faces all of us and it's about time. I say again to the Tory 

Party do what you want to do, fess up, face the reality, and join 

us in rebuilding Saskatchewan even after your nine years of 

devastation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Cutting Government Expenditures 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

for the Minister of Finance.  The New Democratic Party gained 

support of more than 50 per cent of the people of the province 

at the polls in October of 1991, Madam Minister, based on the 

promises of holding the line on taxation.  And if your 

government hopes to earn the trust of the people you really 

must be able to prove that you've taken every possible measure 

to minimize the bill handed to the taxpayer.  The only way to 

do this of course is to provide solid evidence. 

 

Of all the people who have called me, Madam Minister, the 

number one question and the question I pose to you is this: how 

can we be sure that you have cut every expense in government 

which could be considered dispensable, and expendable, or 

unnecessary. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 

thank the leader of the third party for that question.  The 

answer to her question, the question being solid evidence, is set 

out in the books of last year and will be tabled here 

momentarily.  Let me just refresh the memory of the leader of 

the third party, 

what happened. 

 

For the nine years of the former administration, from 1982 to 

1991-92, on average every year expenditures grew by plus 6 

per cent -- $1 billion new debt as a result, each and every year, 

when revenues couldn't match, couldn't keep pace.  Last year 

what did we do?  We not only turned that plus 6 around but we 

cut it minus 3.2 for a net gain of over 9 per cent.  We were the 

only government in Canada to do so. 

 

This year we're going to take it down some more as you'll see 

in the budget in a few more minutes.  The proof of the pudding 

is that we have acted in this decisive way, as I've indicated to 

the leader of the third party.  There are other evidences as well.  

But there comes a point in any provincial budget that you have 

no more room to cut.  I cannot cut a helicopter program at $6.7 

billion.  I do not have a department of defence that I can cut or 

diminish.  I do not have the offloading problems that the 

federal government has.  We have taken concrete evidence to 

do the right kind of budgeting. 

 

Join us, I say.  Join the turn-around corner.  We are building a 

prosperous and optimistic Saskatchewan in this budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

directed then to the Premier.  You've conducted studies on the 

environment, studies on health care, studies on education, 

studies on casino gaming, on sustainable development, studies 

on workers' compensation, legal aid, and the list of topics 

studied at taxpayers' expense is really endless. 

 

Can you identify and produce the study that was done to show 

how caucus grants are spent, whether this legislature and its 

elected officials could operate more cost effectively?  Could 

you in fact provide us the study that shows that $401,000 

which is spent each and every year by your Executive Council 

on nothing but news releases in fact is going to be worthy of 

support from the taxpayers of this province?  Would you please 

today provide us with that study, Mr. Premier? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the leader of the 

third party for that question.  And if I may say so, with the 

greatest respect to her, I think I'd weigh more credibility to her 

question if she offered to cut her grants by about 25 per cent.  

And I haven't heard that at all. 

 

In fact what you do is you ask for more.  You get up in the 

legislature and the public and you say, I need more.  I'm all by 

myself.  More, more, more.  It's okay for you to use taxpayers' 

money to put out the Liberal position, but it's no good for us to 

do it or for the Conservatives to do it.  You're inconsistent. 

 

I also say to you with respect to consultations, we have 

consulted with virtually every group and major organization 

possible.  We have done our internal studies.  We have done 

changes to caucus.  Cabinet 



422 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1993 

took a minus 5 per cent cut last year.  We've frozen the salaries 

of all of the MLAs.  We've reduced the communications minus 

25 per cent. 

 

More needs to be done, but I want to tell the leader of the third 

party, if you fired every single MLA, including yourself, the 

size of the debt that these people left us, that amount of money 

would not even be a drop in the ocean, and we'd still need 

somebody to govern. 

 

So please get off this kick of denying and attacking the 

integrity of the democratic system.  You may think you're 

hurting us, but you're hurting yourself.  You're hurting all of us, 

and most importantly, you're impairing the important job of 

everybody to get together, to pull together to save this . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY 

ESTIMATES 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a message from 

Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 

 

The Speaker: -- Moved by the Minister of Finance, seconded 

by the Premier: 

 

 That Her Honour's message, the estimates, and 

supplementary estimates be referred to the Committee of 

Finance. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to move 

the following motion, seconded by the Premier, the member 

from Riversdale: 

 

 That Her Honour's message, the estimates, and 

supplementary estimates be referred to the Committee of 

Finance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many special guests here today.  There 

are only two who I would like to refer to specifically.  

Unfortunately my husband, Peter MacKinnon, was not able to 

attend because he's involved in the Nerland inquiry in Prince 

Albert.  But I'm very pleased that my two sons, Alan and 

William, are here.  I will spare them the embarrassment of 

pointing them out, but I thank my neighbours for bringing 

them. 

 

And it's especially fitting . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- I think it's especially fitting that my 

children are here today, because this budget is 

for our children; it is about our future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan was 

founded by pioneers who had the vision and the courage to 

make sacrifices, sacrifices in their time to secure a better future 

for their children.  Today our province faces economic 

challenges no less daunting than those faced by our pioneers.  

Today we too must have the vision and the courage to make the 

difficult choices which will help secure a better future for 

ourselves and our children. 

 

The challenges are real and very serious.  No one can deny that 

our government inherited a financial mess from the members 

opposite.  Now we are all forced to clean up and pay for their 

mismanagement.  In only 10 years, Saskatchewan's financial 

position has gone from one of the strongest in the country to 

one of the weakest. 

 

Our total debt per capita is the highest of all the provinces, 

$15,000 for every man, woman, and child.  Mr. Speaker, if 

Saskatchewan's total debt was stretched out before us in $20 

bills laid end to end, there would be enough of them to circle 

the earth at the equator twice. 

 

The interest payments on that huge debt -- just the interest, not 

the principle -- costs our province more than $2 million each 

and every day.  That's more than $2 million a day which leaves 

Saskatchewan for the bankers and the bond dealers of Toronto, 

New York, Zurich, and Hong Kong.  Every dollar we waste on 

interest payments is a dollar we can't spend to help create jobs 

or protect our public services here at home. 

 

Mr. Speaker, interest payments are robbing Saskatchewan 

families of jobs, services, and opportunities.  For their sake we 

have to get these interest payments and the budget deficits 

which caused them under control.  The sooner we do that, the 

sooner we'll secure Saskatchewan's future for ourselves and for 

our children. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Saskatchewan is not alone.  Dealing 

with debt is a challenge for governments everywhere.  The new 

President of the United States has acknowledged that.  He 

recently proposed tax increases and expenditure cuts to tackle 

the debt problems of the world's largest economy.  Yet the debt 

problems facing the United Sates are nowhere near as severe as 

those facing Canada or Saskatchewan.  So the need for action 

here is even more pressing. 

 

Canada must come to grips with its debt problem.  No one 

government can tackle it alone.  We require national solutions.  

We need cooperation, coordination, and a new national agenda. 

 

Imagine the potential of a national economic strategy 

committed to full employment.  Imagine a national 



March 18, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 423 

economic strategy committed to creating jobs today by 

modernizing Canada's infrastructure and making our economy 

more competitive for the future. 

 

Imagine a national economic strategy committed to protecting 

our social programs by improving the delivery of those 

programs.  Imagine the potential for true fairness if we had a 

national commitment to reform our tax system.  Imagine the 

potential for financial freedom if Canadians had a national plan 

to balance our budgets and reduce our debt. 

 

These goals can only be achieved at the national level.  In the 

mean time, we must act here at home.  We are showing the way 

in Saskatchewan.  We are on the leading edge of positive 

change.  We are proving that governments can reduce their 

deficits while remaining true to the fundamental values of 

cooperation, community, compassion, and fairness. 

 

We have made great progress in just a few short months.  To 

encourage jobs and economic growth we have introduced a 

comprehensive economic strategy, Partnership for Renewal, in 

cooperation with all sectors of the Saskatchewan economy. 

 

To protect our vital public services for future generations, we 

have launched major reforms in the delivery of those services, 

such as the wellness approach to health care.  To protect our 

farm families and the rural communities which depend on 

agriculture, we are working with farmers and with their 

organizations to build new, more effective safety net programs 

for the future. 

 

"Forging Partnerships in Agriculture," a discussion paper 

prepared by my colleague, the Minister of Agriculture, is a 

starting point for a province-wide consultation on how to build 

a more self-reliant and diversified agricultural industry. 

 

To guarantee Saskatchewan's financial freedom our 

government has undertaken the most wide-ranging deficit 

reduction program in all of Canada.  We are the only 

government in Canada to have actually reduced our operating 

expenditures. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- And with this budget, we are the 

first government in Canada to introduce a comprehensive 

balanced budget plan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- A plan which will create jobs and 

strengthen our economy; a plan which will rationalize and 

improve the delivery of our services; a plan which will balance 

the budget within four years without any further major personal 

tax increases or cuts to government services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- And a plan committed to 

compassion. 

Mr. Speaker, while the excesses of the past may appear to limit 

our opportunities today, we remain confident about our future.  

We do not fear change; we embrace it and shape it to meet our 

needs and our values. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, the comprehensive 

balanced budget plan I introduce today is a clarion call to all of 

those who believe in Saskatchewan's pioneering spirit and in 

our timeless values of cooperation, community, compassion, 

and fairness.  This plan will secure our future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a strong economy is a prerequisite to a balanced 

budget.  That's why job creation is a key component of our 

balanced budget plan.  We recognize that there are limits to 

what a provincial government can do to stimulate economic 

growth and create jobs.  Saskatchewan is not an economic 

island.  We cannot insulate people totally from the impact of 

federal policies or from the impact of changing world 

conditions.  We understand only too well that the main 

economic levers -- interest and exchange rate policy, banking 

and trade policy -- rest with Ottawa. 

 

That's why our government is raising its voice on behalf of 

Saskatchewan people in a call for a new national approach to 

economic development, one which focuses on creating jobs and 

strengthening the national economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, action has to begin at the national level.  But we 

will not sit idly by hoping for positive action.  We must do all 

we can as a province to create jobs now.  This requires a new 

approach to economic development. 

 

In the 1980s hundreds of millions of dollars went into 

megaprojects, draining our treasury and creating very few 

long-term jobs.  Those days are over. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- No more give-aways.  No more 

sweetheart deals.  No more megadollars for megaprojects.  It's 

time to give Main Street, Saskatchewan, a chance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Developed in partnership with 

business, labour, and communities, our economic development 

strategy involves giving our co-ops and small businesses a 

competitive edge, encouraging new investment, promoting 

value added processing, pursuing new growth industries, 

improving our infrastructure, and maintaining our highly 

skilled workforce. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan's co-ops and small businesses are 

the most effective job creation programs we have.  They were 

responsible for creating two-thirds of all new jobs in this 

province over the past 



424 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1993 

10 years.  Our government has recognized this job creation 

potential.  In the 1992-93 budget we reduced the small business 

corporation income tax rate from 10 per cent to 9 per cent.  I 

am pleased to announce that the rate will be further reduced 

from 9 per cent to eight and one-half per cent effective January 

1, 1994, and to 8 per cent on January 1, 1995. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- This represents a 20 per cent 

reduction in income taxes for co-ops and small businesses, a 

huge incentive to expand and create jobs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, new investment also 

means jobs.  This budget will encourage new investment in our 

province.  It includes improvements to Saskatchewan's 

labour-sponsored venture capital program.  And it removes the 

education and health tax from 1-800 telephone services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1445) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- In addition, Saskatchewan people 

will again be given an opportunity to invest in their province.  

In 1992 Saskatchewan savings bonds were an incredible 

success.  People demonstrated their faith in our province's 

future by buying more than a half a billion dollars worth of 

these bonds.  Today I am pleased to announce a new issue of 

Saskatchewan savings bonds will be made available to our 

citizens in 1993. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, our economic success 

in the 1990s will depend on our ability to broaden the base of 

the Saskatchewan economy.  The future contributions of our 

core industries will come from value added processing and new 

technologies, products, and services.  This budget will 

stimulate value added processing and the development of new 

growth industries. 

 

To encourage small-business investment and processing, I am 

pleased to announce a manufacturing and processing tax credit 

equal to 8 per cent of the value of eligible equipment required 

by small Saskatchewan businesses. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- In addition, our government will 

continue with the planned phase out of the educational and 

health tax on direct agents used in manufacturing and 

processing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- The rate will be lowered 

from 5 per cent to 3 per cent on July 1, '93 and it will become 

zero on July 1, 1994.  This tax reduction will encourage 

expansion and help create manufacturing and processing jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the jobs of tomorrow will depend on our ability to 

develop new technologies, new products, and new services for 

the global market-place.  This means a continuing commitment 

to research and development.  In spite of our financial 

difficulties, this budget maintains that commitment. 

 

It includes $12 million to develop new agricultural 

technologies, $7.5 million for the Saskatchewan Research 

Council to assist resource and manufacturing companies, $4 

million for research to improve the effectiveness and efficiency 

of the health system, and $1.5 million for the new 

Saskatchewan Energy and Conservation Development 

authority.  In total, $51 million will be invested in new growth 

opportunities to create jobs today and build for our future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- In spite of our severe financial 

constraints, our government will continue to invest in 

Saskatchewan's workforce.  We have to maintain a skilled, 

highly trained workforce to take full advantage of new 

economic opportunities. 

 

This budget provides $550 million over the next two years for 

Saskatchewan's post-secondary education system. 

 

Our government is also doing its part to provide summer 

employment opportunities for students.  Partnerships '93 will 

create 2,000 jobs for students in regional parks, municipalities, 

and small businesses. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- We are also providing education, 

training, and employment opportunities for those most in need.  

The New Careers Corporation will implement a cost-sharing 

arrangement with southern municipalities and regional parks to 

create over 1,600 jobs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- And programs to promote Indian 

and Metis training and employment will receive funding of 

almost $14 million. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, local businesses and 

co-ops are the main engines of economic growth in our 

province, but our government believes that the public sector 

too has an important role to play.  What no one company can 

do alone, our community can do together.  In particular we 

recognize the public sector's role in upgrading and modernizing 

Saskatchewan's infrastructure. 



March 18, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 425 

I am pleased to announce that our government will help to 

create jobs this year by investing $162 million in vital public 

projects, including $76 million for highways and airports; $19 

million for rural roads and bridges; $26 million for schools and 

universities; $27 million for health care facilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this investment in public infrastructure represents 

a 10 per cent increase over last year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- It means more jobs for 

Saskatchewan men and women.  Our Crown corporations will 

also help to create jobs this year with significant capital 

investments -- $520 million in construction projects will be 

undertaken by these public companies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget will encourage new jobs and 

economic development --  small business cuts; new incentives 

for investment; new tax credits and other benefits for 

manufacturers and processors; new investments in research and 

development; a program to modernize and upgrade our public 

infrastructure; new education and training opportunities.  These 

commitments will provide jobs today and will help secure our 

future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, agriculture is central to 

the health of our provincial economy.  It represents 10 per cent 

of our gross domestic product and 17 per cent of our employed 

labour force. 

 

This budget provides $320 million in support to farm families 

and the agricultural industry.  Yet despite massive federal and 

provincial spending over the last 10 years, the challenges 

facing farm families have not been resolved.  Our families 

continue to struggle with a cash flow crisis brought about by 

low grain prices and in many cases heavy debt loads. 

 

Governments need to recognize that the old ways haven't 

worked.  We need new solutions, and those solutions must be 

national in scope. 

 

Our agricultural industry competes in the global market-place.  

Our producers are battling subsidies provided to their 

competitors by the national treasuries of the United States and 

Europe.  Our national treasury needs to back our farmers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Unfortunately Ottawa has been 

going in the wrong direction.  Instead of living up to its 

national responsibilities to protect agriculture, it has been 

shifting a larger and larger share of the burden onto producers 

and onto provincial taxpayers.  We need a renewed national 

commitment to our farmers.  We need new national programs 

that meet the needs of the 21st century. 

 

Farm safety net programs like GRIP, the gross revenue 

insurance plan, are fundamentally flawed.  GRIP is a universal 

program based not on the needs of the individual producer, but 

on overall production.  As a consequence, the larger the farmer, 

the larger the payment from the public purse. 

 

Over 40 per cent of the funds paid out under the GRIP program 

in Saskatchewan end up in the hands of only 20 per cent of our 

farmers.  We need new, more effective federal-provincial farm 

safety net programs for the future -- programs targeted to those 

most in need, geared to recognizing the costs of production, 

and above all, designed to provide farm families with 

long-term income security. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Our government is committed to 

developing such a safety net program.  To further that goal, we 

are announcing today our intention to withdraw from GRIP in 

two years time.  By giving notice now, we can begin to work 

with other governments, farm organizations, and farmers 

themselves to develop a new, more effective farm safety net 

program for the future. 

 

We are not serving notice to withdraw from NISA (net income 

stabilization account) at this time, because this program, with 

appropriate revisions, could form the basis of a new and more 

effective farm safety net plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, new safety net programs will take time to 

develop.  But Saskatchewan farmers need cash now to help put 

the crop in the ground this spring.  That is why our government 

will continue to press Ottawa for the critical third line of 

defence payment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- The federal government has an 

obligation to our farmers, and this government will do 

everything it can to convince Ottawa to meet that obligation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I said earlier in my remarks, budget deficits and 

the interest payments those deficits generate are the number 

one drain on our economy.  They prevent economic growth.  

They destroy jobs.  That is why a balanced budget plan is so 

vital to our economic future.  We have to get our fiscal house 

in order. 

 

Our government began that task last year with our first budget.  

We reduced operating expenditures by almost 4 per cent.  

Other governments increased their spending; we reduced ours. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Government spending is under 

control.  However, revenue shortfalls, common to all 

governments in Canada this year, have put pressure on the 

1992-93 deficit.  Still, Mr. Speaker, I can announce today that 

the deficit for 1992-93 is projected to be $592 million, 30 per 

cent less than in 



426 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1993 

1991-92. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- The deficit for the coming year, 

1993-94, will be $296 million, a further reduction of nearly 50 

per cent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Today, Mr. Speaker, I am presenting 

a comprehensive plan with all the major spending cuts and 

revenue adjustments required to balance the budget by 

1996-97. 

 

We will balance the budget to provide Saskatchewan with the 

financial freedom to sustain economic growth and provide jobs 

for our young people, to protect our public services.  These 

goals are fundamental to the quality of life for Saskatchewan 

families.  These goals are what the balanced budget plan is all 

about. 

 

I invite all members to read the budget paper entitled 

Balancing the Budget -- The Fiscal Plan which I have tabled 

in the Assembly today.  This is the plan that will put our fiscal 

house in order.  This is the plan that will secure our future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- To achieve a balanced budget by 

1996, our government did a thorough review of both 

government spending and government revenues.  It was not an 

easy task.  It required some very difficult choices. 

 

First, let me review our decisions with respect to government 

spending.  We decided that government spending had to be cut 

significantly.  We started at the top.  This budget continues the 

freeze on MLAs' salaries; the 5 per cent cut in cabinet 

ministers' salaries; the reductions in allowances for government 

members of the legislature with extra duties; and the freeze on 

out-of-scope salary ranges in the public service. 

 

This budget also introduces a number of new spending cuts.  

Yesterday the Premier announced a major reorganization of 

government departments which will save taxpayers $5 million 

annually and make the delivery of government services and 

programs more effective.  In addition, our government is 

cutting 25 per cent of all agencies, boards, and commissions for 

savings of more than a million dollars a year. 

 

In total, Mr. Speaker, this budget commits government 

departments to save $15 million this year through internal . . . 

in savings and efficiencies, including reorganization, the 

reduction of duplication and overlap, maximizing the 

integration of services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government knows full well that every dollar 

counts.  There are hundreds of ways, big and small, in which 

we have cut waste and reduced 

inefficiency in both government departments and Crown 

corporations.  Here are just a few examples. 

 

Computer contracts in the Department of Energy and Mines 

were renegotiated for savings of $30,000.  Internal operations 

in the Agricultural Credit Corporation were reorganized for 

savings of over a million dollars.  SGI (Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance) negotiated a volume discount postage 

contract, saving $138,000 a year.  SaskEnergy consolidated 

office functions, saving $252,000 a year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have acted on many fronts to meet the 

demands of Saskatchewan people for a more responsive, more 

effective, and more efficient government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1500) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, we are leading by 

example.  But, Mr. Speaker, we cannot do it alone.  Tackling 

our deficit requires all of us to work together.  To succeed we 

need the support of everyone in the Saskatchewan community. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, this year about $1.6 

billion, 32 per cent of the provincial budget, will be transferred 

to health and school boards, universities, colleges, and 

municipalities -- our local government partners. 

 

With these funds they make their own decisions about the 

delivery of programs and services consistent with community 

priorities.  We have already been forced to reduce our transfers 

to these third parties, and I know that this has required many 

difficult choices on the part of our partners.  Today however I 

am calling on our partners to share further in the burden of 

reducing the deficit so that they can soon share in the benefits 

of balancing the budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Last year we provided third parties 

with a longer term commitment by announcing funding levels 

for two years.  Today I am confirming the previously 

announced funding levels for 1993-94 and announcing the 

following reduction in funding levels for 1994-95: 8 per cent in 

urban and rural revenue sharing grants; 2.8 per cent in 

operating funds for hospitals; 4 per cent in operating grants for 

local school boards, universities, regional and federated 

colleges, and SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Science and Technology). 

 

There is no doubt that these funding levels will require difficult 

choices.  But we are confident that local governments possess 

the creativity and the determination to meet the challenges in 

the best interests of their communities. 



March 18, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 427 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, difficult choices also 

had to be made with respect to programs provided directly by 

government.  In making these decisions we had to ask 

ourselves if these programs were affordable, not just this year 

but in future years.  One such program is the Saskatchewan 

prescription drug plan. 

 

In February the federal government passed Bill C-91, which 

will significantly increase the costs of prescription drugs and 

therefore increase the costs of the drug plan.  Forecasts show 

that the current drug plan will cost $110 million a year by 

1995. 

 

Some would argue that a province like Saskatchewan can no 

longer afford a drug plan.  They argue that the drug plan should 

be eliminated because most other provinces don't even offer a 

plan that provides benefits to families.  Mr. Speaker, we reject 

that view. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- We will not eliminate the 

Saskatchewan prescription drug plan.  To do so would mean 

serious hardship for some Saskatchewan families.  Today I 

announce that we have redesigned a new drug plan which will 

protect those with low incomes and with high drug costs.  We 

have created a Saskatchewan prescription drug plan which will 

be affordable today and affordable tomorrow. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- We have designed a plan that will 

protect those most in need. 

 

Another extremely difficult spending choice was the children's 

dental plan.  As you know, the school-based children's dental 

plan was gutted by the members opposite in 1987.  The current 

program is costing taxpayers $10.3 million a year and is not 

providing the province-wide coverage we all hope some day to 

restore to our province. 

 

Our government has decided to limit the current program to 

children in low income families and to begin pilot projects 

which, if funds become available, could lead to the restoration 

of a province-wide children's dental plan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- The Minister of Health will be 

providing additional details on these and other changes to 

health care programs and services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, across government we have used the principles of 

compassion and fairness to guide us in modifying more than 40 

programs, making them affordable today and preserving them 

for our future. 

 

Overall the 1993-94 budget cuts operating expenditures 

by $142 million from 1992-93.  In total this government has 

reduced operating expenditures by 7 per cent over the past two 

years.  We are helping to secure our future by requiring 

government to live within its means. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, reducing expenditures 

alone are not enough to solve this province's financial 

difficulties.  We do not have the wide array of options which 

exist for a national government.  We don't have a Department 

of National Defence or a helicopter program to cut.  About 90 

per cent of our budget is taken up by health, education, social 

services, agriculture and economic development, and interest 

payments.  To cut more than we already have in those areas 

would cause real hardship for some Saskatchewan families. 

 

To balance the budget and secure our future we must increase 

revenues.  This is especially true in light of declining federal 

commitments for health, education, agriculture, and social 

services.  Federal offloading is costing Saskatchewan taxpayers 

more than $500 million each and every year.  As a result, I'm 

announcing the following necessary revenue measures. 

 

Effective April 1, 1993, the rate for the corporation capital tax 

resource surcharge will increase to 3.6 per cent. 

 

Effective midnight tonight the fuel tax rate on gasoline, diesel, 

gasohol, and propane will increase 2 cents per litre. 

 

Effective midnight tonight the education and health tax rate 

will increase to 9 per cent. 

 

Effective midnight tonight the $300 education and health tax 

exemption on the purchase of adult clothing, adult footwear, 

and yard goods will be removed.  Children's clothing will 

continue to be exempt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all the major measures necessary to balance the 

budget in four years including the revenue measures I have just 

announced are included in the balanced budget plan being 

presented to this Assembly today.  In other words, the balanced 

budget plan sees no additional major cuts in government 

programs or major increases in personal taxes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- This balanced budget plan is not 

without risk.  Our revenue and expenditure targets could be 

thrown off course by the state of the global economy, natural 

catastrophes here at home, or more particularly the actions of 

the federal government. 

 

Federal offloading will undermine our balanced budget plan.  

We are hereby serving notice that this government cannot 

withstand any more federal offloading. 



428 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1993 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- But even in the face of these 

uncertainties we have shown the courage and the vision to put a 

comprehensive plan before the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- A plan to create jobs, strengthen our 

economy, protect public service, and balance the budget, a plan 

that secures our future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I do not deny that this 

budget requires sacrifice.  But there are some in our midst who 

cannot be asked to sacrifice more.  They have nothing left to 

give.  Our strength as a society is reflected in our willingness to 

protect our weakest members. 

 

By far the most vulnerable in our society are our children.  Far 

too many live in poverty or unstable family situations.  This 

budget acts to improve the lives of children and families.  

Assistance for working-poor families will be provided by 

increasing payments under the Family Income Plan.  There will 

also be an increase in the monthly social assistance payments 

to families with children. 

 

In 1994 the government will introduce a new child benefit plan 

to support children in low income families. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- This budget also provides almost 

$18 million for programs that directly benefit our children, 

including funding for child care, children's hunger programs, 

and the revised dental program. 

 

The pressures on families are enormous and many, sadly, suffer 

breakdown.  To prevent such tragedies the government has 

introduced preventative programs designed to support families.  

This year we are increasing funding for these programs. 

 

Increased funding will be provided for the family builders 

program which provides in-home therapy to families in crisis, 

and increased funding will be available for support services for 

troubled families. 

 

Single parent women face special challenges.  Single parent 

women need special support.  There will be additional funding 

for infant care centres to help encourage single parents remain 

in school and finish their education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- The teen parent program for 

expectant teenage mothers will be expanded.  And to ensure 

that parents live up to their responsibilities, $1 million will be 

provided to enhance the enforcement 

of maintenance orders. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Low income seniors on the 

Saskatchewan income plan will have their benefits increased.  

These seniors will also receive enhanced benefits under a 

number of other programs, including chiropractic and 

optometric services and the drug plan. 

 

Seniors value their independence.  To help promote this, 

funding for home care services has been increased to $43 

million, in part to fund a new wellness initiative to provide 

additional home care services for patients discharged early 

from hospital. 

 

There will be a continuation of funding for family connections, 

a program designed to ensure that Indian and Metis children in 

need of protection can remain within their own cultural 

communities.  The aboriginal court worker program designed 

to support Indian and Metis people at odds with the law will 

also be re-established. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, this is deficit reduction 

with a difference.  This is deficit reduction which reduces 

expenditures but also shows compassion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, today I have presented 

a plan to secure our future.  A plan that creates jobs and 

strengthens our economy.  A plan that protects public services 

by rationalizing the delivery of those services.  A plan that 

balances the budget within four years.  A plan with a difference 

-- a plan with compassion. 

 

There will be those who say that this plan moves too quickly to 

balance the budget.  To them I say, in the 1980s government 

spent what they didn't have and left the bills to be paid by our 

children.  That era is over. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- I'm going to leave my children more 

than just a stack of unpaid bills. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- There will be those who say we 

should not raise taxes.  Of them I ask, how then would they 

balance the budget without eliminating the safety nets that 

protect Saskatchewan families? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1515) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I will not apologize for 

the compassion we have shown in this 



March 18, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 429 

budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Compassion for those in need is one 

of Saskatchewan's finest traditions.  I am proud to say that this 

government and this budget remains true to that tradition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Finally, Mr. Speaker, there will be 

some who say that they did not create this deficit so they 

should not have to sacrifice to eliminate it.  To them I say, you 

may not have created this deficit but neither did I. 

 

Looking back and assessing blame won't solve our problem; 

looking forward and working together will. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, the eyes of our 

children are on us.  They are looking to us for leadership, 

determination, and courage.  They are counting on us to 

rekindle the true pioneering spirit of our great province.  They 

want us to face our challenges head-on, to be bold enough to 

chart new courses, to be determined enough to make the 

difficult choices now, and to be visionary enough to look to the 

future with confidence and hope. 

 

This is what we have done in our plan.  We have acted today to 

restore confidence and hope in our province.  We have acted 

today to secure our children's future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the Deputy Premier, the member from Regina Dewdney: 

 

 That this Assembly do now resolve itself into the Committee 

of Finance. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

think it's appropriate that I stand today in this Assembly and 

say a few words on behalf of Saskatchewan taxpayers in 

response to the budget just delivered by the member from 

Saskatoon Westmount, the Hon. Finance minister. 

 

And I think I can honestly say that, Mr. Speaker, because over 

the last year and a half, going on two years now, we have seen 

the most intensive PR (public relations), media, and political 

campaign that this province has ever seen in order to take some 

of the heat off of the member from Saskatoon Riversdale and 

his government over the promises they made to Saskatchewan 

people in the fall of 1991. 

 

And what we have today, Mr. Speaker, is the culmination of 

that web of betrayal that is spun today in this document.  

Because in it the member from Saskatoon Westmount tries to 

give all sorts of reasons why Saskatchewan taxpayers should 

forgive this 

Premier and his government for the promises that they made 

and didn't keep after October of 1991 -- those promises, Mr. 

Speaker, about having no new taxes. 

 

I've got two pages of quotes here, Mr. Speaker, that I won't 

read into the record today.  I'm sure we'll have ample 

opportunity on other days in this debate to get to those. 

 

For the Leader of the New Democratic Party, the hon. member 

from Riversdale, promised Saskatchewan people time and time 

again that he could live within $4.5 billion, that he would have 

no new taxes, that he would not offload on Saskatchewan 

taxpayers and families; that he would simply eliminate some 

waste and mismanagement and then his superior management 

skills would come to the fore and everything in Saskatchewan 

-- our health, our education, our social services, the quality of 

life of Saskatchewan people -- would be enhanced. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately that didn't come about.  

Because I believe that the member from Riversdale, knowing 

full well what the economic situation of this province was 

because he had been told over and over again, never intended 

on keeping those promises; that after 25 years in the political 

life of this province he said, I'm going to be premier at 

whatever cost it takes; that I will promise Saskatchewan people 

one thing and I will deliver another. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, it's a sad, sad commentary on 

political life in this province when we would have so many 

promises made and so many promises broken and so many 

taxpayers' pockets picked in such a short time.  It's no wonder 

people in this province say that politicians are ranking just 

about lower than anyone else on the Richter scale. 

 

I look at a budget, Mr. Speaker, that should have had the 

leadership from the top, that should have had this Premier 

saying, I will cut my own.  I will start at the top and show the 

leadership that is absolutely necessary to get Saskatchewan 

taxpayers to dig into their pockets for $788 million alone in 

sales tax over the next four years.  I will start at the top and do 

away with some of these cabinet ministers that don't 

particularly have any duties any more. 

 

I mean it's one thing to shuffle the deck on the boat, Mr. 

Speaker, but after the chairs are rearranged and some of them 

are still standing up I think you should show them off to the 

galley, and the Premier refuses to do that.  He would rather 

look after his friends than show the leadership. 

 

The ratios in this government in this document, Mr. Speaker, 

are still 2:1 on the revenue side over the cuts that are absolutely 

necessary for this province to get to a financial position so that 

our children will be here in the future. 

 

It should have been the other way around -- for every dollar of 

new taxes there should have been $2 of cuts.  But we didn't see 

that kind of leadership today, Mr. 



430 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1993 

Speaker, from the member from Riversdale. 

 

Today we saw the absolute betrayal of the agricultural 

community in our province, the betrayal started by the member 

from Rosetown-Elrose last year when he took away the ability 

of farm families in this province to have bankability and 

predictability and a decent insurance program in the face of 

whatever mother nature can throw at us, in the face of whatever 

the international commodity markets throw at the farm 

community. 

 

And today we saw a further 18 per cent reduction in the largest 

sector of our economy.  We saw a program taken away without 

a program to replace it with, and we simply lit up the blame 

thrower and we said it's all somebody else's fault. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, farm families by the thousand have 

gathered around this province in protest against this 

government in the work started by the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose and obviously finished today by the member 

from Saskatoon Westmount. 

 

And I say, Mr. Speaker, it is a tragedy because thousands of 

people around this province this spring are going to wonder 

about putting in a crop.  They don't know how they're going to 

go to their banker.  They don't know how they're going to go to 

the fuel dealer and the fertilizer dealer.  And Main Street, rural 

Saskatchewan, looks awful dismal, Mr. Speaker, after what we 

saw brought down here today in this legislature. 

 

You know, it's strange, Mr. Speaker, that we see the 

government bringing in what were ordinary line items in past 

budgets as major parts of a budget announcement today; when 

we talk about $12 million in agricultural research, when in fact 

there was $17 million the year before. 

 

And that's why I say to you, Mr. Speaker, this budget is a web 

of deceit.  It is going to take the accountants of the province 

months to figure out what's going on here, much less ordinary 

taxpayers.  One only has to look, Mr. Speaker, to page 50 of 

the document and we see two different deficit numbers:  one is 

an accrual number and one is a cash-in number.  The deficit 

brought down by the Minister of Finance says 296.3; and yet if 

we use the system that we've been using since, I'm told, 1957, 

the number is actually 340.  Which is it? 

 

This government will stoop to no ends, Mr. Speaker, to weave 

that web of confusion, that web of mystery, that web of deceit, 

so that Saskatchewan taxpayers won't place the blame where 

the blame fully rests.  And that's on the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale who said to them, I can live within 4.5 

and I will not raise any more taxes. 

 

It's interesting, Mr. Speaker, when one looks at the offering to 

small business, the engine of growth, the people that employ 

the majority of folks in this province.  They're saying to them, 

we're going to give you harmonization for eight months -- 

April to 

December -- and if you're in the processing and manufacturing 

sector we're going to give you harmonization, that we're going 

to kick-start the Saskatchewan economy, we're going to get 

some jobs with eight months of harmonization in that sector. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the member from Riversdale rejected full 

harmonization of our economy at 7 per cent in 1991, full 

harmonization which would have kick-started many businesses, 

which would have provided employment, which would have 

had a tax refund of every businessman or farmer in this 

province, and he rejected that.  He came up with studies and 

figures that said 7,500 jobs are at stake here -- $1.3 billion in 

economic activity. 

 

The truth is, Mr. Speaker, we have lost 9,000 jobs from 

February of '92 to February of '93, and we probably have lost a 

billion dollars in economic activity because the member from 

Riversdale was so hidebound in his ideology that he would not 

do what was right. 

 

And he talks about having a balanced budged in '96-97.  Well, 

Mr. Speaker, he could have had it a lot sooner.  If it's good 

enough to kick-start the economy, Mr. Speaker, for eight 

months in 1993, surely to goodness if he'd applied it to the 

entire business sector and farming community across this 

province, he'd have had a heck of a kick-start and balanced the 

budget to boot. 

 

But would he do that, Mr. Speaker?  No, we're going to tinker 

and we're going to fool around because we're afraid to admit 

our mistake.  We're more worried, Mr. Speaker, about our 

political hide than what Saskatchewan taxpayers want done 

properly in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this province faces many challenges in the 

coming year.  Net farm income is cast at $241 million, the 

lowest level since the 1930s; $241 million, Mr. Speaker, means 

bankruptcy and dislocation for thousands of people unless they 

have a government that is prepared to stand at their side, unless 

they have a government like one some 10 years ago when 

interest rates were 22 per cent in this province, that stood at 

their side and saved their homes and their farms because the 

member from Riversdale then wouldn't do it, and he's not doing 

it today. 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have five pages of rate increases in my hands 

here -- five pages of rate increases.  Very small ones -- they're 

from $10 to 75; they're from $10 to 250 -- but I say to you that 

the member from Riversdale and his government have been 

picking the pockets of Saskatchewan people from the day that 

they got in power. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- They have offloaded and offloaded and 

offloaded and it is a cost of doing business in each 



March 18, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 431 

and every household in this province.  It is a cost that none of 

us can run away from except if we cross the border into the 

neighbouring province of Alberta.  And I predict to you, sir, 

that by the thousands they will go across that border because of 

what this government has done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this offloading, this half a billion dollars in 

hidden taxes over the next four years is the ultimate betrayal of 

the member from Riversdale.  This half a billion dollars that 

taxpayers, that property owners are going to have to suck up 

for their education and their health and the services that make 

our communities worth living in, that half-a-billion-dollar, 

hidden tax betrayal, Mr. Speaker, is why Saskatchewan people 

are going to reject that party. 

 

That is why they're going to say to the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale, if you do not start showing the leadership you got 

elected for, sir, if you don't start at the top with your cabinet 

and your friends, your hundreds of friends, then, Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan people can't be expected to stay here and 

shoulder the burden, and shoulder the burden that is absolutely 

necessary to build our economy. 

 

Mr. Premier, I'll give you one example before I adjourn debate 

today -- one example.  You had the option, sir, of selling 

TransGas, the pipeline utility, the utility that delivers natural 

gas all over this province, for half a billion dollars -- half a 

billion dollars.  And you still would have collected the tariff 

and the tolling and the royalties and the taxes.  There wouldn't 

have been one RM (rural municipality) on the right of way of 

that pipeline that still wouldn't have got its taxes from a 

privatized TransGas. 

 

The half a billion dollars the Premier could have received 

would have meant no offloading for the next four years, no 

offloading on Saskatchewan taxpayers at all, because the 

amounts are exactly the same.  And he would have still 

collected his revenue as he does today. 

 

And to top that off, Mr. Speaker, to top that off he wouldn't 

have had to sink another 64 million bucks into pipe in the 

ground that Saskatchewan taxpayers are going to have to pay 

for rather than the shareholders of a pipeline utility. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier laughs at that.  He laughs at 

that.  But when the choices are made, Mr. Speaker, that each 

and every taxpayer in this province, every property owner in 

this province, is going to have to dig into hip national and pay 

for the broken promises of the member from Riversdale, I think 

people would make the proper choice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say to the Premier today:  you still have the 

opportunity, sir, you still have the opportunity to show some 

leadership.  And tomorrow you could come to this legislature 

and you could say to Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, the 

Premier could say to Saskatchewan people, in retrospect I 

realize that leadership has to start from the top.  And I'm 

announcing today that I 

have cut my cabinet, that I have cut some of my friends in high 

places. 

 

And I've dedicated those salaries, I've dedicated those salaries 

to the disadvantaged people that the minister from Westmount 

talked about -- those people in our society that are without the 

proper health coverage because of this government, the people 

that will be without the proper dental coverage because of this 

government, the people that will be without an educational 

system that this Premier said would never be in jeopardy. 

 

Mr. Premier, show the leadership that you got elected to 

provide this province.  Come into this legislature tomorrow and 

start fresh, and don't believe your own rhetoric. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker, at this time I'd like to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Resumption of Budget Debate 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- I move, seconded by the House 

Leader, the member from Regina Elphinstone: 

 

 That the debate on the motion that this Assembly do now 

resolve itself into the Committee of Finance be resumed on 

Friday, March 19, 1993. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 3:37 p.m. 

 


