


















































Hansard: May 12, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1629 

 May 12, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to introduce to you, sir, and to all 

the members of the legislature, some students from my 

constituency in Saskatoon who I believe are in the Speaker's 

gallery.  They are from St. Dominic School.  There are 36 of 

them in number; they represent grade 7 and 8.  They are 

accompanied by their teachers, Peter MacDonald and Rob 

Herrick. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as is the custom of the members of the legislature, 

I would ask all members to join me in welcoming our special 

guests from St. Dominic School.  Welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, once again this afternoon 

the Assembly is honoured with the presence of a number of 

civil servants on one of the civil servant tours.  I think this is 

the fourth or fifth such tour that has passed through the 

legislative buildings. 

 

This particular tour has employees from the Department of 

Finance, Economic Development, Community Services, Sask 

Education, Justice, Environment, Community Services.  They 

are here to observe the legislature in action and will be 

throughout the building today to see the many services and 

facilities that the legislature has to offer.  And I would like you 

and all members of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, to welcome 

our guests here this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I have a further introduction, Mr. 

Speaker.  There is in your gallery a number of people that I 

would like to introduce to the legislature.  They are Indian 

people.  Chief Mary Anne Daywalker is here, Elder Ernest 

Crowe, Elder George Carrier.  And during the course of 

question period they will be joined by First Vice-Chief Dan 

Bellegarde and Mr. Lester Henry, all representing the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations. 

 

Today we'll be giving first reading to the legislation of 

particular interest to them.  So I would ask all members to 

welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Rolfes: -- If members will permit the Speaker, I 

would like to join with the Premier and welcome the group 

from St. Dominic School.  I had the pleasure of teaching at St. 

Dominic School for a period of time. 

But more particularly, I would like to welcome Peter 

MacDonald who had the privilege of working for the Speaker 

for some time back in the '70s.  And I want to ask all members 

to join with me in welcoming the students and the teachers of 

St. Dominic School. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Changes to Workers' Compensation 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Minister of Labour.  Mr. Minister, the Canadian Federation 

of Independent Business today released two Workers' 

Compensation Act review committee documents which clearly 

indicate that the concerns of the business community with 

regards to the new Workers' Compensation Act were well 

founded.  One of these documents is signed by Judge Muir, and 

the other is signed by the entire committee. 

 

These documents which the government tried to hide clearly 

indicate that the recommendations of the review committee 

were not followed.  They also show that the minister has 

attempted to mislead the House and the people of 

Saskatchewan in his statement about the costs of these changes 

and about the review committee support of the government's 

legislation.  Mr. Minister, this is an extremely serious matter. 

 

Mr. Minister, my question:  will you apologize to this House?  

Will you apologize to the people of Saskatchewan who you 

tried to mislead, particularly the business community who you 

accused of raising unfounded concerns about this legislation?  

And will you withdraw the Bill and have it redrafted to 

incorporate the recommendations of the review committee that 

you originally ignored? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The member is incorrect in 

suggesting that the document to which you refer and to which 

the WCIB referred throws into doubt the whole Bill.  Indeed 

the reports to which you refer, and which I doubt very much 

that the House has at least one of them, were done as a result of 

a request from myself. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- In April? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- In preparing -- yes, in April -- in 

preparing the Bills it was apparent that the Muir committee had 

left a couple of areas unclear.  I wrote them and asked them for 

a clarification.  We got the clarification.  I am not entirely sure 

that the responses require an amendment.  If there is, it will 

done in the form of a House amendment. 

 

They do not however bring into disrepute the entire Bill.  It's 

only a couple of minor sections of the Bill.  The main thrust of 

the Bill is what Judge Muir recommended and he'd be the first 

one to tell you that if you took the time to ask him. 



1630 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1993 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

there's nothing minor about these changes that are required or 

that are being suggested.  Mr. Minister, again this comes down 

to a matter of trust in your government, and again you have 

failed the test. 

 

Mr. Minister, time and again the opposition and the business 

community stated that these changes would cost substantially 

more than the 20 million you were suggesting. 

 

Time and again you responded by saying that all of the studies 

you had conducted backed your figures.  Mr. Minister, plain 

and simple, you weren't telling the truth.  You had a report in 

your possession from your own review committee that 

expressed serious concerns about the cost of implementing 

these changes retroactively.  You had in your possession a 

report that recommended against such changes.  You hid that 

report, and you even went so far as to suggest that the review 

committee supported your legislation. 

 

Mr. Minister, you misled this House.  Mr. Minister, I call on 

you today to apologize.  And I call on you to table any other 

reports that you may be hiding with regard to these Bills.  Will 

you do that today, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm not sure if the member from 

Maple Creek is at all interested in the facts of the case.  The 

facts of the case are that the Bill reflects with a good deal of 

precision the report of the Muir committee.  The two 

documents to which you refer were questions which I asked the 

review committee to review and do so promptly before the 

Bills in this House got third reading, because I was concerned 

about those two things. 

 

They did and gave us a report.  The Justice department is now 

considering whether or not the report which we got from the 

Muir committee require House amendments.  If they do, they 

will be introduced.  But it is simply a matter of some House 

amendments to two relatively minor sections at the end of the 

day. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Again, Minister, I think that the people of 

Saskatchewan will judge that your interpretation of minor is 

very, very wrong.  Mr. Minister, you introduced legislation 

against your own committee's advice, and then you put out a 

brochure saying that they supported what you were doing -- a 

brochure. 

 

When the business community raised concerns about the costs 

of these changes, you accused them of spreading hysteria, even 

though you had a report in your hands that said that they were 

right.  When the opposition asked you to reveal any studies you 

had that gave the true costs of the legislation, you said no 

such report existed.  That's three strikes against you, Mr. 

Minister.  And you stand in your place and say that you've done 

nothing wrong; it's all trivial. 

 

I know that not telling the truth has become a common practice 

for your government, Minister. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order.  Order.  I 

would ask the member to not use inflammatory terms in asking 

his question.  I've listened very carefully, and on three or four 

occasions the member has used terms which cause nothing but 

inflammatory reactions by the members in this House.  And I 

ask him to please . . . Order.  I would ask the member please to 

refrain from doing so and ask his question. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I respect your ruling, Mr. Speaker, and will 

try to do better.  Mr. Minister, you are caught red-handed.  

Don't you feel some obligation to own up to what you have 

done? 

 

Mr. Minister, once more I demand that you apologize to this 

House.  I demand that you table any other hidden reports that 

you have about this legislation and the occupational health and 

safety legislation.  And I demand that in light of these serious 

improprieties, that this legislation now be withdrawn.  Will you 

commit to that today, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, this government has 

been painstakingly careful with this legislation.  While it was 

being developed we hired the senior managing partner of a 

Saskatoon office of Price Waterhouse to help us with the costs.  

As the matter developed and just before it was introduced, 

there were . . . it appeared to us there were a couple of areas 

which had not been defined with precision by the Muir report. 

 

At my request, the Muir committee reviewed the two areas and 

gave us an opinion.  We are now asking for an opinion from 

Justice as to whether or not that in fact . . . whether or not those 

problems will require any House amendments.  That's where 

it's at.  Nobody was hiding anything.  We were simply 

following a tradition of being very careful in the development 

of this legislation so there would be no surprises, and that's all 

this was.  This was not something that came out of the blue; 

this was done because we requested the Muir committee to 

give us an opinion in these two areas. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Minister, 

I believe that you didn't tell all of the facts to the business 

community, and I believe that you have misled this legislature 

in the way that you've presented this whole package.  You said 

you were acting on the recommendations of your review 

committee and when you had in your hands a document signed 

by all seven members that says exactly the opposite. 



May 12, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1631 

We asked you for further reports on costs, and you said no such 

report exists.  You accuse the business community of spreading 

falsehoods when you had information that what they were 

saying was true.  You have accused and abused your position 

of public trust.  You've been deceitful and dishonest with us, 

quite frankly . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order, order!  If the member . . . 

Order!  If the member persists in using that language, I will 

recognize another member for a question.  I ask the member to 

stop using inflammatory language which adds nothing to the 

debate in this House, and I ask the member to put his question. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'll choose my 

words more carefully. 

 

And now, Mr. Minister, you stand in your place and you say 

that you've done nothing wrong.  Well, Mr. Minister, I see no 

honour that can be . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- I ask the member . . . Order.  I ask the member 

to please put his question. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Minister, will you take responsibility for 

your actions and tender your resignation as a minister of this 

government today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, this opposition has in 

times past attempted to make a mountain out of a molehill but 

this really sets some sort of a high-water mark for this sort of 

an activity. 

 

Let me for the benefit of the member opposite read the letter 

which he finds so inflammatory and so insulting.  Let me just 

read the first paragraph of this letter.  It is addressed to the 

Hon. Ned Shillington, and it says: 

 

The above letter to the Chairperson of the Workers' 

Compensation (Board) was considered at a meeting of the 

Committee in Saskatoon today. 

 

They were considering my letter to them asking them to give us 

some further guidance on two issues.  The letter clearly states 

it.  I recommend to the member from Maple Creek, before you 

ask for someone's resignation, read the material which you 

claim to be the basis of this great embarrassment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I will continue 

from the next paragraph, which says: 

 

In the opinion of the Committee, it would be 

administratively and financially impractical to have these 

changes operate retroactively. 

 

And on it goes.  You read the first paragraph which is polite, 

that any judge would do in the start of any letter to any person, 

no matter what he thought, but the 

meat is in the letter and you'd better read it all, Mr. Minister, 

because the reality is that you're wrong, dead wrong, in this 

one. 

 

Mr. Premier, my question is to you.  Since the minister refuses 

to take the responsibility for his actions, I must ask you to take 

the appropriate measures.  You have a minister who has 

seriously breached the public trust, Mr. Premier; you were 

elected Premier on the commitment to provide open and honest 

government; your minister has neither been open nor honest.  

He has disgraced himself and your government and this entire 

legislature.  Mr. Premier, I ask you now, will you demand the 

resignation of your minister and do the right thing? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Since the member wishes to deal with 

paragraph 3 of the letter, which is what you read from, let me 

read the first sentence in paragraph 3.  The first sentence . . . 

well, we could read the whole paragraph if you like; I doubt if 

the Speaker will permit that but let me try the first sentence: 

 

The Committee did not intend that the amendments it 

recommended to . . . (section 43 would) . . . be retroactive. 

 

Note the use of the verb "intend".  It was clear the committee 

had not recommended it.  They simply hadn't made any 

comment upon it.  And they therefore said the committee did 

not intend this.  That is what I wanted them to say, what they 

intended.  We got it. 

 

This was a report done for us to assist us in finalizing the 

legislation.  That's all it was.  When the matter is concluded, 

and before Committee of the Whole, the legislature will be 

fully informed.  We do not yet know whether or not this will 

result in the necessity for any House amendments. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, it is 

clear today that you have gone deliberately into the writing of 

legislation against the wishes and the recommendations of a 

committee that you yourself employed.  And then you told us 

that no such thing was going on.  You haven't told us what the 

real truth of the matter is here then. 

 

What you've really done is wrote legislation that you wanted -- 

the way you wanted it -- and then you say that the important 

issues in the question are not important at all.  That doesn't 

make any sense to the people of this province.  Five thousand 

businesses belong to the Canadian Federation of Independent 

Business, and they've tried to consult with you; they've asked 

for time for consultation. They've told you what this thing is 

going to do to them, and you won't listen.  You won't consult. 

 

Mr. Premier, my question to you:  will you demand the 

resignation of this man today? 



1632 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1993 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We have . . . in answer . . . I'm not 

sure, Mr. Speaker, how one carries on a dialogue with someone 

who's deaf, but let me try. 

 

We had extensive consultations with the business community.  

This was one of the issues they in fact raised.  It was apparent 

to me and apparent to those who were drafting the Bill that the 

Muir committee had not been as definitive on this issue as they 

should have been.  So we asked them for further clarification.  

That's all you have, is a clarification of a matter for which we 

requested. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Co-op Upgrader Review 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question will be to the minister responsible for the Crown 

Investments Corporation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last fall, in what we in this legislature thought 

was the height of crass politics, the NDP (New Democratic 

Party) government leaked a caucus document to the media, full 

of half-truths and innuendo regarding the Co-op upgrader. 

 

Its sole purpose, I believe, Mr. Speaker, was to malign and 

denigrate the Co-op upgrader and pressure Federated Co-op 

into caving into the wishes of the chairman of CIC (Crown 

Investment Corporation), Don Ching, and his NDP government 

colleagues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was an appalling example of political 

manipulation.  Today we've seen them go better, Mr. Speaker.  

Today, Mr. Speaker, the NDP government leaked another of its 

own documents which threatens more unilateral legislation to 

nationalize the Co-op upgrader if they don't cave into the 

wishes of Mr. Don Ching. 

 

My question to the minister: Mr. Minister, who in your 

government leaked this document and why? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the Hon. 

Associate Minister of Finance, the minister in charge of CIC, 

for permitting me to answer the question. 

 

The answer very, very shortly put to the question is: nobody 

that we know of leaked the document.  We obviously are 

looking into the aspects of the leak because this is a matter 

which is of some concern to the government.  But we have not 

that information, and nobody from the front benches or 

anybody that we've been able to uncover is responsible for this. 

 

But the second aspect of the question, Mr. Speaker, speaks to 

the very important issues of the substance of what the news 

report carries.  And I remind the hon. member opposite that 

Judge Estey in his commission of inquiry said, with respect to 

the upgrader that you 

people negotiated, on page 11, the following: 

 

Consequently, the project has, in a financial sense, run 

aground.  (Note those words, Mr. Speaker, has run aground 

in a financial sense) . . . it cannot sustain the existing debt 

load. 

 

Now from our point of view as a government we have said, and 

I repeat in the legislature, that we're prepared to adopt the 

recommendations of the Estey report if our partners also agree 

to adopt the recommendations of the Estey report.  The federal 

government has indicated a willingness.  The former premier 

says to me across the floor of the House, good luck in my 

expectations.  Unfortunately thus far, FCL (Federated 

Co-operatives Ltd.) has not yet agreed.  We continue to work 

but we have to act on our duties. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Before I recognize the next question I want to 

ask members to please not interrupt, either when the question is 

asked or when the ministers are trying to answer.  I'm sure we 

want to hear the question; we'd also like to hear the answers.  

So please let's . . . I would like to ask the member from Wilkie 

to please not constantly talk from his chair.  If he has a 

question he should go to his caucus and ask permission to ask a 

question. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I will . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Does the member from 

Rosthern have a point of order?  I will recognize the member 

on a point of order after question period. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I will ask my 

question to the Premier, the member from Riversdale, in the 

absence of the minister responsible having the courage to stand 

up. 

 

Mr. Premier, you went to extraordinary lengths to put the Estey 

inquiry together.  You spent several hundred thousand dollars 

of taxpayers' money.  And at the end of the day you hoped 

you'd get a stick in order to beat on the Co-op upgrader with.  

Well that backfired, Mr. Premier.  It didn't work. 

 

So I'm suggesting to you, you got your friend Don Ching to 

draft some legislation, leak it, leak it to the media, in another 

attempt to browbeat the people at Federated Co-ops. 

 

Mr. Premier, I don't know what it will take to stop your 

political agenda, what you won't do in order to try and justify 

the political agenda of your government.  You've used this 

legislature to take away contracts.  You've used closure in here 

innumerable times.  And now you use the threat of 

nationalization against one of the most prominent business 

groups, community-owned groups in our province. 

 

This has got nothing to do with renegotiating any deal, Mr. 

Premier.  This is heavy-handed political manipulation by you 

and your friend, Don Ching. 



May 12, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1633 

Mr. Premier, stand in this legislature today and deny that your 

government would use that kind of legislation against 

Federated Co-ops. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, Moody's, in issuing the 

credit rating for the province yesterday which maintained our 

standing, said the following in its report: 

 

Success in curtailing government exposure to private sector 

venture debt and loan guarantees, will be important to 

maintaining the current credit rating. 

 

Not increasing, Mr. Speaker, but maintaining.  It says: 

 

This will determine the extent and pace to which 

Saskatchewan's overall financial position will benefit from 

current reductions in the budgetary deficit. 

 

In others words, we're doing the job on the budgetary deficit, 

but these loan guarantees, of which the upgrader is but one star 

example engaged by your administrations, according to 

Moody's has imperilled our fiscal position as a province. 

 

Judge Estey on page 11 said:  The project has run aground 

financially; he said, "it cannot sustain the existing debt load."  

He also says on page 34: 

 

Provincial leaders . . . are the custodians of the Provincial 

Treasury.  A threat to the fiscal integrity of the Province 

must be met by the office-holders of the day . . . 

 

Now we have to act on that.  I share that responsibility.  Judge 

Estey has painted the way out of this morass that you and your 

government accepted to the detriment of the taxpayers.  We're 

prepared to adopt Judge Estey.  We think the federal 

government is prepared to deal.  We have not heard from FCL. 

 

We want all of the parties, although it's painful to us, to clean 

up this particularly very difficult and awkwardly and badly 

negotiated deal that you prepared in order to protect the fiscal 

integrity of all the taxpayers of Saskatchewan.  And you should 

be onside with us too in doing that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question will 

be to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, I think we need a series of 

questions here to flush out your true motives. 

 

Simple and short: can you confirm to us today that certain 

members of the NDP were kept fully apprised of the 

negotiations with the Co-op upgrader by Federated Co-op prior 

to the 1986 election, and can you tell us who those members 

were? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't know who was 

fully apprised or who might not have been apprised.  This is 

irrelevant.  What is relevant is Judge Estey's conclusion . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . No, it's irrelevant.  Judge Estey says 

this project has run financially aground.  Judge Estey said that 

it is the duty of the government of the day to take a look at 

what we can do to solve the situation. 

 

You were at the Treasury Board.  You, sir, and the former 

premier were the people who authorized the signature to this 

arrangement.  Now everybody, including the federal 

government, is prepared to make repairs -- everybody.  And 

you still cling to the notion that the people of this province 

should be exposed upwards of $750 million, thereby 

imperilling the entire integrity of the province of 

Saskatchewan.  I say to you, Estey says we can't do that; we 

say we can't do that.  We've got a responsibility to put your 

mess in to proper position and join us in doing it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Premier, 

because you won't confirm it to the legislature, let me do it for 

you.  Harold Empey, the former chairman of the Co-op 

upgrader and the man who negotiated the deal said, and I 

quote: 

 

We met periodically with the opposition party (now the 

government opposite) to keep them informed of the project 

and the progress we were making regarding negotiations.  

We told them of our members' concerns. 

 

Mr. Empey goes on to say that everyone knew the basic 

principles behind the deal: the government, the negotiators, and 

the NDP opposition.  Mr. Empey made these remarks to the 

1992 Co-op convention. 

 

Mr. Premier, Mr. Empey says that the NDP knew the details of 

the Co-op negotiations from the very start.  Mr. Premier, can 

you confirm that two of the NDP members who were very well 

briefed on the Co-op deal at that time were the current 

chairman of CIC, Don Ching, and the current member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale.  Would you confirm that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I can confirm that when 

we assumed office on November 1 and when I looked at the 

documents, which I think perhaps should be tabled in their 

entirety at some very appropriate moment, including the 

memoranda to the former premier pleading with him not to 

sign the deal 10 days before the election in 1986, including the 

various documents to you as a member of the Treasury Board 

-- all those documents -- I can confirm to you that nobody 

outside of you and the former premier and the PC 

administration must have known of them. 

 

You took every advice that your officials gave to you and you 

tore it apart.  Everything.  That's the first time I knew about that 

advice and those recommendations and anybody on this side.  

But that is irrelevant. 



1634 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1993 

What is relevant is that your deal has caught the province of 

Saskatchewan into a $750 million operation, potential up to a 

billion.  Can you imagine the consequences of that?  How in 

the world can you stand up in your place and say that a duly 

elected government sworn to uphold the office takes the 

position that we should simply ignore that? 

 

I say the solution is there, handed to us by Judge Estey.  The 

federal government says they're prepared to look at it.  FCL has 

not indicated it's prepared to look at it. 

 

I say what we should do as all of us, the people of the province 

of Saskatchewan, is unite to get the proper settlement to put 

this thing on a proper based financial footing.  You should join 

us, I repeat again, instead of criticizing as you always do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, you should use your 

cheer-leading in caucus and tell your members what you really 

knew about it. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, you know full well who those NDP 

members were in the negotiations and their progress.  You 

knew back in 1986.  What was your objection?  Was it about 

the deal?  No.  It was about politics. 

 

Let me quote Mr. Empey again for you.  Let's hear what the 

chief negotiator for the Co-op upgrader had to say about Don 

Ching, now head of CIC.  And I quote: 

 

The newly appointed head of Crown Investments proceeded 

to tell us that the Co-op, and mainly Harold Empey, cost 

them the election in 1986, and that we should have cancelled 

the deal at that time, which would have embarrassed the 

previous government. 

 

Mr. Premier, that's what this is all about, your leaked document 

by Don Ching.  It's political revenge and you know it. 

 

Mr. Premier, in the face of this information, in the face of your 

government's total preoccupation with politics and political 

vindictiveness, don't you think it might be appropriate during 

these negotiations to remove Mr. Don Ching totally from the 

picture?  Given that Mr. Ching has some kind of political 

agenda to solve with the people at Federated Co-op, don't you 

think that would be appropriate, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, what amazes me -- and I 

don't believe that the Leader of the Opposition believes that 

this is a credible position in 1993 to take -- what amazes me is 

how these people over there simply ignore the Estey report, 

keeping in mind that Judge Estey had access to all the 

documents and all of the players and people who were involved 

then and now.  And then he tabled his report and nowhere in 

the report is there even the slightest suggestion of those 

comments made by the Leader of the Opposition about any of 

the personalities which  

are involved -- none at all, none at all. 

 

Sure the Co-op convention may have said that.  I'm saying 

Judge Estey never said that and he had access to Don Ching 

and to Mr. Empey and he had access to you people as well.  

And you refused to cooperate with him on this operation. 

 

It is absolutely incredible.  The reality is, the Estey report has 

said that this project negotiated by you, sir, has run financially 

aground and that the fiscal stability of this province is in danger 

-- thanks to you. 

 

And you take the position that we shouldn't work our way out 

of it.  Shame on you.  We're going . . . (inaudible) . . . the 

responsibility in the interests of the taxpayers of . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 75 -- An Act to amend The Freehold Oil and Gas 

Production Tax Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker, I move An Act to amend 

The Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax Act now be read and 

introduced the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 76 -- An Act to amend The Oil and Gas 

Conservation Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker, I move An Act to amend 

The Oil and Gas Conservation Act now be introduced and read 

for the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 77 -- An Act respecting the Implementation of 

Certain Treaty Land Entitlement Settlement Agreements 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill 

respecting the Implementation of Certain Treaty Land 

Entitlement Settlement Agreements be now introduced and 

read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 78 -- An Act to confirm an Agreement between the 

Government of Canada and the Government of 

Saskatchewan varying the Saskatchewan Natural 

Resources Transfer Agreement 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

amend the natural resources transfer agreement be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be a read a second 

time at the next sitting. 



May 12, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1635 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would 

like to respond to your request for a point of order. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order, order.  The rules simply say 

when the Speaker is on his feet the member is to be seated.  

The member does not make a point of order on a request from 

the Speaker.  If he has a point of order, he makes his point of 

order. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- The point of order that I would like to raise, 

Mr. Speaker, is that on repeated occasions not once have you 

made this request of the members opposite on the government 

side.  But on repeated occasions you have, on the opposition, 

made the remark that the member, if he has a question to ask, 

should go back to caucus and ask the caucus chairman for 

permission to ask the question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find that that is debate in itself and I think that is 

most demeaning to the member to have such a suggestion put 

forward to him by Mr. Speaker.  And I would suggest to you, 

Mr. Speaker, that that demeans the position that you are in by 

entering into debate. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  Order.  I have listened 

to the member from Rosthern.  He's getting into debate with the 

Speaker and I will not allow that. 

 

I will simply say to the member from Rosthern that if he were 

to check with the member from Wilkie, I think the member 

from Wilkie will confirm that today he was constantly speaking 

from his chair, constantly speaking from his chair; even after 

the Speaker had asked for the members not to interrupt, the 

member from Wilkie continued.  And immediately after I made 

that request not to interrupt, I took note of the interruptions on 

the Premier's question immediately after and there were 15 

interruptions. 

 

I've asked the members to please cooperate.  They have not 

cooperated.  And I think the Speaker has no other choice but to 

try and keep order in this House, and I've asked the members, if 

they wish to make a statement in the House they know what the 

appropriate means are. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- New point of order. 

 

The Speaker: -- What's the member's point of order? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 

certainly won't get into debate with you on that.  The point of 

order, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- The member need not say that he will not get 

into a debate with the Speaker.  Of course he will not get into a 

debate with the Speaker.  Simply state your order.  What's your 

point of order? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, the point of order is referring to 

the member from Churchill Downs who, in a most demeaning 

way, knowing full well that the 

member from Maple Creek does have a speech . . . or a hearing 

impediment, sarcastically used that excuse to say that the 

member was deaf, Mr. Speaker.  And I ask you, having not 

ruled on it at the moment, to reflect on that for a moment, Mr. 

Speaker, and call that member to order for that demeaning 

attitude that he presented. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  Order!  Will the 

member from Humboldt please come to order. 

 

I did note what the minister said, but I did not think at the time 

that the member . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Of course not.  Course not. 

 

The Speaker: -- Well the Speaker cannot . . . Order.  Will the 

Government House Leader please come to order.  Just come to 

order . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well if you were to let the 

Speaker make his ruling, maybe we could. 

 

I did not think at the time that the member was personally 

referring to the member.  And therefore it's a judgement call 

that the Speaker has to make; I made it at the time.  But if the 

member did make it as a personal accusation, I would 

appreciate it if he did apologize to the member and withdraw it.  

But at the time I did not think that he had made that in that 

tone.  If he had, I feel sorry for the House and the position that 

we're getting ourselves into. 

 

Orders of the day . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Mr. Speaker, a new point of order.  A 

new point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Mr. Speaker, a new point of order. 

 

The Speaker: -- I have taken two points of order from the 

member, and that's sufficient. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What ruling is that based on? 

 

The Speaker: -- I'll take the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

Mr. Speaker, I want to proclaim Battered Women's Week*, but 

it's very difficult with this kind of abusive behaviour going on 

in the legislature, so . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- The member is on her feet because she 

would like to make a statement.  I would like to proclaim . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The member has to have leave. 



1636 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1993 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I would ask for leave. 

 

The Speaker: -- Does the member have leave?  Order, order.  

Order.  Let's settle down and try it again. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I would ask for leave to read a 

statement. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Battered Women's Awareness Week 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

it's my honour to proclaim the week of May 9 to 15 as Battered 

Women's Awareness Week.  The Provincial Association of 

Transition Houses in Saskatchewan had asked me to proclaim 

this week, and I'm pleased to do so. 

 

Battering of women has always existed in our province and in 

our country and in our world, but it's only during the last 15 

years has this issue emerged as a major concern to all members 

of society.  It is a serious problem that severely affects women 

and children of all ages, of all cultures and all economic 

circumstances. 

 

Today I'm wearing a purple ribbon from the Saskatchewan 

Battered Women's Support Network, commemorating the four 

women in Saskatchewan who since January of this year have 

died as a result of violent acts by their partners. 

 

This week provides a special opportunity to express our 

deepest appreciation to the many hundreds of people who work 

with battered women and their children.  I want to recognize 

the contributions made by committed women across our 

province who have worked and are working to establish 

shelters.  I also want to recognize the staff who provide 

services to battered women and their children 24 hours a day, 7 

days a week. 

 

I also want to acknowledge the people who volunteer hundreds 

of hours serving as board members and on committees to 

operate transition houses in our province.  I want to express my 

deepest gratitude to the women's movement and male 

supporters of the women's movement who continue to struggle 

to ensure that some day we will have gender equality in our 

society.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, often 

times days or weeks are set aside to celebrate significant people 

or events.  And while there are many occasions and many 

milestones to celebrate, there are some that deserve attention 

for other reasons. 

 

And I'm speaking, Mr. Speaker, about the violence in our 

society, and specifically, violence towards women.  And I 

would like to join with the minister in 

proclaiming this week. 

 

(1445) 

 

It's one of those topics people would like to ignore rather than 

talk about.  But violence against women is significant in our 

society and the numbers are rising.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, when 

people think about violence, most times . . . more often than 

not they think of violence in the form of physical violence.  But 

violence has many other forms.  It can have mental and 

psychological problems that arise and violence that arises as 

well. 

 

It's not right, Mr. Speaker, that in 1993 many women fear for 

their safety and the safety of their children on a daily basis.  

And many of these women, Mr. Speaker, end up losing their 

lives, and the minister has referred to a few.  It is a tragedy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's not good enough for us to just talk about how 

horrible the situation is.  Each and every one of us must do 

whatever we can.  Taking abused neighbours or friends into our 

homes, getting in touch with professionals and shelters can 

help those in need.  Or tightening up the penalties for those 

who physically abuse women.  Whatever it takes, Mr. Speaker, 

it must be done. 

 

This week is set aside to recognize the problem of battered 

women.  And I would like to challenge everyone here today to 

do our part to take matters into our own hands, to do something 

to help these women and their families.  And I'd like to say 

thank you to each and every one of the organizations and 

individuals who has taken the time to reach out to women in 

such circumstances. 

 

We cannot bury our heads in the sand and hope that violence 

eventually subsides.  Instead, we must do whatever we can do, 

Mr. Speaker.  We must all work together to end this problem.  

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Does the member from Saskatoon Greystone 

-- I assume you want to speak -- does she have leave? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I cannot say that 

it gives me pleasure to rise in the House and join my colleagues 

in acknowledging Battered Women's Awareness Week.  What 

would give me pleasure would be for the need for such a week 

to be unnecessary and for the problem of battered women to 

not exist. 

 

But it does exist and it exists in statistics that are astounding by 

their enormity.  I'm told that Saskatoon's Interval House 

provided safety and shelter to 231 women and 366 children in 

the year between April of 1992 and March of this year.  In 

addition, that shelter had to turn away an additional 226 

families because of lack of space. 



May 12, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1637 

Interval House has held a number of events during this week to 

educate the public.  And yesterday's information session at the 

Saskatoon library was well attended and covered a wide variety 

of topics of great value -- the cycle of violence and myths and 

the reality of family violence and so forth. 

 

They're also sending counsellors into high schools and 

elementary schools, conducting sessions for teens on dating 

violence and family violence.  Because of the intergenerational 

cycle of abuse, too often boys from homes experiencing abuse 

grow up to become abusers and girls grow up to become 

victims. 

 

Interval House is making extra efforts to try to reach the 

youngest victims of battered women's abuse.  And they have 

children's counsellors on staff who have enormous jobs 

compounded by long waiting-lists and shortages of resources. 

 

So as we acknowledge the issue of battered women, I too want 

to pay tribute to the many dedicated professionals and 

volunteers who work to improve the lives of hundreds of 

families who are affected by this dreadful societal problem.  

We can only hope their efforts are not in vain and that someday 

soon we will see a reversal in the growing trend of family 

violence. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave of the Assembly, 

I'd like to make a brief statement about an important event that 

happened in Swift Current last night. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Western Hockey League Championship 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

last evening in Swift Current the seventh and final game of the 

Western Hockey League was played between the Swift Current 

Broncos and the Portland Winter Hawks.  The final score in the 

game was six to nothing for the Broncos. 

 

This is significant, but equally significant is the fact that the 

Broncos will be representing Saskatchewan and the Western 

Hockey League at the Memorial Cup in Sault Ste. Marie for the 

second time in four short years. 

 

The Broncos won the Memorial Cup in 1989, an amazing 

comeback from a tragic loss of four players in 1987 in a bus 

accident.  The management and coaches rebuilt the team and 

today Swift Current and Saskatchewan have the finest junior 

hockey team in Canada. 

 

The Broncos play in the major junior league in western 

Canada.  There are 42 teams in Canada and the United States 

ranging all the way from Seattle to Detroit.  Swift Current is 

the smallest city in North 

America with a major junior hockey team. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the Assembly to join me in congratulating 

John Rittinger, the president and governor; Graham James, the 

general manager and coach; Rob Daum, the assistant general 

manager and coach; Trent McCleary, the team captain; and all 

the players and the fans on their success. 

 

I also ask the members of the Assembly to join me in wishing 

the Swift Current Broncos success in the Memorial Cup action 

starting on Sunday. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to today pay 

tribute to the efforts of the Swift Current Broncos in their win 

in the Western Hockey League. 

 

For me, Mr. Speaker, is has always been a special attraction.  

And not only in the fact that I've been an attendant and a person 

who has supported the team but also as an individual who has 

played a considerable amount of hockey. 

 

I know that the Swift Current Broncos came back in 1986.  

They were formerly the Swift Current Broncos and then they 

moved to Lethbridge.  In that period of time some great hockey 

players came out of that organization in Bryan Trottier, "Tiger" 

Williams, and Terry Ruskowski, three highly credible 

individuals. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, those same Broncos have the captain of 

the Quebec Nordiques as their captain.  And I believe that that 

is significant in relation to the kind of calibre of hockey, the 

intensity with which they play, and the intensity with which 

they view the game. 

 

I also want to point out to this Assembly that the intensity is 

focused mainly, as the member from Swift Current mentioned, 

mainly because of a single tragic accident that occurred there 

on December 30, 1986, when four of them died in that 

accident. 

 

And it was particularly important for my family because one of 

those fellows, Mr. Propp, sat across the aisle from him in grade 

12, and my son is 23 earlier this week.  And I think that it's 

significant that a young man gave his life for what he . . . 

incidentally, by accident, in an occasion when he could not 

control what was going on.  And so for the people of Swift 

Current it has become a very, very significant involvement to 

focus their attention on the Memorial Cup both in 1989 and in 

1993. 

 

I want to congratulate Mr. Rittinger, Graham James.  I want to 

also say to the coach of the Portland Winter Hawks, Ken 

Hodge, who I cheered for in Boston many, many years ago, 

that he also did well in preparing his team. 

 

I want to say to the Assembly, I'm not sure whether they're 

going to win the Memorial Cup this year, but this team is better 

than the one they had in 1989 by a long ways.  In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, it took 17 games for 



1638 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1993 

them to win the title.  They only lost one in 1989.  And for me 

that was significant, because they had a very, very capable 

hockey team.  They set many records in short-handed goals; 

they set records in power plays.  But this team is better, Mr. 

Speaker, and I wish them -- and this Assembly I hope would 

wish them -- the best in Sault Ste. Marie as they try to win the 

Memorial Cup in 1993. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

Having been born and raised in Swift Current, I am absolutely 

compelled to congratulate the Swift Current Broncos as well on 

winning the Western Hockey League championship last 

evening.  And they'll soon be off to Sault Ste. Marie in taking 

on Ontario and Quebec junior leagues. 

 

To the Western Hockey League's representative in the 

Memorial Cup, I too wish to congratulate John Rittinger and 

Graham James and their team -- all the best.  I also join all 

hockey fans in this province in hoping that they'll go to the 

Sault and show those Easterners what real hockey is all about, 

and bring the Memorial Cup back to Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, my function in this House is as 

the House Leader of the opposition, and I have a function to 

perform.  One of the primary functions is to make sure that the 

opposition has the means and the wherewithal to fulfil its 

function as her Loyal Majesty's opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was trying to raise points of order before, and I 

was not permitted to do so, and I would like to quote to you 

from Beauchesne's, 6th Edition, under points of order, no. 317.  

And no. 317, in part, subtitle 1, or sub-point 1, says: 

 

317. (1) Points of order are questions raised with the view of 

calling attention to any departure from the Standing Orders 

or the customary modes of proceeding in debate or in the 

conduct of legislative business and may be raised at virtually 

any time by any Member . . . 

 

And further to that, Mr. Speaker, on page 97, no. 319, it states 

and I quote: 

 

319. Any Member is entitled, even bound, to bring to the 

Speaker's immediate notice any instance of a breach of 

order.  The Member may interrupt and lay the point in 

question concisely before the Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had a point of order that I wanted to raise and I 

still do, subsequent to this point of order.  But I was not given 

the opportunity to do so in spite of the fact that 317 says, ". . . 

raised at virtually any time 

by any Member . . ." 

 

Now, sir, I ask you for an interpretation of what is meant by 

"virtually any time," and if there are times when it is not 

acceptable to raise a point of order, I wish you to be definitive 

on that aspect. 

 

The Speaker: -- I appreciate the member's point of order and 

his explanation.  The member knows full well that in question 

period no points of order can be raised other than that . . . or 

when a division vote is taken and the points of order are raised 

after. 

 

I did take two points of order from the member, one which I 

felt was not a valid point of order.  And I have listened to the 

member in the past raising points of order which, on a number 

of times, were not valid points of order.  And I felt that the 

member had raised his point of order, and if he has another 

point of order I will take the point of order now. 

 

I felt that at the time the House was simply not receptive to 

listen to any more points of order and I wished the House to 

calm down.  I will now accept a point of order from the 

member if he has a valid point of order.  It's a judgement call 

the Speaker has to make and I made it. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This is the point of 

order that I was going to make before and was not allowed to.  

Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  That's exactly the point that I want to 

make in this House.  The member from Humboldt interrupted 

again when the member from Rosthern was on his feet.  The 

House simply cannot function if members do not have any 

respect at all for the rules they themselves set down.  The 

Speaker cannot function and the House can't function unless we 

respect those rules. 

 

Now the member was on his feet and I ask the member again 

from Rosthern to make his point of order. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Perhaps we could 

do this later, but I still have to have clarification whether this 

limits it now to two points of order before you will cut us off, 

because in your deliberation and in your decision that is what 

you said.  Now I want that understood and I'll let you do that at 

a different time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The point of order that I want to bring up now relates to how 

the Speaker's ruling was recorded in the Votes and 

Proceedings and will therefore be recorded in the Journals of 

this Assembly. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I refer you to yesterday's Hansard, page 1618, 

and it is important to quote the entire statement that you made 

at that time, Mr. Speaker, so that you may see how a serious 

error was made in translating your ruling into the Journals.  

And I quote, I quote you, Mr. Speaker: 



May 12, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1639 

Members, give me a moment to have a look at the 

amendment, please. 

 

Order.  I want to remind members . . . that amendments 

should be first of all . . . contain really no preambles.  This 

one doesn't contain a preamble before but contains a 

preamble in the amendment. 

 

And therefore I would . . . the Speaker does have the 

authority to delete, and I will do that and make the 

amendment in order and ask the members whether or not 

they will accept the amendment up to the words "rather than 

substance" and delete the rest of the amendment which 

should be part of the debate if the members wish to make it 

such.  Otherwise I will rule the whole amendment out of 

order. 

 

And that, sir, was the entirety of your ruling which was and is 

accepted, I might add, by the members on this side.  However, 

sir, if you look to today's Votes and Proceedings, you will see 

the following, which I also quote: 

 

The Speaker deleted all the words after the words "rather 

than substance" on the grounds that the deleted words were 

in the nature of a preamble and contained argument that 

would (be) more properly form part of the debate. 

 

The point of order, Mr. Speaker, is simply this.  In your actual 

ruling nowhere did you say that the words contained argument 

or were argumentative.  You did not, sir, make that ruling; you 

restricted yourself exclusively to stating that the words were in 

the nature of a preamble which members could introduce into 

the debate if they so choose. 

 

And I suggest to you, sir, that the Journals are not at this 

moment accurate and I ask you to direct that they be corrected. 

 

The Speaker: -- I think the member does make a good point of 

order.  I would just . . . only for the defence of the journal and 

the Speaker, I think everybody knows that preambles -- that's 

why they are not allowed -- preambles are argumentative in 

nature and that's why they are not allowed as part of your 

amendment.  Preambles are argumentative in nature and 

therefore . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You didn't say that. 

 

The Speaker: -- Well, all right, the Speaker didn't say that.  I 

think the member's point of order is well taken.  I will have a 

look at it and bring back my ruling to the member. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- On another point of order, Mr. Speaker.  It 

relates to another motion that is now on the order paper, which 

is resolution no. 7.  Pursuant to your ruling regarding 

preambulatory clauses within motions made yesterday, 

resolution 7 itself contains just such a clause.  The amendment 

which was ruled on yesterday contained a clause following the 

words, 

and I quote, "which has involved", unquote, and that indicates 

the preambulatory nature of the clause. 

 

Resolution 7 also has such a clause by which Mr. Speaker's 

ruling yesterday must be deleted.  I therefore ask you to rule 

that in resolution 7 all the words after the words "relations 

process" be deleted or the motion be dropped from the order 

paper.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  That's resolution no. 7, sir. 

 

The Speaker: -- The member will have to give me a moment.  

I'm not sure which resolution we are referring to.  Are you 

referring to private members? 

 

I thank the member for his point of order, and I will again have 

a look at it and bring back a ruling to the House. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 74 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Farm 

Security Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise today to 

move second reading of The Saskatchewan Farm Security 

Amendment Act, 1993.  This legislation makes provision for 

four sets of amendments to The Saskatchewan Farm Security 

Act.  The first set of amendments address concerns raised by 

recent events regarding the farm ownership provisions of the 

Act and the need to ensure that these important provisions 

regarding foreign ownership of Saskatchewan farm land fulfil 

their intent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the existing farm ownership provisions contained 

in the Act have not undergone significant amendments since 

the 1970s.  Recent events involving a rumoured sale of a large 

block of Saskatchewan farm land near Eston to what was 

thought to be foreign investors have highlighted the need to 

update these provisions to ensure that this province's greatest 

asset, its productive farm land, is properly and fairly protected. 

 

The farm ownership provisions of the Act are amended in the 

Bill to provide the board with clear authority to investigate the 

potential contraventions of the Act before they occur and to 

provide the board with the ability to make an order enforceable 

by the courts preventing a sale from occurring in violation of 

the Act. 

 

The Act is also amended, Mr. Speaker, to expand the existing 

provision regarding purchase by Saskatchewan residents on 

behalf of non-agricultural corporations or non-residents to 

provide clear authority to the board to order divestment by 

Saskatchewan residents holding farm land in contravention of 

the Act. 

 

Finally, the farm ownership provisions are amended to provide 

cabinet with the ability to direct the board 



1640 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1993 

to investigate and to report on any issue regarding farm 

ownership which may be appropriate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the second set of amendments in this Bill are 

intended to clarify and focus certain aspects of the initiatives 

introduced in the amendments to this Act by this government in 

the last session of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

These amendments include the six-year leaseback protection 

program and certain other modifications to the previous 

process.  The legislation will extend the application of the 

six-year leaseback program to those eligible individuals who, 

pursuant to a settlement agreement, are currently leasing the 

land and would have been eligible for an assignment of the 

leaseback right had this settlement occurred after the Act had 

been passed. 

 

With respect to the operations of the Farm Tenure Arbitration 

Board, the Act makes the following provisions.  It amends the 

quorum provisions -- that is the Bill makes the following 

provisions, Mr. Speaker -- it amends the quorum provisions for 

the Farm Tenure Arbitration Board to allow for a larger board 

which could split and hold separate hearings in panels of three.  

And the Bill further amends the Act to ensure that the Farm 

Tenure Arbitration Board will not lose jurisdiction of a matter 

where it fails due to a heavy case-load to initiate a hearing 

within the statutory time limit. 

 

The Act will also be amended to clarify that where a security 

agreement is entered into with a lender for a specific debt and a 

waiver of statutory exemptions is provided by a farmer that 

specific debt may include a revolving line of credit.  This 

amendment will also provide that such a security agreement 

may not apply to debt previously incurred by that farmer with 

that lender.  This provision is clarified to ensure that the 

operating credit so important to Saskatchewan farmers can 

continue to be provided in a timely fashion. 

 

The third set of amendments clarify that apportionment of debt 

on a homestead will occur in a foreclosure action, regardless of 

whether or not the homestead was included in the original 

foreclosure action by the lender.  This clarification is necessary 

as a result of a recent court decision. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the fourth set of amendments in this Bill 

arise from amalgamation of the Farm Land Security Board and 

the Saskatchewan Farm Ownership Board into one board to be 

known as the Farm Land Security Board.  The new Farm Land 

Security Board will continue to perform all of the existing 

duties and responsibilities of the previous two boards.  This 

amalgamation will streamline the operation of the board under 

the Act while continuing to ensure the important protection 

functions of the board remain fulfilled. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Saskatchewan Farm Security Act. 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to discuss, in 

the form of debate, the changes that are going to result from 

this legislation.  My direction here I think in fairness, Mr. 

Speaker, will be more in the form of questions and 

observations rather than to try to solve the world's farm 

economic problems. 

 

Every time though that we find ourselves tampering with the 

issue of land tenure, we find people becoming very nervous 

and very excited in our society.  As well they might, Mr. 

Speaker, because the reality is that it is very near and dear to 

the hearts of Saskatchewan people who should be able to, who 

can have the right to own and operate property. 

 

Most of the people that live in the province of Saskatchewan 

are here as a result of pioneers that came to this province 

because there was an opportunity to be able to own property.  

That's why most of the settlers originally came to the province 

of Saskatchewan, because they had the right to homestead.  

And the allure of being able to personally own something 

tangible where you could make your living and raise your 

family in peace and harmony with God, that was the lure that 

brought people, mainly in the early 1900s, from the European 

countries. 

 

To have, at any time, a government suggest changes to law that 

might in fact change those directions gets people very nervous 

and very excited because it is a very basic and fundamental 

thing to the people of Saskatchewan.  There are very few 

people that live in our cities in Saskatchewan that don't have 

forefathers that were rooted to that very fundamental principle 

of ownership of property. 

 

Before we had cities, we had pioneers.  Before we had cities, 

we had people staking out claims for one thing or another on 

the land.  And so it is very fundamentally rooted in our culture, 

the right to be able to own property and to be able to make your 

living from that property and to be able to use it as security to 

raise your family. 

 

We have found, Mr. Speaker, our land tenure system under 

serious, serious attack over the past few years because of the 

depression that we are presently in.  And I use the word 

"depression" openly and without apology because that's what it 

is.  We've long since gone past the term "recession" in 

Saskatchewan.  All of the older people that I know that lived 

through the so-called Dirty Thirties have told me that the 

similarities are exactly there.  We are in a situation with 

agriculture that can only be compared to the Dirty Thirties.  

And of course agriculture is the main user of this particular 

type of legislation. 

 

I think that we have to be very careful that we preserve the 

right of the use of food production land to be used for exactly 

that purpose.  I hope the minister will take note of that. 

 

It is fundamentally important to the people of Saskatchewan 

who produce food, that they should have the right to own and 

control the property on 



May 12, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1641 

which they produce that food.  It is fundamentally important to 

the consumers of food that the people who produce that food be 

happy, that they be challenged to want to produce so that they 

feel secure in what they are doing.  It is the only thing that 

makes Saskatchewan farmers heads and shoulders above the 

rest of the world's producers.  We produce more food per 

farmer, per capita in our society, of any other country in the 

world.  We're only able to achieve that goal because our 

farmers are content and happy with the land tenure system that 

they have. 

 

In other words, they will produce more food because they take 

pride in the ownership of the farm that they work.  Ownership 

of their buildings, pride in the beauty of their farm yards, pride 

in the equipment that they operate, and pride in the ownership 

of the ground that they work on. 

 

You will find, Mr. Speaker, very few farmers that will take 

credit for mother nature's contribution, but they will take credit 

for having used mother nature in their program to build the 

land so that they can leave it for future generations in better 

condition than they brought it . . . or started to use it 

themselves. 

 

(1515) 

 

Most farmers take that pride -- pride of being able to build the 

ground and leave it in better condition when they're finished 

with it for the next generation than what they have had it to use 

for themselves.  If it weren't for that pride of ownership, we 

would not see that happen. 

 

I dare say that in Saskatchewan, where the wind is ever there 

and the only sure prediction about our weather is the fact that it 

will probably change in the next 10 minutes, those kinds of 

realities bring us to know that if we don't have farmers that 

work with our weather conditions very carefully, we could 

soon turn this entire province into a desert. 

 

Scientists of every kind, agricultural of course mostly, have 

made those kinds of statements for as long as I can remember.  

And there's no question about the fact that they are right.  If we 

didn't use conservation methods in the way that we till our 

soils, they would soon either wash away or blow away or be 

depleted.  The reality is that in many situations we have been 

losing the depth of our top soil at any rate and it has been lost 

at an alarming rate in some areas. 

 

And so we are working on new techniques and new 

technologies -- all things that cost money but more importantly 

they require dedication, dedication to the soil, dedication to the 

farm.  The kind of dedication that will leave that property in 

better shape for the next generation than it is now. 

 

If you don't have pride in being able to own that property to be 

able to pass it on to your family or the ability to be able to sell 

it for your retirement fund, then you're not going to take as 

good care of it.  And so we have to be extremely careful, Mr. 

Speaker, when we deal with the whole question of land tenure, 

because while we may make what appears to be a very subtle 

move in the direction of government policy in land tenure, it 

will have huge rippling effects on the productive ability of our 

producers.  Because as I've said, we out-produce all of the 

world's farmers now and we want to continue to do that. 

 

But if we don't have that security that farmers need, they'll 

simply throw up their hands in frustration and say it's not worth 

the effort.  If we ever get that idea planted into the heads of 

producers, the only alternative we will have is to live with less 

food production because that will surely be the result. 

 

The four amendments that are being made, Mr. Speaker, 

challenge me to ask some questions because, as has happened 

in some of the other recent legislation, we find that after people 

study it we discover that there are things written in there that 

will be interpreted by the courts or that will in fact become the 

reality of the Bill that we never anticipated when we first read 

through it and took first glance of it. 

 

The four amendments I truly hope do not make the kinds of 

changes to land tenure that we are hearing in the whole labour 

debate that has been going on in this Assembly. 

 

If we're not very careful about the way that we handle property 

ownership, we could in fact make history come true.  After the 

Second World War, a Japanese fellow by the name of Tito 

declared that he couldn't win the world through warfare 

because he had been defeated.  So what he was going to do was 

promote that his country would become an industrial nation 

where they would turn loose their manufacturing capabilities 

and they would become the very best in the world, and that 

they in fact would build a world economy strong enough so 

that they could buy their enemies out and take them over by 

buying their countries. 

 

I don't think that that's good for Canada, and I don't think that 

that's good for Saskatchewan to allow that to happen.  But truly 

history is unfolding, Mr. Speaker, in that direction.  History is 

unfolding in such a way that some countries are becoming 

extremely rich on our world. 

 

On this planet Earth we have nations that have dollar values in 

numbers on books that are phenomenally large.  And they don't 

really know what to do with those numbers.  So the thing to do, 

for them, for security reasons is to go out and buy real property 

in other countries of the world.  In other words, why fight a war 

over what you can buy?  Why win it by force when you can go 

out and buy it with numbers on paper that in fact come from 

that other nation as a result of imbalances in trade and 

commerce? 

 

And I'll use the oil industry as an example.  Oil has become so 

important to our world, especially in the past to the war 

machinery of the nations.  Oil is so important that those 

countries that had it in abundance were able to sell it at 

exorbitant prices in comparison to the trade and commerce of 

the rest of 



1642 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1993 

the world.  Some of the oldest adages in the world that needed 

to consistently be followed in order for the world economies to 

work properly, some of those things fell by the wayside.  I'll 

give you an example. 

 

One of the old rules of thumb is that an ounce of gold should 

buy a brand-new suit, a good quality suit.  If that balance is no 

longer there, then the world economy starts to go wrong. 

 

A barrel of oil used to be the price of a bushel of wheat.  That 

was considered to be a balance in world economy. 

 

What happened to our world economy there is quite simple for 

all farmers to understand.  A barrel of oil is now worth $22 and 

a bushel of wheat is worth $2.  That's $20 difference that 

distorts the world economy and the balance of our world 

economy.  What it means is that countries like the Arab 

countries, the Arab nations suddenly have more wealth coming 

in than they ever put out for food that they buy from the rest of 

the world, and it has upset the balance of our world economy to 

the point that their bank accounts are now so large that they 

have no place to get rid of those numbers. 

 

If we allow those people to come in and invest in our 

Saskatchewan property openly, without restraint, they could 

quite easily with these imbalances buy our entire province and 

have us all working as slaves of their state, not even slaves of 

our own state.  And so we have to be very careful from that 

point of view. 

 

But on the other hand of the argument, Mr. Speaker, we also 

have to be very cautious that we allow land tenure policies to 

exist that do not restrict the free movement of the buying and 

selling of property in a free market system which would be 

geared to the supply and demand within the market-place. 

 

In other words, the relationship of the price of land should be 

directly connected to the saleable value of the products that can 

be produced on that land.  If it becomes attached to speculation 

or foreign dollar investments, which are speculation of course, 

then the farmers that produce the food on the land can no 

longer compete to buy that land.  They would never be able to 

compete. 

 

And if you want a pure, simple comparison of that, I'll show 

you back just to the 1980s in Saskatchewan.  We had an awful 

lot of people believing that inflation was here for ever, that our 

economy was headed in the same direction that Mexico was 

going.  In 1981, 150 pesos were given to you for each 

Canadian dollar; and nine years later in 1989 or '90, you could 

get 1,500 pesos for one dollar. 

 

People in Saskatchewan and Canada, I guess rightfully thought 

that our economy was going to follow that trend and that we in 

fact had an inflationary roll that would never stop.  And as a 

result we had this speculation in property because in an 

inflationary environment, property is the hard-core product that 

will ride out the effects of an inflationary 

spiral. 

 

And so we had everybody in society saying, how do we protect 

our dollars?  And of course the old rule is buy land or iron.  

And so there was a tremendous activity in the speculative 

purchase of farm land to protect inflationary dollars. 

 

That has backfired, Mr. Speaker, because of course our country 

went into a recessionary mode along with the rest of the world 

and we no longer have inflation as our number one problem.  In 

fact we almost have deflation in some areas.  There still is 

some inflation of course, and I could name examples, but that's 

got nothing to do with our point today. 

 

The reality is though that a lot of people who overpaid for that 

farm land, because of those speculatory ideas, suddenly found 

themselves with some very high priced land that they could no 

longer pay for by the product that was being grown on it.  

Quite simply, they had to either have the cash from some other 

source or they would lose their property; they couldn't pay for 

it.  We can blame interest rates and we can blame a whole lot 

of things, but those are the simple realities. 

 

And so that's why it's so important when we see how many 

farmers have lost their farm because they themselves got into 

the position where, if they wanted to expand their property, 

they had to compete with these inflationary prices.  We have all 

kinds of situations, Mr. Speaker, where farm operations got 

into those kinds of financial binds because of no fault of their 

own. 

 

An estate situation might crop up and a farmer would find 

himself having to settle with his brothers and sisters, and the 

settlement would be based upon today's market value of the 

property.  The day's market value, because it was driven up by 

these inflationary forces and these speculative forces, was way 

too high compared to what that farmer would ever be able to 

pay off with the price of a bushel of wheat that he could 

produce on it or a pound of beef or a pound of pork or 

whatever other production he could get from the land.  And as 

a result, in time they started to lose their land, and it was no 

fault of their own. 

 

And so when we talk about land tenure, Mr. Speaker, we have 

to be very careful if we want to have producers that are 

genuinely committed to the production of food, genuinely 

committed to the land for its preservation, especially in this 

fragile environment that we have.  Then we've got to be very 

careful that we don't put producers into a position where they 

have to compete to buy property at prices that are driven by 

forces other than the returns to that land from the productivity 

that it is able to generate. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we are naturally very, very cautious when we 

see this kind of legislation coming in.  I think you can 

understand the fear we might have in our opposition, having 

looked back at the history of this particular government and its 

predecessor government of the 1970s where they in fact 

brought in the now famous land bank proposition. 



May 12, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1643 

The land bank system, which appeared to be genuinely struck 

for good reasons -- had lots of good arguments to support it -- 

in fact became one of those inflationary-driven items that 

forced land prices to become unrealistic as compared to the 

cost of production and the returns on products.  It had no 

relationship to that at all; it became a competitive tool.  And as 

a result, it failed dismally and it was one of the prime 

contributors to the dismal failure of our whole land tenure 

system through the 1980s. 

 

We naturally, though, fear that because we have this 

government in power that they may have forgotten that bitter 

lesson; that their philosophical needs as written in the 

deep-seated parts of their philosophical papers might be 

surfacing here and that the need to nationalize and become the 

controllers of society might be driving them more than the 

reality of how we get the best value out of our farm producers 

and how we have the best security for our agricultural 

community. 

 

Noting that, we are obviously in this opposition somewhat 

reluctant to allow this piece of legislation to go ahead without a 

very thorough scrutinization of each of these individual 

amendments.  Four which were mentioned by the minister 

seemed not so bad on the surface when you brush over them 

quickly, but as I've said, we've just witnessed how the labour 

Bills are totally upside down now as compared to what we 

thought their intent was at the beginning. 

 

We also have come to the point where we have legal 

interpretations saying that in fact they're going to do exactly the 

opposite to what we thought, in fact, many, many things more 

than what anybody ever thought. 

 

(1530) 

 

So when we talk about amalgamation of two parts or two 

boards -- the Farm Ownership Board was one of them -- and 

the ability of those boards to split into panels, we start to worry 

about whether or not this legislation that will be placing these 

two, the Farm Ownership Board and the Farm Land Security 

Board . . . here they are, we're now going to amalgamate those 

two boards into one. 

 

Now on the surface people will say yes, that sounds pretty 

good; we're probably going to save some money; we'll only 

have one board instead of two. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, perhaps what we're doing here that may not 

have come to light -- and I will throw the challenge to the 

minister -- perhaps what we're doing is taking away one of the 

tools that farmers who have a land tenure problem, one of the 

tools that they need and use in order to resolve their problems 

with financial institutions and with government itself in some 

circumstances -- if they're connected with the agricultural 

credit service or one of those farm credit agencies, even 

perhaps the Farm Credit Corporation -- any one of those 

government agencies -- even municipalities if they're behind in 

their taxes and 

those kinds of things . . . become liabilities against the land in a 

settlement arrangement or in some kind of an arrangement to 

resolve a debtor problem between a farmer and his lenders. 

 

Write-downs are common only because these . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Mr. Speaker, I ask leave of the Assembly to 

introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and also 

thank you to the opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure on behalf of 

the hon. member from Rosetown-Elrose to introduce to you 

and through you to the rest of the members of the Assembly, 13 

grade 12 students from Beechy High School.  With them also, 

Mr. Speaker, is their teacher Larry Warwaruk, and they're here 

. . . excuse me for the pronunciation, Larry. 

 

And this afternoon they're here on a tour of the legislature just 

to see the proceedings.  And I'll be meeting with them shortly, 

Mr. Speaker, for drinks and to answer a number of questions 

that I'm sure they'll have.  I understand they'll be watching for 

about 10 or 15 minutes, and I'll meet them outside then. 

 

So if I could ask all the members to join with me in welcoming 

them here this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 74 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I certainly want to 

join with the member opposite in welcoming the guests to the 

legislature.  I hope that your afternoon is productive and 

educational. 

 

We are today debating Bill 74 and The Saskatchewan Farm 

Land Security Act, and we're going to try to caution the 

government not to take this Bill so far as to destroy the ability 

of farm producers to be able to own and control the property 

that they work on.  We worry about this legislation.  As I've 

mentioned before you came in, as an opposition we worry 

about all pieces of legislation that comes before the Assembly, 

and we hope that you will find that our debate in this process is 

important to bring balance to our democratic system. 

 

And that's what it's really all about, Mr. Speaker, is trying to 

bring some balance to our government so that they don't go off 

into a tangent on pieces of legislation like this where they 

might in fact upset the old apple cart and find ourselves with 

farmers no 



1644 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1993 

longer having the ability to own and control the property that 

they farm and destroying their incentive to produce at the best 

possible capability which they have displayed in Saskatchewan 

over all of the years that this province has been developed. 

 

As I pointed out, we have the best agricultural producers in the 

world producing more product per individual farmer than any 

other farm group in the world.  That has only happened for 

certain reasons.  And one of the biggest reasons of course is 

that security of land tenure, the ability of the farmer to be able 

to own and control the property that he works and to have that 

pride of ownership for himself and for his family.  And that has 

been one of the primary motivating forces for why farmers in 

fact do such a good job in our society. 

 

It has a lot to do of course with background as well, the 

background of having most of these people come out of 

countries that were oppressed, where in fact never would there 

have ever been a possibility for these individuals to own 

anything in terms of farm land or farm property. 

 

Also the reality that many of them probably would have been 

shot in wars or killed by bombs if they had stayed in the 

countries of their origin.  They were discriminated against in 

several ways.  They were plunged into all kinds of chaos, and 

so they came to Canada and especially to Saskatchewan for 

that kind of peace and security that we have known and is 

recorded in history. 

 

We want to preserve that.  In our opposition, we want to make 

sure that foreign countries are not given the ability to buy our 

country and take it over and make us slaves of their nation.  We 

want to continue to maintain a system of land tenure that 

provides ownership in the hands of the Saskatchewan farmers 

and the Saskatchewan people. 

 

But at the same time we recognize that there are needs for land 

tenure to be able to fall into other hands during transitional 

periods.  For example, on my own farming operation I have 

children that I hope some day will take some pride in owning 

the family farm.  It's been in our farm for three generations and 

they'll be the fourth generation. 

 

We hope that they will have the opportunity.  Even though one 

of my daughters now lives in Edmonton, I would hope that she 

would have the opportunity to be able to participate in the 

carrying on of that family farm if she chose to do that.  We're 

not saying that every person who has a son or a daughter 

outside of the province would necessarily want to be included, 

but we want the right preserved for them to be able to 

participate in that kind of transferral situation. 

 

We were discussing some of the key points in the legislation 

that the minister brought up in his preamble describing the 

legislation and its intent.  And we were just discussing with the 

minister the question of the amalgamation of two of the very 

important boards that have been set up in our province.  We 

were 

looking at the Saskatchewan Farm Ownership Board and the 

Farm Land Security Board being amalgamated.  The 

amalgamations, Mr. Speaker, might, as I said, take away some 

of the options of farmers to settle disputes that they have with 

their creditors.  And that would be negative. 

 

And so I want the minister to be aware of the fact that we have 

a concern in this area and that we would like him to explain in 

absolute detail just exactly how the rights of the farmer are 

preserved in this legislation or if in fact there is any threat to 

the farmers losing some of their ability to negotiate with their 

lenders and creditors in final settlements of land dispute and 

debt disputes.  It is not clear to me.  And not being a lawyer I 

dare say I probably will never be able to get this exactly for 

sure until I hear a legal opinion. 

 

So I'm suggesting to the minister that he get a legal opinion that 

he would share with us from the Law Society or from some 

credible law firms or lawyers that we in fact can peruse and 

consider to see that the farm rights haven't been lost in this 

process.  Because so often when we rewrite a small bit of 

legislation, we find ourselves in a situation where it affects 

many other parts of the legislation and there can be that 

rippling effect through the whole process. 

 

We're also concerned, Mr. Speaker, about one of the other 

issues which is the formation of the arbitration board.  And 

what troubles me here is that if you have a larger board and that 

board is split into small groups that go around different parts of 

the province, what concerns me is consistency.  I'm wondering 

if you have the ability in such complex areas as write-downs of 

debt and farm settlements and all of these kinds of issues that 

come up in land tenure, I wonder if you have the ability for a 

large board split into segments to maintain any kind of 

consistency throughout their decision-making process within 

the province. Unless they all sit together occasionally on the 

same case and share their ideas, how does one branch of the 

board know that they are ruling anywheres close to the same 

kind of ruling that another branch of the board is ruling on. 

 

And that concerns us very, very deeply, because I think that in 

all fairness most people expect that in Canada if you have a law 

that all people will be treated equally under that law.  But if 

you have a board that's making rulings on that law that isn't the 

same people at different hearings, you may not have that 

consistency of having people treated equally under the law. 

 

And so that has us concerned and I want the minister to take 

note of our concern.  And perhaps he will explain to us how he 

can maintain consistency when those groups make their 

decisions.  Now it might be that he can draw up a set of rules 

for them, perhaps give them a written mandate of how they're 

to conduct themselves.  I don't know for sure but there may be 

some explanations and I certainly want to hear them because 

that does have us concerned. 

 

The lines of credit in operating were mentioned as 



May 12, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1645 

changed to provide for quicker operating loans.  On the surface 

this seems like a very positive thing.  Obviously farmers have 

trouble getting enough cash to operate in these difficult times.  

One of the most serious problems we have this spring in 

Saskatchewan is for farmers to have enough money to be able 

to buy the fuel, the seed, and the fertilizer to be able to put their 

crops in.  There's no question about it. 

 

I've had no less than four individual conversations in my home 

town with four individuals who are having problems trying to 

find enough money to be able to put their crops in.  Their 

machinery is getting old; it's breaking down.  They don't have 

good seed because of the frost last fall in harvest time.  They 

are reluctant to buy better quality seed of course because 

dollars are very scarce; they don't have them.  They don't want 

to go into further debt and further jeopardize their farming 

operations. 

 

And so they're faced with having to seed a crop this year with 

some very, very poor seed.  Now if in fact the ability of farmers 

to go to the bank and get a line of credit were made easier, that 

may in itself be a very positive thing to do.  However if the 

repercussion is that there is no way to service that debt, and no 

guarantee from the government for that debt to be able to be 

serviced, then it absolutely writes the end of that farming 

operation because someone will sooner or later foreclose on 

that debt. 

 

If any time that we allow people with assets to borrow more 

than what those assets are worth, we are putting them in a 

position of self-destruct.  And while I defend every move made 

to try to help farmers, giving them access to credit that will 

automatically force them to go broke would certainly not be in 

the best interests of the farming community. 

 

So we must be very cautious.  And I want the minister to be 

very cautious not to put out a carrot at the end of a stick for 

farmers to reach for that in fact will cause them to fall over a 

cliff.  And that's exactly the kind of danger, metaphorically, we 

have here.  If we allow people to borrow more money than 

what the price of wheat will service, we will certainly cause 

them to go broke and we will have made the situation worse 

instead of better.  I compliment the minister on his attempt 

here, but I caution him that he may not be doing it in the best 

interests of all farm people. 

 

So we have to be careful how we rewrite these pieces of 

legislation.  The lines of credit are very, very important and 

they're very necessary.  I suggest though that the minister 

should have looked at some simple solutions for the immediate 

problem.  For example, there are areas in the province where 

seed is very poor from last year's frost.  A government program 

in 1930 . . . whatever provided that farmers were able, through 

the municipality, to access good-quality seed in those areas that 

didn't have seed.  It was done through the RMs (rural 

municipality) -- a very good plan. 

 

We could revisit history and try to alleviate some of the 

problems that we have today.  And I'm suggesting to the 

minister that he should have had his Minister of 

Agriculture take a look at providing seed to some of those areas 

in Saskatchewan for this spring seeding.  I don't think it's too 

late yet.  All of the crop isn't seeded yet, and there are people 

that are planting seeds that are down to 35 per cent germination 

on their tests.  That's not healthy for good crops and it's not 

healthy for the farm economy.  And we should be looking at 

those kinds of things to go along with lines of credit and all 

those kinds of assistance programs. 

 

The six-year lease that the minister mentioned has got us 

extremely worried because of many letters and many calls that 

we've had from the banking communities, especially our credit 

unions.  I take no problem here at all in saying to you that I do 

most of my personal banking with a credit union and I would 

shudder to think that we would pass a law in this province that 

might cause my credit union to go broke.  But the six-year 

lease program has put extreme stress on our credit unions and it 

has happened because, quite simply, the credit unions are based 

upon the philosophy of money in the community helping 

people in the community. 

 

It's a good philosophy.  It's worked really well in our 

community and it's worked well for credit unions.  

Unfortunately most of the people that borrow money in rural 

communities in Saskatchewan are farm and agricultural based, 

the very, very industry that is under the most extreme stress 

financially in our country today.  Most of the credit union 

money that is lent out then is lent out into a very volatile 

financial industry -- an industry that is hard pressed to make its 

payments.  And as a result of having legislation changed that 

forces the financial institutions into extending credit where 

there is no backing for that credit, they have very seriously 

undermined the stability of the credit union system. 

 

A bank like the Royal Bank, for example, is big enough 

internationally, outside of our province, that they are able to 

absorb those investments that they have within the province of 

Saskatchewan in the agricultural industry. 

 

(1545) 

 

But credit unions don't function that big outside of the 

province.  They function mostly in their own communities.  

And therefore this legislation has been more devastating to the 

credit union system than to any of the other banking 

institutions.  And so I caution the minister again: while your 

intent here to help farmers is good, you may in fact not be 

helping the total system if in fact you cause their financial 

system not to be able to function and to exist.  So you've got to 

be very careful how we make these changes in extending 

leasebacks to people that are not able to pay enough back to the 

financial institution to protect its very existence.  There has to 

be balance in all things that we do. 

 

The Homesteads Act is the other issue that was discussed in 

this legislation by the minister.  The Homesteads Act has been 

a sacred cow in Saskatchewan.  And I believe on a day when 

we stood 



1646 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1993 

in this Assembly and talked about saving battered women from 

the effects of our society, we must seriously look at The 

Homesteads Act, because that's why it's there. 

 

Fundamentally The Homesteads Act was in place to protect 

farm wives, to make sure that no matter what happened through 

the droughts of the Dirty Thirties, the Depression of the Dirty 

Thirties, the causes of war, and the effects of the 1980s -- all 

through those periods of stress and trouble that could happen, a 

farm wife was guaranteed that she and her children were 

protected, to have their home with a roof over their heads on 

the home quarter of land. 

 

That was a fundamental right that was written into the law, and 

I believe that it has been supported by New Democrats all 

through the years.  It is a fundamental right that is necessary 

unless you provide some other guarantee to farm wives and 

their children that they will not be forced out of their home and 

left destitute.  It is the kind of thing that farm wives are entitled 

to; they deserve to have this protection. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I caution the minister not to rip the rug out 

from underneath the wives of the farm community.  They need 

some security even if it's just so that they can sleep good at 

night; that's important too.  Those people deserve the right to 

think that the next day and the week after, they will have a 

home.  They deserve that.  They work hard, and they deserve 

the right to have that security to be able to rest in the comfort 

that they will always have, that roof over their head, even 

though in many cases it might be very humble.  It's better than 

being turfed out on your ear and not knowing where your next 

meal is coming from or being placed in a position that many of 

our battered women in our society must find themselves in as 

well.  And while I know it's a long bow to draw that 

comparison, there is some similarity to the realities here.  All 

people deserve to have some protection from the effects of 

what society can do to them. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, those are the four issues that the minister 

discussed.  He discussed the foreign investment in the Eston 

area and the deal that he felt ought to have been able to be 

investigated by the board.  And I commend him for looking at 

that. 

 

However, I don't again understand what the magnitude or the 

total parameters of this legislation will truly be.  I don't know 

just how far it's going.  I haven't been able to interpret that in 

my study of the explanatory notes or the legislation itself.  And 

I think we need to have a legal opinion to let us know whether 

or not we are serving the need that he explained in his simple 

approach, or if in fact this legislation may be going far, far 

further than any of us know. 

 

We have to know what this legislation is going to do to our 

people and to our province in order for us to be able to properly 

even debate it, let alone support it, or to suggest amendments to 

it if there is something that needs to be changed or something 

that should be 

right. 

 

So we have to ask the minister if he will consider giving us 

some detailed explanation by people in the legal profession 

who understand legislation and how it's written.  We need to 

have that assurance and that explanation so that we can judge 

what truly will happen to the land tenure system in our 

province, because it is near and dear to the hearts, not only of 

the people of Saskatchewan, farmers, but to the existence of the 

very fundamental principles that we work under in this 

province -- all of them based on the right of the farmer who 

produces the food to be able to own and control the land that he 

produces his living on. 

 

I think with that, Mr. Speaker, I will conclude and I'll thank 

you for your attention. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm rising today to 

talk about the piece of legislation that was tabled in the 

Assembly yesterday. And I want to point out to this Assembly 

and to the people of the province some of the things that I've 

had the opportunity to observe, and I will deal with them, Mr. 

Speaker, in a detailed way as I go through the whole Bill. 

 

But I want to point out that I will not be directing it at clauses, 

but I will read . . . or discuss it from the context of what I think 

is in the Bill. 

 

The beginning of the Bill, Mr. Speaker . . . Well first of all I 

want to say that the Minister of Justice gave us an explanation 

on four points as has been outlined by the member for Maple 

Creek.  Some of the things that he suggested was that they 

could order divestments of land of individuals.  Then he also 

said that cabinet would be able to order the board to investigate 

contravention of the Act.  The Farm Tenure Board, there would 

be changes to the quorum. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, as I've read through this, that I would say 

to the members opposite that I believe that I suggested it last 

year in the discussion when the Farm Tenure Board came up.  

And I suggested to the minister of Agriculture at the time, the 

member from Rosetown-Elrose, that there probably would be a 

need for that kind of a function to take place.  And that's 

probably the reasonable part about this Bill. 

 

The fourth thing that the Minister of Justice mentioned was that 

the apportion of homesteads and the fact that the waiver 

wouldn't be changed as it relates to The Homesteads Act. 

 

I find all of these things rather interesting, Mr. Speaker, from 

the perspective that the individual who is dealing with this is 

the Minister of Justice.  I find it interesting that the Minister of 

Agriculture was not or has not been prepared even to discuss it 

so far.  And I would suggest that because it deals a lot with 

agriculture or land holdings, that it would be significantly 

proper for the Minister of Agriculture to discuss this and 

provide some details. 

 

As I've been going through it, Mr. Speaker, I found some 

things that concern me.  And I'm going to be 



May 12, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1647 

raising a significant amount of questions regarding this Bill 

because it deals with a significant amount of areas.  It deals 

with tenure for the Farm Tenure Board.  It will establish some 

new criteria for leaseback programs, as I read what I have here. 

 

I'm not sure exactly what they will do to the people in the 

leaseback program.  I know that there have been some concerns 

expressed to me in relation to this and I've been looking 

through it to find out whether in fact they do address some of 

those concerns.  And because of the kinds of things that have 

been suggested here, I'm not sure whether they achieve that. 

 

The part I suppose, Mr. Speaker, that concerns me the most  -- 

and I would have appreciated if the minister would have been 

very specific on dealing with it -- we have some items that call 

for identifying the words and what they mean in this Act.  For 

example, "Canadian resident" is described here.  I think it 

probably would have been in the interests of this Assembly if 

the minister would have described exactly what a Canadian 

resident refers to in terms of this Bill because he makes a note 

of that. 

 

The other thing that is of interest, I believe, is that the Part IV 

"Farm Ownership" has also the words as an "aggregate land 

holding" the individual has the responsibility to provide to the 

Farm Ownership Board the volume of land that he has as an 

individual.  If he's a non-resident from Saskatchewan that 

would mean that he was resident in Canada; he would have a 

different kind of a relationship to that land.  Canadian resident 

means something else as it relates to the original Act.  A 

foreigner, I believe, was someone outside of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that some of these things, as they've 

been worded here  -- and I've noticed how they've been worded 

-- describe to me a very carefully planned, surgical description 

of how they differentiate between a Canadian citizen and a 

Saskatchewan citizen.  And, Mr. Speaker, I have a great deal of 

concern as it relates to that. 

 

A description here tells me that a Canadian resident can own 

320 acres.  I'm not sure that that's fair for the people of Canada.  

I'm not even sure that it's fair for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I was going through this and I said to myself, who are the 

people, who are the people that will want to farm in the 

province of Saskatchewan?  Who are they? 

 

And if I go down to my part of the province, Mr. Speaker, 

where's there's sometimes 10, sometimes 8 miles between 

farms, and I take a look at that and I say to the members 

opposite, somebody is going to have to own that land and farm 

that land in the future because these people are getting older 

and older and older.  And, Mr. Speaker, their children are not 

on the farm.  And because of that, Mr. Speaker, we probably 

have to have more people being willing to participate in 

agriculture than we do today. 

 

And what I'm seeing as a part of the overall tone of the 

Bill, I see more and more restrictions coming into place to 

prevent people from making an investment in land in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  And I find that rather difficult to 

understand why they would do this at a time, Mr. Speaker, I 

believe at a time when we should be a little bit more open and a 

little bit more willing to have and allow people to own land in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Recently I did an assessment of the municipality that I live in, 

Mr. Speaker, and 42 per cent of the land in the municipality 

was owned by those people who did not reside in the 

municipality.  Now that doesn't mean that they didn't reside in 

the province of Saskatchewan or that they weren't Canadian 

residents, but I know that there are some people who own land 

in my municipality who live in the United States, for example.  

I also know that just recently a couple that I know from Herbert 

moved to Medicine Hat, and he has significant land holdings in 

the Herbert area. 

 

And those are the kinds of things, Mr. Speaker, that tell me 

something.  They tell me, number one, that people are finding 

it more and more difficult to live under the circumstances in 

agriculture that there are today.  They are finding it difficult, 

and under those circumstances they're prepared to move 

anywhere to reduce the cost. 

 

And so as you go about the various kinds of restrictive 

functions that this Bill goes through, we have to take a serious 

look at, really what does it do to help agriculture?  The 

Minister of Justice used the land deal in Eston as the overall 

focus of dealing with an issue that was put into place by an 

individual from Regina here.  And I noticed in the paper that 

the Leader-Post yesterday -- or today's Leader-Post, I'm sorry 

-- that the new legislation when passed, the new law will allow 

the Farm Land Security Board to investigate potential 

contravention of the Act before it even occurs. 

 

So if the incident at Eston had taken place after the passage of 

this Bill, the individuals who were involved would have had to 

disclose all of the investors' names.  They would have had to 

disclose all of the actions in relation to the land purchase.  And 

I think that in some ways, Mr. Speaker, it probably wouldn't be 

a bad idea for that disclosure to take place.  However, the 

individuals who are dealing with this are looking at it, I 

believe, from the position, if it isn't going to be a quarter 

section at a time, then we have to take a look at how people are 

going to dispose of the land. 

 

(1600) 

 

And if you take a look at what happened at Eston as an 

example, people in that area willingly -- willingly -- took and 

said I am prepared to sell my land to whoever the highest 

bidder is.  And I read a letter in the paper that was written to 

the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, I believe, a letter that was sent to 

me, carbon copy to me.  And this individual was a lady that 

was writing and was saying, you know, my husband and I have 

been farming here for 40 years plus, and we are both over 65 

years of age, and we would like to have 



1648 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1993 

someone buy our land.  But we . . . we don't have anyone to do 

that.  And she said, who is going to buy it? 

 

I have a neighbour that's two miles to the south of me, and she 

gave ages of 65, 68.  And then she said I have neighbours to . . 

. the other direction, they are two miles away, they are 75 and 

78.  And then I have neighbours on the other side of me that are 

68 and 72.  And, Mr. Speaker, she said also that there were . . . 

none of those children were there to keep the land, to farm the 

land.  So I'm here all by myself, as a 65-year old pensioner, 

trying to farm the land, and no one for me to sell it to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they had an opportunity, or could have had an 

opportunity, to move that land, and the people in that area said 

well it's a good deal.  Who said it wasn't a good deal?  Did the 

people in the community say it was bad?  No, they didn't say it 

was bad.  Who said it was bad?  It was somebody else living a 

distance away where there was not an opportunity to have that 

land holding transfer to someone else. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have an interesting scenario that 

develops.  We have one set of rules for business, and we have 

another set of rules for agricultural land.  We have a rule that 

says that anybody that comes in and invests in Regina, for 

example, can come in here with $10 million and buy as many 

apartment buildings as he wants for that $10 million.  He can 

do that any time he wants.  Real estate will sell that to him.  

But as it relates to farm land, we've got a different set of rules. 

 

Now we've talked earlier about discrimination, but I'm soon 

beginning to think that people in agriculture are getting 

discriminated against in many different ways.  And as I see the 

restrictions in this Bill . . . and there are a lot of different kinds 

of restrictions.  We have different dates, for example.  We have 

dates that deal with March 31, 1974, restrictions not applicable 

to land acquired prior to that.  Then we've got some more 

restrictions, land holdings by non-residents after September 15, 

1977.  Then we've got land holding by non-residents after May 

6, 1980.  Then we have special exemptions.  We have a 

definition of Canadian residents, Mr. Speaker, and Canadian 

residents can only own 320 acres. 

 

Now we are dealing and the Minister of Agriculture has been 

dealing on a constant basis about establishing a level playing 

field in relation to commodities moving back and forth in 

agriculture in this province and in Canada.  Why not allow 

some of this in agricultural land to take place?  Why should 

there be restrictions on this, for example?  Why should there be 

restrictions on members who are part of my family who live in 

British Columbia and want to buy some land back in 

Saskatchewan, who I could sell that land to, being restricted?  

And I believe, as I've looked through this, that there are 

significant areas here that will restrict that opportunity for these 

individuals. 

 

As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, my uncles who live in British 

Columbia cannot come back and buy their grandfather's farm, 

and why shouldn't they be able to 

do that?  Today, Mr. Speaker, people are suffering from a lack 

of an opportunity for equity investment in farm land.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, over and over and over again this opportunity for 

equity is being eroded.  Every time you turn the screws tighter 

on restrictions and make the whole area of financing 

agriculture more restrictive, each time you do that, you reduce 

the value of the land.  Each time you do that, you reduce the 

value of the land. 

 

I'm going to suggest to the members opposite, if you forced all 

of the non-Canadian . . . I'll start again.  If you force all of the 

non-Saskatchewan residents in the province . . . or those people 

who live outside of Saskatchewan from not investing in real 

estate in the city of Regina, my guesses are that you would 

have a reduction in the value of property in this city by 50 per 

cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is exactly what restrictions placed on 

agriculture land do to agriculture in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  They are taking a very limited source of supply 

for equity to finance land, and saying, I'm going to exclude 

Canadian citizens from investing in land in Saskatchewan.  

And that's what this legislation does.  It says that you cannot 

own land in Saskatchewan.  You have to be a resident here for 

183 days; you have to be a resident in Canada for 183 days to 

own land . . . 320 acres. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am of the belief that people in Canada 

would like to access an opportunity to buy land in 

Saskatchewan.  Why not?  Why not?  Why shouldn't they be? 

 

I'll point out to the members of the Assembly, if you took the 

housing market and said in the city of Regina, I am going to 

exclude all non-residents of Saskatchewan from owning 

property in the city of Regina, half of it would be gone.  If you 

said, I will restrict non-resident corporations from owning land 

in Regina, you wouldn't have a single service station available, 

except the Co-op service station, available in the city of 

Regina. 

 

Well that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what you're doing with this 

restrictive control of farm land in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  That is exactly what you're doing. 

 

Now let's go one step further.  Let's go for all the farm 

implement dealerships in the province of Saskatchewan that are 

owned by non-resident agriculture corporations.  If they were, 

Mr. Speaker, held by non-resident corporations, if they had to 

deal with this kind of restricted rules, you wouldn't have a 

single agriculture implement dealer except those implement 

dealers who are residents here.  And you would only have 

Degelman, you'd only have Morris Rod-Weeder Company, 

you'd only have the ones that make and manufacture 

implements here being able to own that land. 

 

Now let's go one step further.  If you apply the same rules in 

agriculture to all of the land holdings held by motor dealer 

companies -- Ford, Chrysler, Chev -- if 



May 12, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1649 

they were all owned by non-resident people, you would not be 

able to have . . . you would have a significant amount of them 

leaving the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

What would that do in terms of investment in the province?  

That would cripple the economy of the province of 

Saskatchewan -- cripple it, Mr. Speaker.  And that's the kind of 

stuff we're talking about in this legislation. 

 

Why do you want to restrict agricultural land to only equity 

that is available in Saskatchewan?  That's the question you 

have to ask and that's the question I'm going to be asking the 

minister. 

 

The second question that I'm going to be asking: why restrict 

the equity only to debt equity which is the hardest and the most 

difficult to pay back of any of the equity functions that can 

exist for an opportunity for an individual to buy land in the 

province of Saskatchewan? 

 

You can only use debt financing for individuals in the province 

of Saskatchewan.  You cannot use equity that comes from 

outside of the province of Saskatchewan to finance land in 

Saskatchewan.  And that's what this is talking about; you've got 

to understand that that's what that's talking about. 

 

Then you go one step further. Would individuals be able to 

own any kind of . . . Use Cameco as an example.  Would 

anybody but a significant Saskatchewan-based individual be 

able to own shares in Cameco or in the diamond drilling 

functions that are going on through the province of 

Saskatchewan?  Would any investments be able to be made by 

individuals outside of Saskatchewan? 

 

The answer is no.  What would that do for financing an 

opportunity in mining and development?  It would curtail that 

seriously. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, that's what you're doing 

in agriculture.  That's what you're doing in agriculture.  You're 

restricting the use and the capability of equity financing in 

agricultural land that you don't do to anyone else.  You don't do 

this to anyone else.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is a problem.  It's a 

problem that has to be begun to be addressed. 

 

If you want to have agricultural land continue to be debt 

financed, you're going to have to deal with that issue.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, until that's done, nobody is going to get rich in 

agriculture -- until that's done.  And you need to have a cheaper 

way of financing agricultural land. 

 

You need to do it by equity financing.  Somebody has to put 

the equity in that says, I will base my investment on the basis 

of an opportunity for investment, and if there's profit there, I 

will pay for it what it profitably will provide me.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, the people in the province of Saskatchewan need that 

opportunity. 

 

Why?  They need that opportunity just like you need 

outside investment coming in for any one of the oil companies 

coming into Saskatchewan to drill wells; you need that 

investment in people like Producers Pipelines.  You need that 

investment.  People have an opportunity to make investment in 

the province of Saskatchewan in every other commodity except 

agriculture land.  And why?  Why restrict that? 

 

We're going to be asking the minister questions as it relates to . 

. . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, I want to point this 

out to the member from Rosemont who needs to understand 

some very fundamental things as it relates to the issues that I've 

raised.  And he believes that I am wrong in what I'm saying.  

But, Mr. Speaker, what I want to point to this member is that 

the equity in land cannot be financed by individuals only in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  It cannot, because it's debt 

financing which it totally . . . it's acceptable, but it isn't the only 

way that we should be doing it. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is a problem.  It raised its head all 

through the '70s as the prices of land was going up and in 

1984-85 when it sustained itself, and then when it started to 

show the real impact in agriculture, it crippled agriculture, Mr. 

Speaker, it crippled it.  And what should have had is an 

opportunity for investment from outside Saskatchewan coming 

in to Saskatchewan to own that land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all through the time that we're going to be in 

Committee of the Whole, I'm going to be seriously asking the 

minister why he does these kinds of things, why he's doing it.  

What's the purpose?  And I'm going to suggest to him that in 

order to deal with the items that were raised in the Eston land 

deal, there should be a better way of providing a control 

mechanism for some of those kinds of opportunities. 

 

The people in those areas, the people in Eston, did not want to 

have interference.  Mr. Speaker, the people in Eston were 

willing and personally prepared to put their land for sale.  Mr. 

Speaker, they were . . . secondly, they were interested in 

putting it up for sale and staying farming there to realize on the 

volume of dollars that they could take out for retirement for 

themselves. 

 

And today, as I talk to various people in my constituency and 

in others, there are only . . . significantly there are only one 

group of people who buy land.  There is only one group of 

people who buy land, and that's the Hutterites.  And you know 

what they do?  They do it based on equity coming in from other 

parts of Canada to provide the basis for the equity development 

on their farms. That's what they do.  And it comes from all over 

Canada.  It comes right into that Hutterite colony.  They'll buy 

land for 15 to 20 times the assessment when land is normally 

going for 8 to 10 times the assessment. 

 

And how are you going to prevent that from happening?  Now 

that is gaining a general acceptance as the only individuals who 

can afford to buy land.  Now do you want that to continue or 

would you like to have individuals who have private interests 

in land come forward and say, I am prepared to make an 



1650 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1993 

investment in that community because my grandfather lived 

there, or my great-grandfather lived, or my uncle lived there.  

And as an investor I want to come in and put some money in 

there. 

 

(1615) 

 

Would you allow that to happen?  This Bill will say no.  This 

Bill will say no.  And yet he could come in and put up 25 

Woolco stores in the province of Saskatchewan and never have 

anyone bat an eye.  Never.  And why?  If we have an 

opportunity for any kind of a commercial outlet, why would 

you want to restrict that opportunity from that investment?  

You wouldn't.  And yet you turn around and in land you do 

that.  In farm land you do that. 

 

You say no, I can't have anybody coming in and making an 

investment in equity in farm land.  I can't do that.  Why?  And 

the Minister of Justice and the Minister of Agriculture are 

going to have to answer those questions.  I'm going to ask them 

why the different dates?  What's the significance of the 

different dates as it relates to the time line?  Why is March 31 

of significance, 1974?  Why is September 15, 1977, of 

significance?  Why is May 6, 1980?  Why is September 15, 

1977?  March 31, 1974? 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, the minister made reference to cabinet 

to be able to order the board to investigate.  Now what would 

you want to snoop around doing that for?  So that there's 

nobody coming in and saying to the individual investor, you're 

going to scare them away some more.  Mr. Speaker, they're 

going to scare them away some more.  The investor coming in, 

whether he is a Saskatchewan resident or a Canadian resident, 

that investor is going to be frightened away some more.  

Because the government is going to come snooping around 

everything that goes on. 

 

My question to the Minister of Justice is going to be, how 

many people in real estate did he confer with as it relates to this 

Bill?  How many people in SARM (Saskatchewan Association 

of Rural Municipalities) did he talk to as it relates to this Bill?  

Mr. Speaker, how many lawyers did he talk to in relation to 

this Bill who were dealing with farm estates and who have to 

go through the transactions that deal with this?  Did anyone 

else ask him questions as it relates to the reason why in section 

85 he talks about five years?  You have five years to sell your 

land.  There is also going to be questions raised as to why 

January 1, that land will have to be disposed of by January 1, 

1994. 

 

It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that there have been too many 

people who are urban dwellers dealing with land that is 

agriculture, rural-based and don't have a clear understanding of 

what's going on.  And I believe the Minister of Justice should 

have asked some of his back-benchers, especially those along 

the Alberta and American borders, what impact that this is 

going to have on those people.  And that is in my view, Mr. 

Speaker, very serious. 

 

I'm also going to ask the Minister of Justice what kind of 

restrictions he's going to place on land holdings as it 

relates to partnerships and corporations. 

 

Then there's some other things that are in here too, Mr. 

Speaker.  There will be special exemptions.  There'll be special 

exemptions.  Oh there's some dates I didn't mention yet too.  

May 24, 1983, is a date that is in this Bill also, Mr. Speaker, 

that is going to have to have some clarity.  And people are 

going to have to dispose of their land by January 1, 1994.  

Who's going to auction this off, Mr. Speaker?  Who's going 

auction it off?  That, Mr. Speaker, is what the problem is going 

to be.  Is the land price going to go like this? 

 

Now let's talk about exemptions.  Are you going to have to be a 

special friend to the Minister of Justice in order to have an 

exemption?  Are you going to have to be a special friend of the 

member from Regina Rosemont to have an exemption?  Are 

you going to be the Minister of Agriculture and give the 

exemption?  Are you going to be the minister responsible for 

Economic Development and give the exemption?  Who is 

going to be the person that gives the exemption? 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, after all of that is done, will the 

determination be made on whether it is a good deal or a bad 

deal for the farmer?  No.  It'll be based on a political -- and 

might even be a small "p" political -- view of the world.  And 

that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why we are going to have lots 

of questions to raise with the minister about this Bill. 

 

Now I want to point out some things that I'm going to raise that 

I find difficult to understand.  First of all, the Farm Ownership 

Board will have the authority to investigate where the board 

has reason to believe that a person has violated the intent of the 

Bill in obtaining some land.  The board or people authorized by 

the board may conduct an investigation into the matter. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, would there be any toleration of this kind of 

a function in any land held in the city of Regina?  Would there 

be ever any opportunity for this to be put into place in the city 

of Regina or the city of Saskatoon to do exactly what you're 

doing in agricultural land? 

 

And the answer, Mr. Speaker, would be never.  There would be 

absolute, total rebellion, revolt if that's what would happen to 

the business communities in the cities and to the people who 

own housing in the cities; that are here in Regina or Saskatoon 

or any city.  That, Mr. Speaker, is what this Bill is going to do. 

 

So we're going to have . . . as the Minister of Agriculture said 

one time earlier, we have bin police -- people going from bin to 

bin to bin to measure.  Well now, Mr. Speaker, we're going to 

have land tenure board police. 

 

People who are going to try and police this are going to be 

going from deal to deal: Mr. Real Estate Agent, what's your 

commission on doing a deal today?  And after going through 

all of this investigation, what's your commission going to be on 

a deal that he does tomorrow?  It's going to be significantly 

higher. 



May 12, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1651 

You know why?  Because the land prices are going to go down 

and his commission is going to go up.  And I see that 

happening over and over and over again. 

 

The court is going to be able to enforce this under the board.  

The court will be able to enforce this.  It will be able to declare 

null and void any instrument or document agreed to by 

individuals. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we had this government stand up and say 

that they were going to nullify, make void, make void any 

action taken by the Crop Insurance Corporation in the province 

of Saskatchewan.  They were going to declare that action taken 

from 1991, January 1, 1991 and on, as null and void -- void.  

Void in . . . They're going to deem it to be void.  Okay, Mr. 

Speaker, they deem it to be void.  Deeming, in legal terms, is 

legalizing and putting in a legal term a word that isn't the truth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm pointing this out to the people of the province 

of Saskatchewan because I think it's significant.  The court will 

also be able to order in the nature of an injunction prohibiting 

any transaction through which a land holding may be acquired 

as it contravenes this Act.  So the court is going to rule that you 

can't buy land if you're a non-resident. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, over and over and over again they're 

attaching a cost to the process of moving land in Saskatchewan.  

Every time one of these things happens,  Mr. Speaker, it costs 

more.  And who pays the piper, Mr. Speaker, who pays?  It will 

be the person selling the land.  Why?  Why would this 

government decide to take and personally view every land deal 

in the province of Saskatchewan?  Why would they want to do 

that?  That's what they say they have to do. 

 

A person having a land holding in contravention of this Part 

shall immediately reduce his, her or its aggregate land 

holding to an aggregate land holding permitted pursuant to 

this Part. 

 

They will have to be forced to go right down to 10 acres or 320 

acres, depend upon which part of this Act applies.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, the Minister of Justice should have stated in his place 

here today that this is what is going to happen.  But did he?  

No, Mr. Speaker.  He just had as loose and broad-ranging 

discussion about this Bill as you could possibly get, didn't 

define any of this for us, didn't show us any of the things that it 

would do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he didn't show us how much the increased costs 

in legal fees were going to be to make these transfers, when 

lawyers are going to have to investigate the aspects of 

application by the board.  He didn't say anything about that.  

He didn't inquire about whether the court action is going to cost 

the farmer or whether it's going to cost the guy that buys. 

 

All of these things, Mr. Speaker, are going to cost more.  And 

that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why we're going to be raising 

these kinds of questions in the Committee of the Whole, for the 

single purpose of 

showing to the people of the province of Saskatchewan that 

what the Minister of Justice has done here, he's taken a 

howitzer to kill a fly.  And, Mr. Speaker, that's what the 

problem is.  And if he would have used a fly swatter in the first 

place and borrowed it from Jack Messer, it might have been a 

good idea. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the kind of thing that we need to 

think about when we deal with this part.  Who's paying?  Who's 

paying?  Across the board as I look at this Bill, I see only one 

group of people paying, and that's the people who are selling 

the land -- the people who are selling the land.  And if it isn't 

going to be the people who are selling the land, it will be the 

people who are buying. 

 

And if you're debt financing all of these assets in the province 

of Saskatchewan one more time, then, Mr. Speaker, that will be 

a significant debt financing load for the rural people in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  And I don't think that that's fair.  

You wouldn't do that to any of your voters.  You wouldn't do 

that to any of your voters in your urban centres; you wouldn't 

do that.  As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, they would be run 

out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do have some family that live in Vancouver and 

in Victoria and in the Fraser valley.  And the day that they put 

in that new tax law, the Minister of Finance in B.C. (British 

Columbia) read the Riot Act on ownership of homes in British 

Columbia to the tune of . . . if your house has assets of 

$400,000, you've got to pay a $400 tax.  And then your land tax 

and all of the taxes related to that.  And their taxes are based on 

the fact that the asset value of the land is what its saleability 

would recover, and that value is its market value. 

 

Now when the Minister of Finance brought forward that 

legislation or that tax increase in British Columbia, who 

rebelled?  Who rebelled at that?  It was the women and men 

who were senior citizens who got very, very seriously angry.  

Do you know why?  Do you know why?  Because the 

government said, oh, don't worry about it; don't worry about it.  

You can attach that extra tax to your land and you don't have to 

pay it now.  We'll just put it against your land, and you can pay 

for it when you die.  Your estate can pay for it.  That's what 

they said.  Then the senior people in British Columbia got 

really upset.  And that's why 50,000 people marched in the 

legislature in British Columbia; that's the reason why. 

 

And you start attaching those kinds of items to the people in 

the province of Saskatchewan on land tenure and you're going 

to have a serious problem. 

 

I don't understand why people in the province decided that they 

weren't going to support the constitution.  Why?  One 

fundamental reason I believe overrides all of the other reasons.  

And that one reason was that there was too many times and 

places where discrimination was taking place and that certain 

individual groups were getting a benefit.  Certain individual 

groups were getting a benefit that others did not get. 



1652 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1993 

And, Mr. Speaker, what you're doing here, is you're doing that 

in reverse.  You're saying to the people in rural Saskatchewan 

because you are rural, because your assets are land, you will be 

discriminated against in relation to its marketability. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what the problem is.  And I see 

that as a serious erosion of the rights of individuals in this 

province because you do not treat everybody the same.  You've 

got to make a special rule for agricultural land. 

 

And I'm saying, I'm saying to you as individuals in the 

province of Saskatchewan and as members of this Assembly 

that you should take and make those same rules apply to 

everybody, if you're going to make them apply to agricultural 

land.  And I'm going to say that as we go through this Bill we 

will be talking about those kinds of items that are going to 

seriously impair the opportunity for transfer of land in this 

province. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I took a look at this yesterday, I said to myself, 

well you know if they're going to be brave and make an 

opportunity available, we could have the price of land go up a 

couple of thousand dollars a quarter, or maybe $5,000 a 

quarter.  But you know what, Mr. Speaker?  This is going to 

make it go down, down some more. 

 

And I'm going to say to the members of this Assembly that you 

are going to hurt the very people that built this province, that 

put it together in the first place, and the people that keep it 

together.  The rural people in this province can't move their 

business elsewhere.  They have nowhere else to move it. 

 

And I'll point that out by saying this to you, Mr. Speaker, and 

to this Assembly.  I was in Kindersley one day about six 

months ago and I asked the people there whether they approved 

of this government.  And that was even before the new health 

program came in.  And I said, what would you say if we all 

hooked our tractors onto the Alberta border and pulled it 150 

miles to the east.  And one guy yelled from the back and he 

said, 70 would be good enough for me.  And the joke going 

around in the Calgary papers was that Saskatchewan's going to 

be annexed by the Alberta government. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, those people didn't take it as a joke, Mr. 

Speaker.  They're seriously beginning to consider that as an 

alternative.  And I say to the members of this Assembly that 

that is being perpetrated on them more every day by putting in 

this kind of legislation.  And, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of 

Justice is going to have to answer the questions as it relates to 

the kinds of things that I see in this Bill. 

 

I'm going to be asking him also questions, Mr. Speaker, that 

relate to how he's going to allow exemptions to major 

corporations in Canada including the Royal Bank, the Bank of 

Montreal, the credit unions in the province of Saskatchewan 

who 

use outside financing to come in and buy this land, to finance 

land. 

 

I'm going to ask him: what kind of exemptions are they going 

to make in order to determine that they're going to get 

exemptions?  Who are they going to ask?  Who are they going 

to ask over on that side?  And what is that asking going to cost 

them?  And what is that asking going to cost them? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as I take a look at this, I'm going to ask the 

Minister of Justice whether the Farm Credit Corporation is 

going to get an exemption.  I'm going to ask him specifically 

why, if Farm Credit is going to get an exemption. 

 

And if Farm Credit is going to get an exemption, then why 

shouldn't other individuals who are my family get an 

exemption?  Why shouldn't they be able to do that?  Why 

should Farm Credit get an exemption?  Why should the Royal 

Bank get an exemption?  Why should the Bank of Montreal get 

an exemption?  Why, Mr. Minister? 

 

And my observations are going to be this: that I don't believe 

that the minister has thought through the serious economic 

difficulties that are going to be created by his imposition of this 

Bill on the people of the province of Saskatchewan.  I don't 

think he's considered it.  That's because, Mr. Speaker, he 

doesn't understand it.  I don't believe he's understood it and 

neither will he be able to answer the questions when it comes 

time to because I don't think he's seriously considered that. 

 

And I want to point out to the people here that if you don't 

comply, if you don't comply, Mr. Speaker, there's fines 

involved.  Well how much would a fine be?  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, a fine for a corporation is $100,000; a person who is 

in contravention of this Act is fined $100,000. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there is going to be an involvement by the 

legal profession in this, and who's going to get the money from 

all of the transactions that are taking place?  It isn't going to be 

the people of rural Saskatchewan who will get the benefit.  It 

won't be land holders in the province of Saskatchewan who 

will get the benefit.  No, Mr. Speaker, it will be lawyers, it will 

be accountants, it will be judges, it will be courts, that have to 

act in response to this. 

 

And I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the people in the 

province of Saskatchewan should surely and seriously take an 

absolute close look at this in order to say to the Minister of 

Justice, you've definitely contravened some of their own 

individual rights in relation to this Act. 

 

Not only that, Mr. Speaker, an individual who contravenes this 

Act will be guilty of imprisonment for six months, 

imprisonment and a $100,000 fine for what, Mr. Speaker: 

something that is available to the business community and the 

province of Saskatchewan and is not available to agriculture 

people. 



May 12, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1653 

People in business in the province of Saskatchewan, if its 

owning all of the service stations in the province of 

Saskatchewan, can do this.  And they can legitimately do it.  

But if somebody comes in and says I have money from the 

outside and I want to buy some agricultural land, and he's in 

contravention, he can be thrown in jail and fined a $100,000 

besides. 

 

Now have we got two classes of citizens, Mr. Speaker?  It 

apparently appears that way.  We have two classes of citizens.  

One is a rural person, and one is an urban person.  They both 

have assets in real estate, and you treat one as if he was good 

and the other as if he was bad, for making the exact same land 

transaction.  And, Mr. Speaker, I am of the belief that the 

people in the province of Saskatchewan should take a serious 

look at what this does to impact on each one of them. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I am going to be asking the Minister of 

Justice questions as it relates to this Bill.  And I believe that he 

better have the answers as to economic impact that this will be 

in relation to the kinds of things that I see happening. 

 

Now how is this going to work, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you 

can get an exemption for the Bank of Montreal and you can't 

get an exemption for an individual who lives five miles out of 

the province of Saskatchewan, who owns land in the province 

of Saskatchewan?  How is this going to apply, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker?  The Bank of Montreal could get an exemption.  The 

Royal Bank can get an exemption.  They have 4 or 500,000 

acres of land in the province.  They can get an exemption.  But 

the individual who lives 5 miles outside of the province of 

Saskatchewan and has land in Saskatchewan, will he get an 

exemption?  Who knows, Mr. Speaker?  And if he's in 

contravention of this Act, he could go to jail for six months or 

be fined $100,000. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that's the kind of thing that I'm going to be 

asking the Minister of Justice to supply to this Assembly and to 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan.  What's the 

economic cost, in relation to this Bill, to the people of the 

province? 

 

You know what?  I don't think he'll be able to answer.  Because 

I don't think he's assessed it.  And if he had, he would have, I 

believe, not put this Bill in. 

 

There's another thing that strikes me in this Bill that is of 

interest, and that is dealing with section 16 as it relates to 

mediation services.  Mediation services to this point, Mr. 

Speaker, have been at cost to the taxpayer.  But what's going to 

be in this Bill, Mr. Speaker?  Mediation services in this Bill 

will now be able to prescribe a fee -- a fee, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

This government is full of fees.  It is loaded with fees.  

Everything it does has got a fee attached to it.  You can't do 

anything on that side of the House and it hasn't got a fee 

attached.  And, Mr. Speaker, I'm pointing out to the people of 

the province that the mediation services will be able to 

prescribe and require a payment of fees for persons using those 

services. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that's really interesting.  Agriculture has to 

pay a fee.  When a criminal goes to court, does he pay for the 

judge?  No.  The taxpayer pays for the judge, Mr. Speaker.  

When a farmer goes to court on mediation services and 

someone is acting on his behalf, will he have to pay?  You 

betcha. 

 

I'm going to ask the Minister of Justice how much those fees 

are going to be.  And my best guesses are, Mr. Speaker, he 

won't be able to tell us that either. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of things about this Bill that I find 

not only cause me a lot of problem but they are going to cause 

the people in the province of Saskatchewan serious, serious 

problems.  And I am saying to this Assembly and to the 

Minister of Justice that not only should he have people who are 

able to describe the legal concept of the Bill to this Assembly, 

but he'd better have people in place who can talk to us about 

the constitutional rights of individuals as it relates to this Bill 

because I think they're in contravention of the charter of rights 

in some of these area. 

 

And I am going to be asking those kinds of questions.  I'm 

going to be asking questions as it relates to the volume of 

dollars it takes to finance this kind of a board, a farm 

ownership board, because they're going to be very, very busy. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to ask him what the cost on 

society is going to be in relation to this.  Because I don't think 

that these people in government have assessed that.  And that, 

Mr. Speaker, those questions I believe that the Minister of 

Justice has an absolute, total responsibility to answer. 

 

The people of the province of Saskatchewan are having this 

Bill pushed through the Assembly on the basis that it's going to 

solve all the problems that happened in Eston.  And I'm certain, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there are a whole lot of things that 

the minister hasn't taken into consideration as it relates to this 

Bill, and I'm going to be asking those questions in Committee 

of the Whole as we get to it. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman . . . 

Deputy Speaker.  The Bill we're discussing today dealing with 

farm land security, it seems appropriate, Mr. Speaker, that this 

government would bring forward such a Bill, particularly when 

it's their Premier, their leader, who states that farm income is 

rising; when Agriculture Canada turns around in the same week 

and says that farm income will drop to net of $5,000 this 

coming year. 

 

This government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has very little 

credibility when it comes to talking about farm issues.  In fact 

is perhaps I used the word "very little" too strongly and I 

should have said has no credibility when it comes to dealing 

with farm issues. 



1654 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1993 

My colleague, the member from Morse, talks about some of the 

people on the west side of the province wanting to move the 

border -- the Alberta border -- eastward.  Well, Mr. Speaker, 

Deputy Speaker, as you know, my constituency borders on the 

U.S. (United States) and there people are saying that in the 

1870s and 1880s when the land survey came through and 

surveyed the border, the 49th parallel, some people are saying 

they made a mistake -- that they set the border too far south, 

that actually it should be about 50 miles further north than what 

it actually is.  So those people, Mr. Speaker, don't like what this 

government is doing either, just like the people on the west side 

of the province don't like what's going on. 

 

One of the issues that this Bill relates to indirectly is some of 

the changes being made at SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment 

Management Agency) and their assessment process.  It deals 

with the figure of $15,000 of assessment, municipal tax 

assessment for a piece of property, as being the limit that a 

non-resident can hold.  Well under the previous Bill which was 

designed better than 10 years ago, a $15,000 municipal 

assessment reflected very valuable land, or a large piece of 

property, Mr. Deputy Chairman.  But today, with the 

reassessment that's been carried out in the last few years where 

assessments more than doubled in most cases, that has changed 

the amount of property that fits within that criteria of $15,000. 

 

(1645) 

 

SAMA is now talking about moving to a system of real value 

as represented by the historical sales of land within a particular 

area.  If this change is accepted, Mr. Deputy Speaker, then the 

values of land will jump dramatically and easily exceed the 

$15,000 taxable assessment that this Bill talks about.  If the 

SAMA recommendations are accepted to go to true market 

values for municipal assessments, then $15,000 will not even 

reflect the value of a single quarter of land unless, as my 

colleague was mentioning, this Bill and other Acts that could 

be presented before this House . . . the effect of them being to 

drive the price down.  If that does indeed happen, then we 

could see a situation where $15,000 might reflect the half 

section of land or the 320 acres that's being talked about. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the farmers of this province would certainly 

hope that land values do not decrease to such an extent as to 

drop down to $15,000 a quarter. 

 

By putting people into the situation where they will have to 

dispose of their property -- forced disposal of their property, 

not because they wish to dispose of it, but because they're 

forced to by this legislation -- that is one of the things that will 

drive the value of property down. 

 

You look across this province and the Bill talks of 

non-agricultural corporations.  Well land is held by various 

non-agricultural corporations, some of which are the banks, the 

credit unions, FCC (Farm Credit Corporation).  Now they're 

exempted in this Bill. 

But what would happen, Mr. Speaker, if this legislation was 

changed, or if the exemptions that are being given to the banks 

and the credit unions currently, were disallowed?  We would 

have a large amount of land which would be forced on to the 

market, Mr. Speaker.  And this would have a twofold effect.  It 

would drive down the immediate price, the immediate value of 

land because of all the land that the financial institutions would 

be dumping into the market-place.  It would also have the 

effect of decreasing the value of collateral on other mortgages, 

other land mortgages being held by those financial institutions.  

And that has as dramatic an effect as decreasing the actual 

value of the land on purchases. 

 

What would happen is that those people who hold mortgages 

with financial institutions would have their collateral eroded; 

they would no longer have the collateral to support the 

mortgage, and this would put the financial institutions in the 

position of demanding more collateral or calling the loans to . . 

. at least a portion of the loan, to bring the loan value down to 

what the current value of the collateral is. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, farmers in this province cannot afford to pay 

off loans in such an immediate situation.  They don't have the 

financial resources or the wherewithal to do so.  So that would 

put them in the position of having a large amount of land being 

foreclosed by the financial institutions.  And, Mr. Speaker, I 

don't believe anybody in this province wants that to happen. 

 

So when the minister is bringing this forward, I hope he will 

take a very serious look at that $15,000 figure and reflect on 

how the changes to SAMA, how the changes to the municipal 

assessment will affect this type of legislation. 

 

Municipal assessment is also based now on the property, on the 

buildings and improvements on that land.  That's part of that 

assessment figure now.  Mr. Speaker, that needs to be taken 

into consideration also when you're talking about the $15,000 

figure for municipal tax assessment on a piece of property. 

 

Some buildings that are now being assessed do have a 

significant amount of value.  If you start looking at extensive 

hog operations, extensive feather operations, cattle operations, 

you're looking at a significant real value there.  And when 

SAMA starts to reassess this type of property, you're going to 

find a good number of pieces of property are going to fall 

outside of that $15,000 value.  And that will put a large amount 

of property in the position of being forced . . . of having a 

forced sale on it. 

 

In my area in particular, Mr. Speaker, because I'm bordered by 

Manitoba on the east and the U.S. on the south, there has been 

traditionally a significant amount of land owned by people on 

either side of the border.  People in North Dakota own land in 

Saskatchewan; people in Saskatchewan own land in North 

Dakota.  People in Manitoba own land in Saskatchewan and 

vice versa.  We have quite a large number of farmers who farm 

on either side of any of 



May 12, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1655 

those borders.  And what impact is this going to have on them? 

 

I had a fellow who phoned me not that long ago, Mr. Speaker, 

dealing with one of the changes that the government had made 

on another piece of farm legislation.  This fellow farms with 

his three sons.  They live on the Saskatchewan side of the 

border.  One of his sons bought some property, with buildings, 

on the Manitoba side of the border.  He lives 100 yards from 

Saskatchewan and yet under this legislation he will not be 

allowed to own property on the Saskatchewan side of the 

border unless he purchased it -- with all the different dates in 

here -- prior to 1977 or prior to 1980.  The dates are somewhat 

confusing for most people as to when they're allowed to own 

this property. 

 

In this particular case, because he's a young man who's just 

entered into farming, he won't . . . his situation will not be 

covered by the exemptions.  So he'll be in a position of having 

to dispose of his property within five years.  And it hardly 

seems fair, Mr. Speaker, when he stands within a stone's throw 

of the Saskatchewan border and the rest of his family's 

operation.  They're farming it as a family operation. 

 

If we look along the U.S. border in my area, Mr. Speaker, the 

people have traditionally married back and forth; have families 

back and forth on either side of the border.  Their grandparents 

settled in one place and the families have spread out from that 

point.  And some of those settled on the Saskatchewan side of 

the border and some of them settled on the North Dakota side 

of the border.  They all have the same family names.  And 

they're going to be severely impacted by this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As my colleague from Morse was saying, uncles and aunts, 

nieces and nephews will not be able to buy their heritage farms, 

the farms that their grandparents initially homesteaded, under 

this type of legislation. 

 

This government when they bring forward legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, and make a statement that this is how things will be 

done, the people of this province have a great deal of 

apprehension with this government because there is no longer a 

feeling that the people of this province can trust the 

government opposite.  They have seen contracts broken across 

the board, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have seen the contracts of civil servants broken.  We have 

seen the contracts of farmers broken.  We're now seeing the 

potential for contracts being broken with the province's co-ops.  

And what's to say, Mr. Speaker, that once this piece of 

legislation is brought forward, passed, that a social contract 

with the people of this province that that in turn will not be 

broken.  Where it says 320 acres is what you're eligible to have, 

next year it could . . . once you've come forward and purchased 

it or dropped your holdings down to that number, that the next 

year they won't say it's 160 and then it's 40 and then it's 10 as in 

some cases in this Bill already.  Mr. Speaker, the people of this 

province do indeed have a great deal of mistrust for the 

operation of this government. 

 

This Bill also talks about combining the Farm Land Security 

Board and the Farm Ownership Board.  Well, Mr. Speaker, 

those are two separate entities currently.  They fill two separate 

functions.  And perhaps there are some savings to be had by 

amalgamating of these boards.  But, Mr. Speaker, we would 

like to see some evidence that there is indeed some savings to 

be had here. 

 

The Farm Land Security Board deals with particular issues.  It 

deals with the foreclosures of farm land; it deals with the 

farmers themselves when the financial institutions have given 

foreclosure notices; and it deals with the financial institutions.  

It brings the two groups together for mediation and for 

negotiations. 

 

And the Farm Land Security Board does have some authorities 

vested in it through legislation that gives it power to make 

recommendations to the court that the farmer has indeed tried 

to meet his obligations or no, he has not tried to meet his 

obligations. 

 

By combining the two groups together, you're mixing apples 

and oranges, Mr. Speaker.  You're going to have to have people 

on these boards that are going to have two separate functions 

but are sitting on the same board and trying to make 

determinations on the recommendations of those boards the 

cases that come before those boards. 

 

And what the net result of it will be, as an ownership case 

comes forward, those people that are dealing with the 

ownership issues of farm land in this province will make the 

decisions for that board.  When a farm land security case or 

foreclosure case comes forward, it'll be the people dealing with 

that particular type of issue that will make the decisions. 

 

So the net result will be is that you'll have actually two boards 

still sitting there even though they're sitting at the same table.  

There will be that invisible dividing line between them.  The 

one group will make the decisions dealing with the one 

particular issue; the other group will make the decisions 

dealing with the other issue. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I believe that it will cause some 

confusion and inefficiencies within that board when that 

happens.  And unless the government can demonstrate that 

there will be actual savings by combining the two boards, it's 

perhaps better if they reconsider that option and leave them as 

two separate entities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, back during the 1970s during the NDP Party's 

previous incarnation as government within this province, they 

had a committee that toured the province dealing with land use.  

And this Bill deals with land and land use; it says who can own 

land and who can't. 

 

What was interesting with that previous committee, as it toured 

the province in the '70s, was the interpretation as to who should 

have land and what 



1656 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1993 

was the proper amount of land for any particular individual to 

hold.  You know, and it seemed to be depending on the 

individual that was making the presentations to those 

committees on what was the proper numbers, what was the 

proper use, who should be eligible to have land in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

One particular gentleman down in my constituency, a 

well-known member of the government party, stood up at one 

of these meetings and stated that the proper amount of land for 

an individual to hold was 20 quarters of land, because at that 

particular time the gentleman in question only had 19.  And 

that seems to be the case in this legislation, Mr. Speaker; it 

depends on how much land you already own, how much land 

somebody else should be allowed to have.  If it exceeds what 

you have, well then they're reaching the limit on what they 

should have.  If you wish to expand a little bit, well then the 

numbers grow some more.  And that seems to be a real 

problem, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When you look along the borders of this province -- Manitoba, 

the U.S., and Alberta -- the families that are farming back and 

forth, they have the right, Mr. Speaker, to expand.  They are 

Saskatchewan people in the main or they're related to 

Saskatchewan people.  But even under this legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, an individual could come into this province and buy 

land, be a resident of Saskatchewan.  It doesn't say in here that 

they have to be a Canadian resident or hold Canadian 

citizenship, but that they be resident in Saskatchewan.  They 

could come into this province, Mr. Speaker, with money from 

offshore, purchase attractive land.  As long as they lived here, 

they would be entitled to hold it. 

 

So what is the government trying to accomplish with this type 

of legislation that's saying people who are Canadian residents 

or non-Saskatchewan residents can hold a half-section of land 

or a value of $15,000. 

 

Well people, as long they're prepared to live in Saskatchewan, 

can have property here.  They can have mortgages on all this 

property outside of Saskatchewan.  If you go down to the 

Royal Bank or the CIBC (Canadian Imperial Bank of 

Commerce) or Toronto-Dominion or whoever today, as a 

Saskatchewan resident and borrow money that debt is being 

held by a non-Saskatchewan corporation. 

 

So you owe that money some place else.  If they foreclose, that 

money in turn . . . or that land in turn moves to a person or to a 

corporation resident outside of this province.  And there's 

nothing in here, Mr. Speaker, that . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  It now being 5 o'clock, this House 

stands adjourned until 2 p.m. tomorrow. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 

 

 


