




















































Hansard: June 07, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2271 

 June 7, 1993 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 55 -- An Act to amend The Workers' 

Compensation Act, 1979 

 

Clause 3 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Mr. 

Minister, we will go on to our second amendment.  We had just 

completed the first one.  I'm going to try and make sure we 

don't do the same ones over and over.  Just to let you know 

what we're doing, we want to give a little explanation for why 

we want to bring a change about in this particular section.  

Now just as in the new 3(b) -- old 2(f.1) delete -- not necessary 

-- and could be manipulated or abused by future governments, 

we have the new 3(c) -- the old 2(h.1) -- drastically increases 

the number of medical people billing the Workers' 

Compensation Board. 

 

This has not been properly costed according to one of our 

expert diagnostics, or whatever they are.  Anyway, by 

expanding the definition of health care professionals this 

provision offloads health care costs from the government onto 

employers.  It specifically causes employers to cover medical 

expenses for things the province has just finished taking out of 

medicare, such as chiropractors and optometrists.  It should be 

self-evident that if the provincial government is not prepared to 

cover such costs for the general population then employers 

should be under no greater obligation than their own 

government.  Now we suggest that basically that we're going to 

delete that from the Bill by the following motion to amend. 

 

Okay we want to: 

 

Amend clause 3 of the printed Bill: 

 

(a) by deleting clause (e) thereof; and 

 

(b) by re-lettering clauses (f) and (g) thereof as clauses (e) 

and (f) respectively. 

 

And I would so move, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The Chair: -- The hon. member for Maple Creek has moved 

an amendment to clause 3.  Does the minister wish to respond? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Just ask the Chair to read the 

amendment. 

 

The Chair: -- The member for Maple Creek has moved to: 

 

Amend clause 3 of the printed Bill: 

 

(a) by deleting clause (e) thereof; and 

 

(b) by re-lettering clauses (f) and (g) thereof as clauses (e) 

and (f) respectively. 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I have to confess I am confused by 

what's happening here.  The member's comments related to the 

number and variety of health care professionals who can 

invoice the Workers' Compensation Board, unless I 

misunderstood him, and I invite him to clarify it if I didn't.  His 

amendment refers to a deletion of a definition of labour 

organization.  I am unable to relate his comments to his 

amendment and I wonder if he's not commenting upon a 

different amendment than what the Chair is dealing with. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Just let me check 

here, Minister, and see.  I have three amendments to clause 3, 

and maybe I did pick one of the other ones and give the 

explanation to the wrong one. 

 

Okay, the other . . . I think my colleague just ran away with the 

one I just quoted from, so I'm going to wave him back here.  

Thank you. 

 

Okay, Minister, I think what we're going to do is I'm going to 

just read through the amendment again that we are proposing.  

If I'm going to explain this to you, Minister, I'll have to have 

my ducks in line, I guess. 

 

Just for clarification, Mr. Chairman, we voted on the 

amendment to section 3(b), the first one. 

 

The Chair: -- The amendment that I have at the table, and I 

believe this is what I heard the member move, to: 

 

Amend clause 3 of the printed Bill: 

 

(a) by deleting clause (e) thereof; and 

 

(b) by re-lettering clauses (f) and (g) thereof as clauses (e) 

and (f) respectively. 

 

The effect being to delete clause (e) and renumber the 

following clauses.  And I'll now call on the hon. member for 

Maple Creek. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Okay, that was 

the one that we voted on.  Under section 3(c) we proposed . . . 

Okay we got it straightened out.  Okay, An Act to amend The 

Workers' Compensation Act, 1979, and we are under 55-3(b) 

clause of the printed Bill: 

 

Amend clause 3 of the printed Bill: 

 

(a) by deleting clause (e) thereof; and 

 

(b) by re-lettering clauses (f) and (g) thereof as clauses (e) 

and (f) respectively. 

 

That's the one we're on.  And I will read the proper note this 

time. 

 

Defines employer association as it was under a similar 

provision that the Minister of Labour designated the 

representative mechanical contractors as the 



2272 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 1993 

employer association for almost the entire construction 

industry.  This definition is especially disturbing as it allows 

recognition of an employer organization made up of people 

who are not employers at all, whether or not they are 

employers. 

 

We said we wanted that part deleted, and then we went on to 

section 3(c) by explaining the definition of the health care 

professional.  Okay, this provision offloads health care, in our 

opinion, costs from the government. 

 

Now that's the one we're going to be doing next, so I got to stop 

there and let you comment on 3(b) because I had gone one too 

far already the first time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well I am not entirely clear about the 

member's position, I have to say.  Perhaps it would suffice . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . All right.  Perhaps it will suffice if I 

simply set out what purpose the Bill serves as it is now before 

the legislature. 

 

The definition . . . the member's amendment would delete the 

definition of labour organization.  The purpose of labour 

organization is that the Muir committee recommended that the 

Workers' Compensation Board be representative, 

recommended that two representatives be appointed from the 

employer organizations and two representatives be appointed 

from employee organizations.  This . . . the only employee 

organizations are trade unions in effect. 

 

So we are adding a definition of labour organization to mean 

the labour organization as defined by The Trade Union Act, but 

the function of the definition is to provide a basis for the 

amendments -- which we'll later come to -- which provide that 

the board must be representative.  So that's the purpose of the 

amendment. 

 

I am unable to relate to the member's comments, I have to say. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  We are looking 

now at Clause 3(c) and if my amendment corresponds to the 

memorandum of briefing notes that I have, we may be away 

here. .You never know about these things . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . exactly.  But it's a complicated Bill and needs 

some straightening out, obviously, because even we can't get it 

straight. 

 

We're looking here at 3(c).  It's the new 3(c) -- 2(h.1) of the old 

Bill.  And it says it drastically increases the number of medical 

people billing the Workers' Compensation Board.  This has not 

been properly costed, according to this footnote. 

 

And section 3(c) on this explanation, by expanding the 

definition of the health care professional, this provision 

offloads health care costs from the government onto employers.  

It especially causes employers to cover medical expenses for 

things the 

province has just finished taking out of medicare such as 

chiropractic and optometrics. 

 

It should be self-evident that if the provincial government is 

not prepared to cover such costs for the general population, 

then the employers should be under no greater obligation than 

their own government.  And we have suggested deleting that 

part. 

 

Now if I'm on the right amendment, I will read it.  And it goes, 

and I move as such that: 

 

Amend clause 3 of the printed Bill by deleting clause (g) 

thereof. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Again the members of the Assembly 

are going to have to weigh those comments themselves.  All I 

can do, I think, is to relate what purpose clause (g) serves.  

Clause (g) contains a definition of vocational rehabilitation.  

The vocational rehabilitation is central to these amendments. 

 

As I explained in the spirited exchange which I had with the 

member from Saskatoon Greystone, the whole basis of the 

legislation is that we are setting up a system whereby workers 

are not compensated, they're rehabilitated.  I'm 

overgeneralizing, but this definition of vocational rehabilitation 

is central to the changes to the Act which is to rehabilitate 

workers rather than compensate them.  You can't always do 

that, but that is the centre, that is the core of the system.  So I 

will obviously be recommending, Mr. Chairman, that this 

amendment be defeated. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 3 agreed to. 

 

(1915) 

 

Clause 4 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I will move: 

 

 That clause 4 be amended by striking out section 4. 

 

The Chair: -- I am going to rule that the amendment is out of 

order and will refer hon. members to Beauchesne, item no. 

698(5) and (6), and I quote: 

 

An amendment to delete a clause is not in order, as the 

proper course is to vote against the clause standing part of 

the bill. 

 

And that is from June 23, 1920.  Therefore I will rule the 

amendment out of order and the minister will be advised by the 

ruling. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Accordingly, I will simply urge 

members to vote against this section and we'll accomplish the 

same thing. 

 

Clause 4 negatived. 



June 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2273 

Clause 5 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I will be moving that clauses . . . 

sections 5 to 9, and I guess this will have to be done 

individually with each section, but I will therefore move that 

this section be renumbered as section 4, given the fact that we 

deleted the earlier section. 

 

The Chair: -- If the minister wishes to move, I would accept 

all sections 5 to 9 be done simultaneously.  If the minister 

would like to move that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I would move: 

 

Sections 5 to 9 of the printed Bill be renumbered as 

sections 4 to 8. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

The Chair: -- Then the renumbered section 4. 

 

Clause 4 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Under the 

renumbered no. 4, the old section, no. 13 amended, see no need 

to expand administrative costs of board by an extra two 

members, especially during these times of fiscal restraint. 

 

Increasing the number of board members from three to five, 

Mr. Chairman, at a time when we are reducing the number of 

MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) to save costs, it 

is inconsistent to be increasing the size of boards and 

commissions.  Under the previous board on the day the 

members were dismissed without cause, the backlog of cases 

was only 18.  Since that time, the new appointees have actively 

generated a backlog that we are told exceeds 100 cases. 

 

Now this is not a reflection, therefore, on the need for more 

members since the previous board was able to cope effectively.  

Rather it is a reflection of either incompetence or political 

manipulation.  There is simply no demonstrable reason to place 

this increased cost on the province at this time and we're 

suggesting that we delete it with our amendment, which clause 

4 of the printed Bill, I now move that we: 

 

Amend clause 4 of the printed Bill by striking out the 

phrase "maximum of five members" where it appears in 

section 13(1) as being enacted therein and substituting 

therefor the following: "maximum of three members". 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I will be urging the Assembly to 

defeat this, although I do so with some considerable caution.  I 

don't entirely disagree with the comments which the member 

made. 

 

The Muir committee recommended there be five members in 

order that the administrative problems -- to which I think all 

parties have addressed themselves in the earlier questions -- so 

these administrations 

problems can be dealt with.  In fact at the moment, we only 

have three members, and I guess we're simply going to play 

this by ear as we go along.  If we don't need any more than 

three members they won't be appointed. 

 

We would, however, like the flexibility to increase the number 

if it's necessary, and we're cognizant of the fact that the Muir 

committee which spent some considerable time recommending 

it recommended five.  So we're adopting the recommendation 

of the Muir committee. 

 

If it's any comfort to the member from Maple Creek, I say that 

I share some of his concerns and if . . . We only have three at 

the moment. If we can get by with three, that's all that will be 

appointed. 

 

So I'm going to ask the amendment be defeated but I certainly 

respect the spirit in which it's put forward. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- It's okay.  I'm one ahead of myself. 

 

Clause 4 agreed to. 

 

Clause 5 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The new clause 

5(3) -- old subsection 14(3) repealed: this will further politicize 

the board by taking away scrutiny of the chairman's status 

before the full legislature.  We prefer to see the old section 

retained as it was. 

 

Now we also have the note here that it removes the authority of 

the Legislative Assembly to determine if there is cause to 

dismiss the chairman of the Workers' Compensation Board and 

give the cabinet the power to fire the chairman at its discretion.  

The provisions giving the Assembly this authority was 

designated to preserve the independence of the position and 

protect it from political interference by cabinet. 

 

Given the promise of the Premier to have all major 

appointments subject to approval of the legislative committee, 

it is absurd that they are now proposing to eliminate this one 

modest measure of independence in the system.  There is 

simply no justifiable reason for the provision except purely 

political motivation. 

 

To argue that the government would not be able to fire an 

incompetent chairman would mean that the government would 

not be able to convince even its own members that he is in fact 

incompetent.  Of course the government can impose party 

discipline and win any vote it wants. 

 

So the only difference is that before the firing takes place there 

would be an open public debate.  Therefore we can only 

conclude that the government is afraid of open debate about 

such a matter, and with this provision is insisting it has the 

power to fire important officers in secret. 

 

And we suggest that we delete this by moving the 



2274 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 1993 

following amendment of clause 5 of the printed Bill: 

 

Amend clause 5 of the printed Bill: 

 

(a) by deleting subsection (3) thereof; and 

 

(b) by renumbering subsection (4) thereof as subsection 

(3). 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- What the member says is rational but 

it's not in keeping with the practice of this legislature.  What 

the member says is correct, in a way.  If the government has 

some quarrel with the chairman, in theory it isn't any different 

than having some quarrel with any other public servant so long 

as the government maintains its majority in the Assembly. 

 

In fact that's really not been the practice.  The practice has been 

that when a public servant is removable only by a resolution of 

the legislature, the practice has been that that person is 

accountable to the legislature and not the government.  That's 

the purpose of making the Ombudsman appointable back to the 

legislature.  That's the function in making . . . that's the 

rationale behind making judges removable by a motion of the 

Assembly and so on. 

 

So what the member says is rational theory; it is not, however, 

the practice of this legislature.  The practice of the legislature 

is, as I said, when someone is removable only by a motion of 

the legislature that they are accountable to the legislature and 

not to the government. 

 

I just want to explain very briefly why we believe that this is 

not an appropriate amendment.  We have all spoken earlier 

about the administrative problems which we foresee and which 

we all agree -- all three parties agree -- should be corrected.  

That's very difficult to do if the chairman is not accountable to 

government.  We agree that with respect to the disposition of 

individual claims, the board should exercise an independence 

which would be very similar to that exercised by judges. 

 

With respect to the administration of the board and the fund, 

however, we believe they should be accountable to the 

government, and I, in turn, should be -- the minister -- in turn 

should be accountable to this legislature. 

 

So we therefore feel that this amendment -- while I appreciate 

the spirit of it, I agree it is appropriate that the chairman be 

independent with respect . . . in the individual claim, it is our 

view, however, that the amendment as a whole isn't appropriate 

because the chairman should be accountable to government 

with respect to administration of the Act and the fund. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 5 agreed to. 

Clauses 6 and 7 agreed to. 

 

Clause 8 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, the 

new clause 9 was the old 21.1.  Note that the government is not 

proposing any duty on the board to be fiscally responsible and 

provide fair and reasonable employer classification or 

assessment. 

 

With that note having been made -- I'm hoping that I grabbed a 

hold of the right sheet because I have two of them -- we are 

going to move the following amendment: 

 

 (a) by adding immediately after the words "The board shall" 

where they appear in subsection 21.1(1) as being enacted 

therein the following words: 

 

 ", in a fiscally responsible manner"; 

 

 and 

 

 (b) by adding immediately after clause 21.1(1)(a) as being 

enacted therein the following new clause: 

 

 "(a.1) provide fair and reasonable employer classifications or 

assessments;" 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I would just be fairly brief here.  I 

can be much more, much more . . . I'm getting different advice 

here, Mr. Chairman.  I'll act on my own instincts and be 

relatively brief. 

 

I would simply point out to the member that we think this is 

probably unnecessary.  Section 118 now requires the board to 

be fiscally responsible by maintaining a fully funded system.  

So we think that's already in the legislation.  It's certainly the 

view of this government that that should be maintained.  So I 

think it's already covered off.  I'd urge the Assembly to vote 

against this as being unnecessary. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

(1930) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We have another 

one on clause 8, the new 9(2), and just in reflecting on how we 

are handling these amendments, I would suggest to the minister 

that when he makes comments about why he opposes our 

position, it seems to me that he should do more than think he's 

got something covered in the Bill with another part of the Bill.  

He ought to know for sure, and that's the doubt that we have is 

the reason why we are introducing these amendments because 

we seriously doubt that these things are covered off in the other 

sections as he has suggested.  And in order for there to be no 

mistaking the intent or the understanding, that's our purpose in 

proposing the amendments. 



June 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2275 

On the 8(2), rather, we recommend the new legislation 

commitment to have the board make its policy directives 

public, but there should be opportunity for at least 60 days 

advance notice and comment.  And we suggest that you see 

sections in Bill 56 which also of course have that same 

connotation. 

 

Having then made that reflection, Minister, we propose the 

following House amendment which I'll now move: 

 

Amend clause 8 of the printed Bill by deleting subsection 

21.1(2) as being enacted therein and substituting the 

following therefor: 

 

"(2) The policy directives of the board shall not be 

effective until a period of time of not less than 60 days has 

elapsed after it is published in The Saskatchewan 

Gazette." 

 

And I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I think we seek the same goals here.  

The existing section, subsection (2) says: 

 

 The board shall make its policy directives available to the 

public. 

 

We certainly invite comment on them in cases where the 

change is substantial.  However I think our view is that the 

suggestion put forward by the member for Maple Creek would 

be unduly restrictive and unduly awkward in some cases where 

the changes are minor. 

 

So we'll be urging the Assembly not to adopt it, not because we 

think it's wrong-headed, but just because it may be awkward in 

some instances. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 8 agreed to. 

 

Clause 10 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The policy here is easy to explain but 

difficult to actually implement.  It deals with workers who are 

injured for a second time.  The policy -- which is really not 

changed -- is that workers who are reinjured should be 

compensated for the aggravation or the acceleration of their 

injury, but not compensated a second time for the earlier injury. 

 

There was some concern expressed that the words "or 

combines with" in line 4 and 5 of the existing amendment 

might have the result that a worker would be compensated 

twice.  I am therefore moving: 

 

That section 10 of the printed Bill be amended by 

renumbering section 10 of the printed Bill as section 9; 

and 

 

by amending section 50 of the Act, as being enacted by 

renumbering section 9 of the printed Bill, by striking out 

"aggravates, accelerates or combines with" and 

substituting "aggravates or accelerates." 

I so move. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We appreciate, 

Minister, the fact that you have noted concern in this clause.  

We too had an amendment prepared for it, have decided not to 

present our amendment in the hope that what you are doing 

will suffice the needs of the general public who will be affected 

by the Bill. 

 

And as you have indicated earlier today, this Bill -- being very 

complicated and somewhat controversial, to say the least -- 

most likely it would be back on the order paper for adjustment 

next year.  Noting this commitment from you, that you will be 

relooking the whole thing over in due course to see how it 

works, we're prepared to go along with not putting our 

amendment in and going along with yours for the time being. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 9 as amended agreed to. 

 

The Chair: -- I understand the minister wishes to move an 

amendment to sections 11 to 24. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, this is going to be a continuing 

problem here.  I move: 

 

That sections 11 to 24 of the printed Bill, that the printed 

Bill be amended by renumbering sections 11 to 24 of the 

printed Bill as sections 10 to 23. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 10 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As we get these 

things all renumbered, I'm sure we'll have it straight in the end. 

 

Under the new now number 10, the old section of 51.1 

amended as worded, this may guarantee almost every worker a 

costly rehabilitation plan as long as they merely prove they are 

cooperating.  Now we think that that has to be changed 

somewhat, Mr. Minister, and we're going to do it by moving 

the following amendment to clause 10 of the printed Bill: 

 

Amend clause 10 of the printed Bill by adding 

immediately after the word "Where" where it appears in 

clause 51.1(b) as being enacted therein the following: 

 

", in the opinion of the board,". 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- It seems to me that the member's 

amendment is really unnecessary.  The section states, the 

worker shall: 

 

. . . where the circumstances require, 



2276 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 1993 

co-operate with the board in the development of a 

rehabilitation plan . . . 

 

The member's amendment would have that read: 

 

. . . where in the opinion of the board the circumstances 

require, co-operate with the board . . . 

 

It strikes me that, even without the member's amendment, that's 

a logical consequence of that section.  So I think the member's 

amendment is unnecessary.  I think it's already incorporated in 

the section, and I will urge that the section be . . . this 

amendment be defeated. 

 

Amendment negatived. 

 

Clause 10 agreed to. 

 

Clause 11 agreed to. 

 

Clause 12 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Someone 

suggested in the background that I'll be recognized a lot more if 

I don't hurry up.  So we will try to get on with this.  Or maybe I 

won't be recognized if I don't hurry up. 

 

It says here . . . dictates what the medical records will be 

available to the board in considering claims.  The problem with 

this section is in its relationship to other sections.  In other 

sections the Bill provides coverage for pre-existing medical 

conditions in making a compensation claim.  If that is to be the 

case, then the board must clearly have access to previous 

medical history of the claimant. 

 

Moreover, access to previous medical history is important to 

ensure that a claim is not made purely on the basis of a 

pre-existing condition that had been hidden from the employer. 

 

And we also have a note here that the old sections 54 and 56 

indicates that health care professionals can only furnish reports 

to the board that are relevant to the injury for which the 

compensation is claimed.  How could the board ever get 

information on pre-existing conditions with this amendment?  

If this prevents such access, then section 50 as amended 

becomes truly costly and wide open for potential abuse. 

 

With that need to rectify potential for abuse, Mr. Chairman, I 

would move the following amendment to clause 12 of the 

printed Bill: 

 

Amend clause 12(b) of the printed Bill at clause 54(a) be 

deleting "that are relevant to the injury for which 

compensation is claimed" and substituting: 

 

"including previous medical history as deemed necessary 

by the board". 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm going to urge the Assembly to 

defeat this.  I think we've already covered off the ill that the 

member addresses himself to.  The current interpretation is that 

past medical reports, of course, can be requested.  We really . . 

. What other medical reports do you want?  You scarcely want 

future medical reports to be furnished. 

 

This section says they can be furnished if they're relevant.  

Surely that's a reasonable test by which the board requests 

medical information.  So we think the section is fair and 

adequate as it is.  We think it covers the ill which I believe the 

member addresses himself, and we therefore urge the 

amendment be defeated. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 12 agreed to. 

 

Clause 13 agreed to. 

 

Clause 14 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Now we have a 

feeling that this section needs amending for basically the same 

arguments that we gave in the last section.  I won't bother 

rereading all of that but we suggest that we'll have to amend by 

deleting words, and I think that will be evident if I read the 

amendment itself.  So having said that it basically follows that 

same argument, I will simply go on to reading the amendment 

which I will now move to clause 14 of the printed Bill: 

 

Amend clause 14 of the printed Bill at clause 56(a) by 

deleting "that are relevant to the injury for which 

compensation is claimed" and substituting: 

 

"including previous medical history". 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I think I am just going to refer 

members to my comments under the previous section.  This 

was really ancillary to the earlier amendment which the 

member moved.  We defeated it and logically we should defeat 

this as well. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 14 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 15 to 20 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 21 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Mr. 

Minister, section 21.  This is the section that eliminates 

deeming, apparently, and there is no statistical basis to the 

government's claim that deeming has presented any significant 

hardship.  The appeal process is exhaustive and the end result 

of the process has meant that something in the order of only 1 

to 2 per cent of 



June 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2277 

cases are ultimately deemed to the dissatisfaction of the 

claimant.  Therefore the current provisions are adequate and 

this section is not needed, and we suggest that it should be 

deleted. 

 

(1945) 

 

Questions to raise on this clause include, as I have in my notes 

here: how many cases were deemed last year as a per cent of 

the total claims?  And how many cases of deeming were 

appealed?  Of those, how many appeals were denied?  What 

percentage of the total claims?  And what happened after the 

first appeal failed, etc. 

 

So I think that the minister will take note of those questions 

and answer them, perhaps, as we go along.  And I will move 

the following amendment to correct and rectify this situation in 

the Bill. 

 

I move that clause 21 of the printed Bill: 

 

Amend clause 21 of the printed Bill: 

 

(a) by deleting subsection 21(1); and 

 

(b) by renumbering section (2) as section 21. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  I think . . . Let me just read the 

amendment as I have it worded before me, and I'll ask the 

member to follow through.  I think you may have erred in your 

reading.  Just to make sure we have it correct. 

 

Move motion to: 

 

Amend clause 21 of the printed Bill: 

 

(a) by deleting subsection 22(1); and 

 

(b) by renumbering subsection (2) as section 22. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- That is correct, Mr. Chairman.  When I was 

changing the 22's up above I also changed these, but these have 

to stay the same as 22, yes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Briefly, this matter was covered 

briefly in my discussion with the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone earlier in the day. 

 

We have not eliminated deeming; we have simply returned 

deeming to its original function as a mechanism for dealing 

with injured workers who refuse rehabilitation or, having got 

rehabilitation, are not making reasonable efforts to return to 

work. 

 

So this section doesn't eliminate deeming.  It returns it to 

original function which we think is appropriate.  We therefore 

ask all members of the Assembly to join us in defeating this 

amendment. 

 

The Chair: -- I'm going to reread the amendment again. I think 

the error may have been the Chair's.  And 

as originally worded by the member from Maple Creek is the 

intention of the amendment in light of the amended numbers of 

the sections of the Bill. 

 

The amendment before us, as I understand it, is to: 

 

Amend clause 21 of the printed Bill: 

 

(a) by deleting subsection 21(1); and 

 

(b) by renumbering subsection (2) as section 21. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 21 agreed to. 

 

Clause 22 agreed to on division. 

 

Clause 23 agreed to. 

 

Clause 24 agreed to on division. 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  Because of the renumbering, the Chair 

was in error in calling for the vote on section 24.  There 

currently is no section 24.  However there is a section 25, and it 

is section 25 that is before us and the minister wishes to move 

an amendment to section 25. 

 

Clause 25 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move that we renumber section 25 

of the printed Bill as section 24. 

 

So we can now satisfy our lust for voting on section 24.  And: 

 

amend renumbered section 24 of the printed Bill by 

striking out subsections (2) and (3) and substituting the 

following: 

 

"(2) Subsection 77.01 is amended by striking out 'on the 

anniversary date of his injury'". 

 

I think the members read that it will be appropriate.  It will 

appear as a typographical change and no change in substance.  

I'll answer any questions the members may have. 

 

The Chair: -- I'm going to reread the amendment and I'll ask 

the minister to follow.  The printed copy I have before me is 

not precisely as you stated.  And I will ask that you confirm 

that the amendment is as follows: 

 

renumber section 25 of the printed Bill as section 24. 

 

amend renumbered section 24 of the printed Bill by 

striking out subsections (2) and (3) and substituting the 

following: 

 

"(2) Subsection 77.01(2) is amended by striking out 'on the 

anniversary date of his injury'". 

 

That is the amendment before us.  Are you ready for the 

question?  Will you take the amendment as read? 



2278 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 1993 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 24 as amended agreed to. 

 

The Chair: -- I stand corrected.  I thank the member from 

Morse for his help.  That's clause 25 as amended, which now 

makes it clause 24. 

 

And the minister wishes to move an amendment to sections 26 

to 32 of the printed Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move that we: 

 

Renumber sections 26 to 32 of the printed Bill as sections 

25 to 31. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 25 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In the new 25 to 

28 we have 31-old 82(85)(1)(87) amended.  We have no 

problem with increasing the amount to dependent spouses and 

children but are concerned about establishing the new 

precedent of indexing. 

 

We would rather see periodic adjustments based on the ability 

of the economy or the board to pay.  And with view to that 

concern, we have the following amendment which I will now 

move to clause 25 of the printed Bill: 

 

Amend clause 25 of the printed Bill by striking out the 

words "annually in subsequent years by the average 

percentage change in the Consumer Price Index" where 

they appear in subsection 82(3) as being enacted therein 

and substituting therefor the following: 

 

"periodically, based on the ability of the economy and the 

board to pay". 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm going to urge that this section be 

defeated, not that we disagree with the approach of the member 

from Maple Creek.  This section however should be understood 

in its context.  This section applies only to burials for which the 

board is responsible.  There were only 40 of them last year. 

 

The amount here involved is so small it would really not be 

possible or relevant to try to figure out whether or not the board 

could afford it.  The amount of the increase is just too small to 

be an actuarial concern.  We therefore recommend that it be 

defeated. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 25 agreed to. 

 

Clause 26 agreed to. 

 

Clause 27 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'm just going to 

move this amendment.  I think that the minister will pick it up 

as self-explanatory.  We have in clause 27 of the printed Bill, I 

move that we: 

 

Amend clause 27 of the printed Bill by striking out the 

words "annually in subsequent years by the average 

percentage change in the Consumer Price Index" where 

they appear in subsection 85.(1.3) as being enacted therein 

and substituting therefor the following: 

 

"periodically, based on the ability of the economy and of 

the board to pay". 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Again, my comments are the same.  

The amount involved is too small to be actuarially relevant.  

There were 94 children involved.  We're told by Price 

Waterhouse that the total cost of this would be $166,000. 

 

Given the magnitude of the sum and the amount in the fund, it 

would be almost impossible to determine . . . to make a really . 

. . a determination in such a small sum as to whether or not it's 

affordable.  We therefore urge this be defeated. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 27 agreed to on division. 

 

Clauses 28 and 29 agreed to. 

 

Clause 30 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

think that this is also self-explanatory, so I will simply go 

ahead and move that clause 30 of the printed Bill: 

 

Amend clause 30 of the printed Bill by striking out the 

words "annually in subsequent years by the average 

percentage change in the Consumer Price Index" where 

they appear in subsection 87(1.1) as being enacted therein 

and substituting therefor the following: 

 

"periodically, based on the ability of the economy and the 

board to pay". 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I could repeat my comments from the 

previous section and that is the amount involved is very small.  

I think, however, I prefer to base my comments under this 

section on the principle involved.  This section applies to 

children.  Surely with respect to children we can put them first 

and we can assure that the amount of their benefits are indexed 

to inflation.  Surely this is not an appropriate place to be 

agonizing over whether or not the fund is in balance or out of 

balance. The sum is too small to be really actuarially relevant.  

In any event, I think it's 



June 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2279 

inappropriate to be restricting the benefits given to children 

based on a concern as to whether or not the fund in its total 

would be actuarially sound. 

 

I therefore ask and urge members to defeat this amendment. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 30 agreed to on division. 

 

(2000) 

 

Clause 31 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move that section 30 . . . I'm going 

to move the following section after the renumbered section 31.  

I don't know whether or not it's appropriate now or whether it's 

appropriate after we've passed section 31. 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  The amendment is in order and 

appropriate to move with the consideration of section 31 as 

renumbered.  So if the minister would like to move the 

amendment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- At the end of my comments I will 

move that section 32 be renumbered.  I'm not going to read it; I 

think the members have it for themselves.  I will not read it 

until I actually get around to moving it. 

 

I think it's apparent that the words "$630 per month" are 

substituted for the words "the amount that would have been 

payable to the worker with respect to whom the spouse is 

entitled to compensation if the worker had attained the age of 

65," as I think is apparent. 

 

The increased pensions for spouses covered under the old . . . 

this increases the pensions for spouses under the old Act from 

530 to 630.  Doesn't seem like an excessive amount of 

generosity. 

 

I would therefore move that: 

 

The following section, after renumbered section 31: 

Section 98(1) amended 

32 Subsection 98.1(3) is amended by striking out "the 

amount that would have been payable to the worker 

with respect to whom a spouse is entitled to 

compensation if the worker had attained the age of 65 

years" and substituting "six hundred and thirty dollars 

per month." 

 

I so move. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, two 

obvious questions come to mind.  How many people does this 

affect on a normal year?  You can't predict next year I expect, 

but of course you could take something from last year, and the 

year before, and give us an idea of how many people this does 

affect and how many dollars this $100 per month 

increase will amount to in general terms for the program. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- If the member wants precise 

information, I'll have to supply it in writing later on.  We do not 

have the precise number.  It is something slightly in excess of a 

million dollars, I'm told is the cost.  And I'm told involves a 

rather few number of spouses. 

 

I am told that this is something which was overlooked from an 

earlier report, and we are moving forward with it now.  It isn't 

something that arose with this report.  So the best I can do is to 

say my information is it's something in slightly excess of a 

million dollars.  And it has been calculated by Price 

Waterhouse and is included within the amount of the 10.5 per 

cent increase we expected. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I would appreciate if you would give us those 

figures when you have them available, Mr. Minister, because a 

million dollars of course is not much to a government, I 

suppose.  But here again we see a rather ominous threat to 

people who are not in the government circle. 

 

In other words, what we're saying is that you've cut back 

seniors in all kinds of areas with the government cut-backs of 

every description, even right down to taking away the right of 

seniors to fish in this province free of charge.  You've cut them 

back in every area where the government pays. 

 

But in this one area where business gets stuck with the bill, it's 

real easy to be generous and look like a good guy, and I'm sure 

the folks that are going to get the extra hundred dollars are 

cheering and they're happy.  But there is something that's not 

quite consistent in the way your government deals with who 

pays the bills and how much they pay.  Obviously we won't be 

able to convince you not to do this, so I think I'll just simply let 

it lie there. 

 

The Chair: -- The question before the committee is the 

amendment to clause 31, in effect adding a clause 32.  Will you 

take the amendment as read? 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 31 as amended agreed to. 

 

The Chair: -- I now advise members of the committee that the 

amendment added a clause 32 so the numbers before us are 

now those that appear in the printed Bill, and that is our 

numerical system.  The question before the committee is clause 

33. 

 

Clause 33 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I am going to . . . at the conclusion of 

my comments, we'll move that we amend section 104 of the 

Act as being enacted by section 33.  We'll be striking out 

subclause (4)(b)(iii) -- I'll read this precisely when I move it -- 

and we will substitute a phrase which reads: 



2280 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 1993 

"(iii) in consultation with the worker, the board has designed 

and provided to the worker, at the expense of the board, a 

vocational rehabilitation program, and the worker has been 

allowed a reasonable time to obtain employment after 

completing the program"; 

 

Members will recognize in this clause the core of the program 

to which I refer, and that is that workers are not being 

compensated so much as they're being rehabilitated.  This 

section, with a fair amount of brevity, sets out that the board 

shall consult with the workers; shall design and provide a 

program to the worker; allow the worker a reasonable period of 

time in which to obtain employment after which the board's 

responsibility will come to an end. 

 

I therefore, Mr. Chairman, move that section 33 of the printed 

Bill be amended by: 

 

Amending section 104 of the Act, as enacted by section 33 

of the printed Bill: 

 

(a) by striking out subclause (4)(b)(iii) and substituting the 

following: 

 

"(iii) in consultation with the worker, the board has 

designed and provided to the worker, at the expense of the 

board, a vocational rehabilitation program, and the worker 

has been allowed a reasonable period of time to obtain 

employment after completing the program"; 

 

I so move.  And: 

 

(b) by striking out subsection (5); and 

 

(b) by renumbering subsection (6) as subsection (5). 

 

I so move. 

 

The Chair: -- I have the printed motion before me, but it is not 

precisely the same as read by the minister.  Can I just read the 

words that are substituted to see if we have the same? 

 

"(iii) in consultation with the worker, the board has 

designed and provided to the worker, at the expense of the 

board, a vocational rehabilitation program, and the worker 

has been allowed a reasonable time to obtain employment 

after completing the program"; 

 

That's your intention?  Is that amendment that is before the 

committee . . . Just stop for a moment. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Mr. 

Minister, I think I should read the comment that I had written 

about the whole section because that may apply to what we're 

going to do in the attempt to correct your amendment so that it 

actually will serve the needs that has to be served.  Then we're 

going to suggest and move a subamendment. 

Now we believe that under the old section 104 amended . . . 

still does not provide employers with clear assurances that 

duration of time on vocational rehabilitation will not be greater 

. . . or greatly extended or abused, especially if read in 

conjunction with the new objects clause of the Act.  The board 

may reduce or terminate, rather, payment to a worker, only if 

the worker can be proven not to be cooperating, i.e., without 

good reason. 

 

Now this may be very hard to do.  Amendment amended 

401(4), little two in brackets, should indicate a maximum job 

search of three months, not a minimum of three months.  In 

other words, change wording from "not less than" to "up to" 

three months. 

 

And that, I guess, is the suggestion we're making there. 

 

The new 401(5) should be deleted, we suggest, by including 

this in . . . potentially nullifies any time limits established under 

404-4.  Now, I would like to move the following 

subamendment to the amendment: 

 

That the amendment be amended by deleting "a reasonable 

time" and substituting "up to three months" therefor. 

 

And I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I would suggest the amendment's out 

of order.  If the amendment which I proposed passes, there 

would be nothing there for the member from Maple Creek to 

amend. 

 

A subamendment's only in order if it amends my amendment.  

His doesn't.  His amends the original section.  His amendment 

only makes sense, I think, if my amendment is defeated.  And 

therefore, I think it's out of order.  It has to make sense on the 

assumption that mine might be passed. 

 

(2015) 

 

The Clerk points out that I may have been in error.  I was 

following the amendment as you had it written.  Apparently 

you have changed it, and it was slightly different as you stated 

it.  We'll accept it as you stated it.  I would therefore urge the 

subamendment be defeated. 

 

The amendment which we proposed provides that the injured 

worker shall have a reasonable period of time in which to find 

employment. Three months is probably a rough guide.  There 

might be some who would take less and there might be some 

who would take more. 

 

My fear about the member's amendment is, everybody will get 

three months whether they need it or not.  That might be 

overcompensating people who could have found work in less 

than that, and I suspect might undercompensate some who have 

more difficulty because their injuries are more serious.  So I 

would urge that this be defeated, acknowledging that three 

months is probably a rough guide and a rough 



June 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2281 

average. 

 

Subamendment negatived on division. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 33 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 34 to 37 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 39 agreed to. 

 

Clause 40 

 

The Chair: -- And I will ask the Minister of Labour to move 

his amendment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We're going to add the following 

section after section 40 of the Bill.  We're going to provide a 

requirement that if the . . . We have stated that we expect the 

assessments, the average increase in assessments to be 10.5 per 

cent.  Some concern that this figure might be a sham.  I think 

the concern was expressed by people in the business 

community.  This figure might be a sham and a figure to which 

we have no commitment beyond some verbal passing 

reference. 

 

In order to assure the business community that the 10.5 per 

cent figure was real -- we expect the board to live within it and 

believe they can -- we've proposed the amendment which I'm 

now going to read.  I would move that section 40 of the printed 

Bill be amended: 

 

Add the following section after section 40 of the printed 

Bill: 

 

"Section 135 amended 

41(1) subsection 135(1) is amended by striking out 'The 

board shall' and substituting 'Subject to subsection (4), 

the board shall'. 

 

(2) The following subsection is added after subsection 

135(3): 

 

'(4) Where, in any year, the board proposes to assess and 

levy on the employers in a class of industry an 

assessment that exceeds the assessment levied on those 

employers in the preceding year by more than 10.5 per 

cent: 

 

(a) the board shall, before making the assessment: 

 

(i) send a notice of the proposed assessment to the 

employers in the class; and 

 

(ii) cause the notice to be published in The 

Saskatchewan Gazette; and 

 

(b) the employers in the class may, within 30 days after 

the date 

of publication of the notice in The Saskatchewan 

Gazette, make representations to the board with respect 

to the proposed assessment'". 

 

Perhaps I'm just going to say this time that I'm reading this and 

all members have a copy of this.  If there's any differences 

between what I read and what's printed, the printed version 

shall prevail. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Mr. 

Minister, the initial start of your comments had us up in our 

seats a little because we thought that you might actually be 

doing something positive with this very, very badly drafted 

Bill. 

 

What in fact you have said is that you're going to have a 

maximum per year of 10.5 per cent increase to the business 

community on their premiums -- which means, of course, that 

in six years that alone could mean 100 per cent increase -- at a 

time when you're telling everybody else that 2 per cent 

increases in wages and 2.5 and that sort of thing is all enough. 

 

Yet you're saying that increases to business communities' costs 

should go up by 10.5 per cent.  And then you even leave 

yourself an escape hatch here saying that if you put it in the 

Gazette, you're going to be allowed to increase it even more. 

 

I mean, really if I understood that right, this is not much 

comfort to the business community, I shouldn't think at least.  I 

don't pay for any workers' compensation in my operation at the 

moment.  But if I did, I think I'd be probably a little astounded 

at sort of the damage control mechanism that you're throwing 

in here as a peace offering. 

 

And if that's what it's intended to be, I think you're falling 

mighty short mighty fast because we're not getting anywheres 

with this Bill towards alleviating the concerns and the problems 

of the business community. 

 

So obviously you are going to, with the weight of your 

majority, pass this and do it, but I suggest to you that if you're 

going to take any credit for helping anything, you've missed it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. 

Minister.  Another point in this amendment that you proposed 

is a possible 10.5 per cent increase in one year.  And if you're 

going to have more than that, your bone to the employers of 

this province is that you'll notify them that you're going to raise 

the fees up.  You'll notify that class of employers and you'll 

cause that a notice be published in the Saskatchewan Gazette. 

 

And if that increase is, say, 50 per cent in a year, what recourse 

do the employers have?  Well they can make presentations to 

the board within 30 days.  Now that is a very flimsy excuse for 

claiming that you're giving something to the business 

community, Mr. Minister.  You're giving them absolutely 

nothing other than the fact that you'll send them a letter that 

we're raising the 



2282 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 1993 

fees.  That's all you're doing.  That is garbage, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm crushed.  My amendment, which 

we thought so good, has found itself ill-favoured with members 

opposite. 

 

Let me explain what we're doing here for members opposite.  

And I think members understand this, but let me repeat that the 

assessments are based upon the loss record.  If an industry has 

a bad loss record, their assessments will go up because it's as if 

each industry had a separate fund.  If their accident record is 

bad, the assessment is increased.  The fund is kept in balance.  

Thus in any year, assessments might go up by nothing, they 

might be reduced, or they might be increased.  And given the 

loss record, they could be increased by more than 10 per cent. 

 

There was some concern expressed that the . . . And I think 

everyone except perhaps members opposite, but everyone else 

agrees these amendments are going to cause a one-time-only 

increase.  It's not going to happen every year.  These are a 

one-time-only increase. 

 

We therefore, to give some comfort and assurance to the 

business community that we were serious about the 10.5 per 

cent, we've provided something they didn't have before, and 

that's the legislative right to be notified of any increases over 

10.5 per cent.  In any given year, any industry might face that if 

their loss record is that bad.  So I would urge members to 

accept this in that spirit and pass this amendment. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I have to rush to get ahead of my colleague; 

he was so anxious to get involved in that one. And I can readily 

see why, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the minister shall note, I think, that if he is 

serious about a one-time-only rise in cost as a result of this Bill, 

I challenge him here and now to stake his seat in the cabinet on 

that statement.  If you're wrong, you resign.  Put your money 

where your mouth is, Minister, because this is really not going 

to happen. 

 

The very way that this Bill is written absolutely ensures that the 

costs to the business community have to go up.  There is no 

down and there is no staying the same.  And if there is any 

chance that this could happen only once, the sun won't come up 

in the East any more.  And I challenge you to put your money 

where your mouth is and commit yourself to resigning from 

your seat if you're wrong and they go up more than one time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I assume the member will resign his 

seat if they go up by less than 10.5 per cent.  If that's part of the 

bargain, it needs to be considered.  If the average increase is 

more than 10.5 per cent, I resign.  if they're less than 10.5 per 

cent, you resign. 

 

I want to say to the member opposite, you may get the best of 

that bargain.  I'm not sure that a by-election in Churchill 

Downs wouldn't be more attractive than a by-election in Maple 

Creek.  So perhaps I shouldn't be 

making any bargains on behalf of the Premier. 

 

I just make this . . . not to make a serious offer to you of wager, 

just to point out that I think your proposal is not well founded if 

it was seriously put forward. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The minister 

talks of measure of losses within an industry determining what 

the fee schedule will be.  Where do you measure that industry?  

Is that within the province of Saskatchewan, or just what 

jurisdictions do you measure? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, it's within the province of 

Saskatchewan.  It is as if each industry in the province had a 

separate bank account.  All of their assessments go into their 

bank account.  All of the losses are paid out of their bank 

account.  The bank account is kept in a zero balance or better. 

 

Now there isn't actually separate bank accounts, but the system 

is administered and has been administered since time 

immemorial in that fashion, and it is in every other province. 

 

Thus every three years the assessments are reviewed for any 

one industry.  They're staggered so the board is constantly 

reviewing assessments, but each one is done about every three 

years.  If the accident record suggests a decrease in assessment, 

that occurs; if the accident record justifies an increase, that 

occurs.  But it's done in that fashion.  So given that as a basis, 

of course it includes only businesses within Saskatchewan. 

 

Amendment agreed to on division. 

 

Clause 40 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 41 

 

The Chair: -- Members will note then that this has created a 

new clause 41, and I'll recognize the Minister of Labour for an 

amendment to the printed Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- This came about as a result of some 

considerable dialogue between myself and members of the 

business community.  As the Bill was originally printed, the 

Bill would be . . . scheme would have envisioned information 

flowing from occupational health and safety to the Workers' 

Compensation Board and that information being the basis of 

assessments. 

 

The business community made a very vigorous case that their 

assessment should not be based on information from 

occupational health and safety when it has not been tried and 

tested.  And they felt their assessments might go up on the 

basis of some personal dispute with an occupational health and 

safety officer. 

 

At the end of the day, whether or not they persuaded the 

government, we kind of came to the conclusion this is their 

call.  It's their money.  It's they who pay it. 



June 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2283 

That's the basis upon which they want to pay it.  I think we 

weren't prepared to sort of shove the changes down their 

throats. 

 

So this amendment will provide the information can still be 

passed on to WCB (Workers' Compensation Board) for general 

purposes, but the information will not be part of their 

assessments.  As I say, this is done in response to quite a 

vigorous lobby from the business community. 

 

(2030) 

 

The Chair: -- Would the minister then like to move the 

amendment into the record? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- . . . neglected to actually move it.  

Once again I add the condition in the event of any discrepancy 

within what I say and what's printed, the printable version shall 

prevail. 

 

I therefore move section 41 of the printed Bill be amended by: 

 

Renumber existing section 41 of the printed Bill as section 

42. 

 

Strike out section 139.1 of the Act, as being enacted by 

renumbered section 41 of the printed Bill and substitute 

the following: 

 

"Forwarding information re accident records 

139.1 The board may forward to the Occupational Health 

and Safety Division of the Department of Labour any 

information respecting the accident record of an employer 

or any class of employers that the board considers 

appropriate for the purposes of improving occupational 

health and safety". 

 

I so move. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

certainly wouldn't want to describe myself as any kind of an 

expert at all in this area, but it seems to me, it seems to me that 

we shouldn't be mixing The Occupational Health and Safety 

Act into the Workers' Compensation Act.  That in itself triggers 

me to think that we are definitely going to have a mix that isn't 

going to serve the purposes of the people involved. 

 

Amendment agreed to on division. 

 

Clause 41 as amended agreed to. 

 

The Chair: -- On sections 42 to 47 of the printed Bill, the 

minister wishes to move an amendment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Consequence of thereof, I move 

sections 42 to 47 of the printed Bill be amended by: 

 

Renumbering existing sections 42 to 47 of the printed Bill 

as sections 43 to 48. 

I so move. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clauses 43 to 48 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 48 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move the following amendment -- I 

think as I work my way through this, it will be . . . I think the 

purpose behind it is relatively clear; it is consequential to 

earlier amendments -- section 48 of the printed Bill be 

amended by: 

 

Renumber existing section 48 of the printed Bill as section 

49. 

 

add the following section after renumbered section 49 of 

the printed Bill: 

 

"New section 183.1 

50 The following section is added after section 183: 

 

'Transitional 

183.1(1) In this section: 

 

(a) "amendment date" means the day on which a 

section of The Workers' Compensation Amendment 

Act, 1993 comes into force; 

 

(b) "relevant amending section" means, with respect 

to a section of this Act, the section of The Workers' 

Compensation Amendment Act, 1993 that amends 

the section of this Act. 

 

(2) Notwithstanding The Workers' Compensation 

Amendment Act, 1993: 

 

(a) sections 68, 69 and 104 as they existed 

immediately before the amendment date of the 

relevant amending sections apply with respect to 

injuries that occurred before the amendment date of 

the relevant amending sections; and 

 

(b) sections 82 and 83 as they existed immediately 

before the amendment date of the relevant 

amending sections apply with respect to deaths that 

occurred before the amendment date of the relevant 

amending sections. 

 

(3) Where a dependent child is receiving benefits 

pursuant to section 85 or 87 as those sections existed 

prior to the amendment dates of the relevant 

amending sections, the child is entitled to receive 

benefits calculated in accordance with those sections 

as amended by the relevant amending sections, but 

only with respect to the period commencing on the 

amendment date.'" 



2284 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 1993 

Renumber existing section 49 of the printed Bill as 

section 51. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Chair: -- I believe that last motion to renumber section 49 

of the printed Bill as section 51 is out of order.  We're not . . . 

it's section 48 of the printed Bill that's before us, and what's 

before the committee is just the amendment as moved to 

section 48 of the printed Bill. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 48 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 49 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move: 

 

 this be amended by renumbering existing section 49 of the 

printed Bill as section 51. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Yes I have . . . I may be one step ahead of 

myself here; I'm not sure.  I have kind of a wrap-up statement 

that I want to make about the Bill . . . (inaudible interjection) . . 

. after 49.  Thank you. 

 

Clause 49 as amended agreed to. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Just before we 

make this into law there's one little statement I think that needs 

to be put on the record to indicate where we feel this is going to 

end up. 

 

Given the proposed amendments, Mr. Minister, employers will 

become resistant  to hire people with medical conditions and 

most particular people who previously have had work-related 

injuries.  Hiring such people will pose an additional financial 

risk for employers in the unhappy eventuality that an accident 

does occur to the worker. 

 

Therefore in a real way these proposals work against injured 

workers who are actively trying to get back into the labour 

force.  This phenomenon will give rise to demands for new 

Human Rights Code amendments to outlaw asking questions 

about medical information related to employment and possibly 

even removing the right of an employer to require a medical 

exam. 

 

I want you to take that into account, Minister, because I think 

the effect of your Bill will be very much against the working 

people of our province in the way that we have expressed it.  

The Bill we believe was poorly drafted although some of the 

changes are always necessary.  We're not saying that we don't 

have to keep up with our times and remodel things, but we feel 

that this Bill really has missed the target, and we want to 

encourage members to defeat it and send it back to the drawing 

board. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I want to make a general 

comment and then a specific comment. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Oh no. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I see the members welcoming my 

comments, and I gather from the member from . . . I gather the 

more extensive they are the better they would like it. 

 

The general comment is that we do not believe that this Bill, 

which strikes a balance between injured workers and 

employers, will make it any more difficult for employers . . . 

for employees to be hired. 

 

I want to say specifically with respect to injured workers where 

we're going to be encouraging injured workers to . . . we're 

going to be encouraging employers to rehire injured workers.  

It's one important way we'll be trying to keep assessments 

down, and we really . . . we'll be looking forward to 

cooperation from employers in rehiring injured workers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair: -- The question before the committee . . . Order.  

The question before the committee is to report the Bill with 

amendment. 

 

The division bells rang from 8:41 p.m. until 8:42 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Van Mulligen Serby 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Teichrob Sonntag 

Kowalsky Flavel 

Carson Cline 

Mitchell Wormsbecker 

MacKinnon Crofford 

Penner Stanger 

Cunningham Carlson 

Lautermilch Langford 

Calvert Jess 

Murray t  

-- 23 

Nays 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

Boyd Haverstock t 

-- 6 

 

(2045) 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 55 -- An Act to amend The Workers' Compensation 

Act, 1979 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the 

amendments now be read a first and second time. 



June 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2285 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave I move the 

Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Economic Development 

Vote 45 

 

The Chair: -- At this time I would ask the minister to please 

introduce the officials who have joined the committee this 

evening. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Thank you very much, Mr. 

Chairman.  I want to introduce two of my staff who are with 

me here today:  Frank Hart, deputy minister of Economic 

Development, and Peter Phillips, who is seated on my left, 

associate deputy minister of policy for the Department of 

Economic Development. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, we 

have a number of questions that we want to deal with this 

evening and in a number of specific areas.  As well, we'd like 

to welcome your officials here this evening and the help that 

they'll be able to offer you, I'm sure. 

 

First of all, Mr. Minister, I'd like to deal with the Piper Aircraft 

deal and all of the information surrounding the Piper Aircraft 

deal, or lack of information more to the point, I guess is what it 

is.  Mr. Minister, just a quick question to start off the Piper 

Aircraft situation.  Is it the view of the government that the deal 

is still possible or is it finished? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well I think more importantly than 

the view of the government is the view of our private-sector 

partner, Mr. Paul Hill, who indicates that he would like to keep 

the embers alive, let's say, of the deal.  In the event that the 

present bidding process that's going on in Vero Beach at the 

present time doesn't prove successful by the Pilatus Group that 

are bidding for Piper, then at some time in the future there may 

be an opportunity for Saskatchewan and the Hill family to be 

involved in a purchase. 

 

So I have to say, first of all, that as time goes on I suppose you 

might say it gets less and less likely.  I think that on that you 

are correct. 

 

But there is still some slim chance, and I'll put it that way.  And 

I've said this publicly last week, and I say it again:  there is 

some slim chance that the present bidding process in Vero 

Beach may not be successful and then there would be an 

opportunity for Saskatchewan and Mr. Hill to be involved 

again. 

Mr. Boyd: -- It's my understanding that Mr. Hill has 

withdrawn his bid on it, and he has said that at a future time he 

may be interested in resubmitting his bid.  Is that your 

understanding as well? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, that's exactly the point, that we 

are not involved in the bidding process at this time; our bid has 

been pulled back. 

 

But it's fair to say that in these processes they often go on over 

a long period of time, and especially when it comes to trying to 

purchase a company in the United States that's in chapter 11 

bankruptcy where the courts are involved; where the creditors, 

both secured and unsecured, are involved; where the whole 

issue of product liability, a very huge issue in the United States, 

is involved. 

 

A lot of legal work necessarily has to be included in this 

process; it is a very complicated arrangement.  So we're not 

involved in the bidding at this time. 

 

But Mr. Hill says that if this bidding process collapses and no 

deal is made at the present time, there may be an opportunity in 

some months to get back involved. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- What would you estimate the cost to the 

Saskatchewan taxpayers has been to this point for the Piper 

Aircraft . . . trying to attract Piper Aircraft to Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well I can't give you an estimate.  

This arrangement is not being worked out of Economic 

Development.  SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic 

Development Corporation) is the lead government agency 

involved in arranging a loan if the deal were to be completed. 

 

I will, however, make the commitment again that once the deal 

is concluded one way or the other, successfully or 

unsuccessfully, we'll be making all of the financial 

arrangements, the studies, the analysis, the legal work that went 

into the deal public in a proper format. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I would imagine 

there's been a number of consulting firms that have been 

associated with the bid -- presumably anyway.  And I'm 

wondering if, Mr. Minister, if you could provide us with the 

details of the consulting firms' consultations that you've had 

with them as well as the names of the companies and 

everything associated with them -- any reports they may have 

prepared or anything of that nature. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well I don't want to get into this 

because it's not part of the Economic Development estimates.  I 

mean, we don't have . . . there's nothing in Economic 

Development Estimates as it would relate to contracts or the 

consulting fees. 

 

I will tell you this though that off the top of my head there's 

only one very large . . . by comparison to anything else in the 

arrangement is consulting fees -- the analysis and study that 

was done by Ernst & Young, a Toronto-based firm. 



2286 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 1993 

But I don't have the details here, but when we get the deal 

concluded -- successfully I say, or unsuccessfully -- I'll be 

making all of that public through SEDCO through the Crown 

corporation. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it certainly was, initially 

anyway, one of the things that you were promoting as an 

economic development project that your government was really 

quite proud of.  And if we just think back to the day when you 

made the announcement on it, there was a great deal of fanfare 

about it.  And I recall you making the statement that the Piper 

Aircraft company would soon be relocating shortly after the 

court decision to Saskatchewan and that there'd be a number of 

job opportunities and indeed be building planes in 

Saskatchewan before very long. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I think it's fair to say that that was a 

program and an important economic development platform that 

you people had initiated, and I think it's within the 

responsibility of you in the Economic Diversification and 

Trade to be able to provide us with information on it, on the 

deal. 

 

There was a number of opportunities for the deal to be put 

together.  They didn't seem to come together and we're wanting 

detail of the information on that Piper Aircraft deal.  And I 

think it's important that the taxpayers of Saskatchewan know 

that the deal is not likely going to happen any more -- very, 

very slim chance by your own estimation.  I'd say it's slim to 

none, and Slim's riding out of town. 

 

There isn't any chance of it happening any more and I think 

everyone recognizes that, Mr. Minister; probably Mr. Hill as 

well.  And I suspect that Mr. Hill, the only reason he suggested 

that he might be interested in another bid opportunity is 

because he never likes to close the door on any opportunity that 

might be available to him. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, I think it's important that you provide us with 

detail of the Piper Aircraft deal so the people of Saskatchewan 

can determine for themselves whether this was an opportunity 

that was missed or an opportunity that was not handled 

properly by your department. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well I want to say again that it was 

neither handled properly or improperly by the department 

because it wasn't handled by the department.  Mr. Chairman, 

I'm having a bit of a difficult time explaining to the member 

that this deal was not arranged through the Department of 

Economic Development. 

 

I just want to clarify for the member that the bid that was put 

forward -- and I say again by the private sector; this was not a 

bid that was put forward by the government -- was a very small 

part of the economic development strategy of the then new 

government.  In fact, the economic renewal package that we 

initiated along with the private sector was not released until 

November of 1992, long after the Piper deal was gone 

after by the private sector with their partnership with the 

government. 

 

(2100) 

 

And I say again, these arrangements, some of them work and 

some of them don't. It's no . . . there's no certainty when you go 

after trying to relocate a company to Saskatchewan that you're 

going to get all of them.  Obviously, that's not how it works. 

 

And some of them you shouldn't relocate, because they're just 

too expensive.  And in our private sector partner's mind, 

obviously this is the case here, that the cost of buying the 

company and relocating it, the bottom line wasn't there.  And 

having said that, I think there are many deals that were worked 

through the previous government that the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan wished hadn't been concluded, and the province 

would be much better off financially if those deals hadn't been 

concluded. 

 

So it's simply not accurate to think that every deal that a private 

sector company goes after, or the government along with the 

private sector goes after, should be completed.  Some of them 

should, like Sears, like AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.), 

like the Royal Bank relocating their call office to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I think the unemployment numbers in Saskatchewan will 

clearly indicate that when stacked up against the other 

provinces, that Saskatchewan is doing not badly.  When you 

look at the unemployment rate and you see that we have the 

lowest unemployment rate in Canada by two full percentage 

points; also the population in Saskatchewan in the last two 

quarters has actually started to grow again after six years of 

decline, out-migration has slowed considerably -- many of the 

leading indicators in the economy, like housing starts, 

consumer spending, machinery manufacturing, oil production, 

uranium production, all of those are now headed back up again.  

And I dare say that there is a pleasant amount of positive 

attitude in Saskatchewan in the business community. 

 

Now you may come back and say, well that's not what we hear, 

that there are some who are going broke, and there is 

disappointment.  But even at that level the bankruptcies -- the 

business bankruptcies in Saskatchewan -- are down and down 

considerably. 

 

So I say again that while it's not perfect, when you get the 

unemployment rate at 7.3 per cent -- I believe that was the May 

statistics -- while the national average is 11.4, and you look at 

some of the provinces around us with as much advantage as we 

have, and their unemployment rate is much higher . . . I say 

again it's not perfect.  And we're going to work very, very hard 

and diligently to bring that seven, seven and a half per cent rate 

down below 7 per cent.  I think we are now headed in the right 

direction. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Well, Mr. Minister, 

I'm not sure that there would be too many 



June 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2287 

people would agree with your contention that the Piper Aircraft 

deal was something that was just a small bit player in your 

overall strategy.  I think it was . . . in your mind you were 

trying to promote it as the flagship, an opportunity that 

Saskatchewan would be bidding on and an opportunity that 

Saskatchewan would be trying to bring to Saskatchewan. 

 

It was something that you people felt would show the business 

community that you indeed had some agenda for business.  

And now that it has fizzled, it's little wonder that the business 

community is beginning to doubt your economic development 

strategy. 

 

The information that you put together looks to the business 

community that I have opportunity to talk with and by evidence 

of the advertisements that they're taking out these days, I think 

it's fairly clear that they don't believe what's in the glossy 

brochures any more, Mr. Minister. 

 

The information that you were providing at the time showed 

that there was going to be an improved business climate, a 

business climate that would be welcomed by business all over 

Saskatchewan.  And yet now we see business groups -- 

Canadian Federation of Independent Business, the 

Saskatchewan Construction Association, all kinds of business 

groups and advocacy groups around this province -- saying to 

you and your government that your policies are not working, 

that they are to the detriment of the economy of Saskatchewan. 

 

The economy is slowing, Mr. Minister. The headlines indicate 

in a number of publications around the province and 

throughout western Canada that Saskatchewan's economic 

growth predictions are not very good, Mr. Minister.  And they 

also show that the types of things that you're doing with your 

union-only policies and Bill 55 and 56 are the types of policies 

that will be regressive towards business, Mr. Minister, will hurt 

business.  And that's exactly what they're telling you. 

 

And yet, Mr. Minister, you've shown absolutely no willingness 

to listen.  You are taking credit for a lot of things that you and 

your government have no business taking credit for.  Seasonal 

change simply does not .  . simply is not something that you 

can hold up as an example of the initiatives that your 

government is putting forward. 

 

Mr. Minister, I would suggest to you that the change in the 

business climate in this province is in spite of your government 

policies, not as a result of your government policies. And, Mr. 

Minister, I think the business groups are telling you that on 

every occasion when they get an opportunity to do exactly that.  

And I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, what effect on business 

confidence in this province do you think there is when you and 

your government brings forward things like Bill 55 and 56? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Talking about unemployment or the 

employment strategy of the 

government and whether it's working or not, I just want to 

comment to the member opposite that the May labour force 

statistics report indicated that the employment, that is the 

number of people employed in the province, increased by 6,000 

between May of '92 and May of '93.  This is Statistics Canada, 

so this is not seasonal.  This is as compared to the same month 

a year ago.  That's an increase of 6,000 people being employed. 

 

I might add that much of that is in rural Saskatchewan.  In fact, 

employment increased year over year in agriculture by . . . in 

fact most of that increase was in fact in agriculture, which tells 

you that there's some encouragement and some optimism in 

certain parts of the agricultural sectors. 

 

When it comes to certain Bills that are being passed by the 

government, obviously labour will push the government to 

have more labour legislation, and business will lobby to have 

limited amounts of labour legislation.  And this a healthy 

tension that exists in the province. And labour is never going to 

be happy with us in terms of having enough labour legislation, 

and business is going to argue that we've got too much. 

 

The key is is to try to find some sort of a compromise situation 

where you meet the health and safety circumstances for 

workers because that's very, very important in terms of 

attracting workers to the province of Saskatchewan.  But on the 

other side, you're right in a sense to be concerned that you don't 

pass so many laws or have so much red tape that you shut 

business off. 

 

And in fact the ads that you're talking about being run by the 

business community, two weekends ago the ad had a list of 10 

items that they would see the provincial government do.  Seven 

of those items were in fact strategies that the government had 

already agreed to.  Three of them, one which was 

harmonization of the PST (provincial sales tax), the other one 

was more privatization, we have not agreed with at this time. 

But clearly seven of the ten points we have agreed to and are 

actually in the strategy paper for economic development. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, you've brought up the topic of 

harmonization.  And it seems to me that your government is 

indeed doing exactly that with the harmonization of the tax for 

the Sears deal and for IPSCO and for others, I suspect, that you 

are like to take credit for.  So on one hand we see the 

government saying that the harmonization that the previous 

administration was doing was all wrong, and yet now we see 

selective harmonization coming in through the back door for 

companies that you like to hold up as examples of the 

economic development strategy that your government has. 

 

And I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, how you can complete that 

circle.  Why on one hand was it bad and on the other hand, 

when you promote it and when you put it forward for situations 

like Sears, all of a sudden is it a good deal?  And, Mr. Minister, 

I wonder if you could just care to elaborate on that a little bit 

for us. 



2288 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 1993 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well I don't want to be 

argumentative with the member, but I think you have your 

definition of harmonization a little bit confused because what 

we did for Sears was eliminate the PST on 1-800 calls.  That is 

very much different than harmonization.  We simply eliminated 

it.  It's gone; it doesn't exist.  And so when you call that 

harmonization, I tend to disagree with that. 

 

We're also looking at other areas, obviously in the area of 

taxation where we can nudge the tax system because obviously 

we don't have very much money with a $15 billion debt that 

was left by the previous administration.  It is very difficult to 

have serious cuts in taxation when you need 800 million or so a 

year to pay the interest on the debt. 

 

And I wish that debt weren't there, and I wish we didn't have to 

take $800 million of taxpayers' taxes every year to pay the 

interest; however we do.  And that was left by the previous 

administration.  It is like a millstone around the neck of the 

taxpayers of the province. 

 

But I want to say clearly that what we did with the removal of 

the PST on 1-800 numbers is not, by definition, harmonization. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it may not be by definition 

harmonization, it's certainly by all cause and effect certainly is 

harmonization.  It's the removal of the business tax or the PST, 

as you've referred to it as, removal of the PST on 1-800 

numbers.  Right.  What was harmonization?  Would it not have 

done the exactly the same thing, Mr. Minister? 

 

If they were being charged the PST on it and they were rebated 

it back, they would be able to recover that cost.  Is that not 

correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well the member is . . . this will get 

more and more confusing because he seems to not to realize 

what we're talking about here.  There are certain items in 

Saskatchewan that don't have sales tax applied to them: 

children's clothing, for example, food in restaurants, now 1-800 

numbers.  That does not mean we have harmonization for those 

items.  It means that there is no sales tax at the provincial level.  

So it's not harmonization. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, we could probably debate that for a 

long, long time about that because I think that you are 

incorrect.  I think that indeed the harmonization is exactly what 

we're talking about, Mr. Minister.  With harmonization, if we're 

to remove the tax on all companies in Saskatchewan, not just 

Sears, or not just some of the others that you may be looking at, 

Mr. Minister . . . 

 

And I want to deal with 55 and 56 and the effect on business 

competence in this province.  We have heard from a number of 

groups all over Saskatchewan about what the cost of it will be 

to the businesses, various businesses, around this province and 

the effect of opportunities that they will have as a result of that. 

They are . . . business groups around this province are telling us 

that it will cost them tens, if not hundreds, of millions of 

dollars in increased costs to them as a result of that type of 

legislation, Mr. Minister. 

 

And I'm wondering how anyone in Saskatchewan could feel if 

those kinds of pieces of legislation would be conducive to a 

good business climate in this province, Mr. Minister.  The cost 

is going to be overwhelming.  The amount of liability potential 

. . . liability under the workers' compensation is extremely high.  

That is why, Mr. Minister, I think we are seeing that business 

groups, and virtually business -- both public and private 

business as well, Mr. Minister -- are saying to you that the 

legislation is inadequate and therefore is the type of thing that 

has a very detrimental impact on business.  And we wonder if 

you could just speak about that for a moment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I just want to say to the member 

opposite that when it comes to Bill 55 and 56, there are 

certainly areas that improve the legislation when it would apply 

to working people in the province.  Safety is a very, very 

important issue for this government. 

 

We were very concerned about some of the slackness in the 

legislation that the previous administration had allowed.  We 

witnessed the terrible accident at Shand and the problems that 

workers had with the situation that occurred there, and the 

families of workers.  So improving the safety in the workplace 

is not only important to government, it's important to families 

in Saskatchewan and I dare say most business people don't 

mind as long as it isn't exorbitant and it's not improving the 

situation in the workplace. 

 

When it comes to the Workers' Compensation Board and the 

fees that are being discussed here, there was some concern by 

business people that the fee would be increased by 100 per cent 

or 200 per cent.  There were statistics that high.  We have had a 

great number of meetings with Dale Botting and people in the 

business community, the new president of the chamber of 

commerce, Mr. Mel Watson, who I've met with on several 

occasions to discuss amendments to the Bills that would help 

lighten the load on business.  We have now guaranteed that the 

maximum fee increase will be 10.5 per cent without a very, 

very rigorous review and consultation taking place. 

 

(2115) 

 

So I think we've gone a long way to mitigate some of the 

problems that business identified for us.  One of the issues 

raised by certain people in the business community was the 

issue of testing in sensitive areas of work, and those provisions 

are now in place where companies have certain rights in the 

area of testing where situations warrant. 

 

Now we're going to be taking this list of amendments that we 

just went through here today as it would relate to Bill 55 and 

once we get through Bill 56, and we will be consulting 

extensively with business to make sure that they understand the 

exact ramifications that will 



June 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2289 

result from these amendments. 

 

I think in the end you're going to have a situation, I think and I 

believe, that labour isn't totally happy with the government 

because they obviously had wanted more to be included in 

these pieces of legislation.  Business probably won't be as 

pleased as they could be because we probably didn't make all 

the amendments they wanted.  But at the end of the day I think 

we have two pieces of legislation that will be stronger, that will 

meet the needs of business and workers, and I think overall 

they will be two excellent additions to our legislation in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, not only 

are Bill 55 and 56 retarding growth in this province and 

restricting growth in this province, Mr. Minister. Your 

union-only policy is restricting growth in this province as well, 

Mr. Minister.  We have seen examples, Mr. Minister, where 

contracts that have been let in this province by your 

government, one here that we have will cost the taxpayers, 

potentially cost the taxpayers of Saskatchewan over $1 million 

in higher costs to the taxpayers as a result of your excluding 

non-union companies. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, in this day of fiscal responsibility as you 

people like to talk about and how you're going to promote a 

government that is doing what is best for the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan, one can only wonder why you would want to 

restrict companies from bidding on projects that are under the 

government's purview by only allowing for union-only 

contracting. 

 

Mr. Minister, do you not feel a union-only policy for the 

Government of Saskatchewan is a very wrong-headed direction 

that this government should be going, particularly when we see 

examples of costs coming in at $1 million more on a project 

that is only about $3 million to begin with? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The member will know from 

question period, Mr. Chairman, that in the Saskatchewan 

government there is no policy of union only.  We have let a 

number of projects out of SaskPower in the past few months 

that have been non-union. 

 

Obviously our objective in the procurement policy of the 

government, though, is to have a balance between union and 

non-union.  We have a number of union companies that work 

in the province and we're proud of them, and we have a number 

of non-union companies.  And at the end of the day what we 

would like to have is a perfect world where there's a balance 

between union and non-union.  But we do not have a policy of 

union only.  I think that would be impossible to manage.  But 

nor do we have a policy of totally non-union, and I don't 

believe your government had that policy either. 

 

We will probably try to have a better balance than there was in 

the past, but it will be done in a sensitive way, protecting both 

union and non-union companies and union and non-union 

workers.  I think 

that's only fair and it's trying to arrive at some reasonable 

situation where both of these entities are able to work and be 

comfortable in the province. 

 

This was certainly the case in the 1970s, in the years when 

there were a number of big projects going on in the province.  

The government at that time had a very, very close working 

relationship with both union and non-union contractors.  And 

obviously that's what we would like to establish here in the 

province at the present time in the 1990s as well. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  So essentially you're 

saying to us -- and you can provide examples, I'm sure, and 

we'll accept that -- that you have a policy in your government 

where you would promote both union and non-union 

companies for government-tendered projects. 

 

Well I don't think that anyone has a great deal of problem with 

that, Mr. Minister, if indeed that's true.  But is it true also that 

the union contracting costs are in a lot of cases substantially 

higher, and I'm wondering if your government's policy is . . . 

Like how do you determine what your policy is anyway? 

 

It doesn't matter whether or not there's a higher cost; you're 

going to allow this project to go to the union.  Or are you 

saying to us that you have the lowest-cost bidder gets the job 

regardless of whether they're union or non-union.  Is that the 

policy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- No.  There will be times when the 

lowest bid is not the best bid.  And as you will know in many 

cases when you were in government that simply taking the 

lowest bid is not necessarily in the best interest of the taxpayers 

or of the business community or of the workers. 

 

Obviously if you were in the area of aerospace and you were 

designing a rocket to fly to Mars, having the lowest bid is not 

necessarily the most important issue.  The most important issue 

would be whether the spacecraft would get to Mars, and that 

may not be the lowest bid. 

 

So to simplistically say that what your policy should be is 

lowest bid is not what anyone in the world would accept as a 

reasonable operation for all of the procurement we do.  It is just 

more complicated than that, and I'm sure you know that 

because your government certainly did not always accept the 

lowest bid.  There are many other criteria that go into the 

bidding process. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I see that we have two new people joining us.  

And I'd like to just take this occasion to introduce Sharon 

Roulston, the executive director of internal operations who is 

seated directly behind me, and Leona Stengler, the associate 

deputy minister of Tourism and Small Business. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, I just 

kind of remind you we're not building too many spacecrafts to 

head off to Mars these days.  We can't even get a small little 

single-seat aircraft engine 



2290 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 1993 

manufacturer to relocate to Saskatchewan, let alone building 

any aircraft to head off to Mars. 

 

Mr. Minister, I find it interesting that while in opposition over 

here, the opposition of the day, you folks in the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) were suggesting that the lowest bid was the 

bid that you were going to go with.  Open tenders, lowest bid, 

no matter what the circumstances are, that's going to be the 

circumstances that you people follow. 

 

It seems ironic now, Mr. Minister, that you can stand up and 

say that you're going to be building things to head off to Mars, 

and therefore you're going to need a policy that allows you the 

flexibility to be able to choose a company with a higher bid.  

Mr. Minister, on a contract that has a total cost of $2,942,292, 

an additional cost could be added on to that of $1,028,512. 

 

So you're saying to me and the people of Saskatchewan that 

you can justify an expenditure of over $1 million on a simple 

pipeline up to Melfort, on a $3 million bid, total bid to begin 

with.  What possibly more could cost $1 million in that bid that 

would allow for you to look at that kind of an expenditure? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well the member talks about the 

example of a spacecraft.  Let me use something more close to 

home that you would understand, and that is a dam built down 

near Estevan where we had like tens of millions of dollars put 

into the Rafferty dam. 

 

It's not whether the bid was the low bid or not, but it's whether 

the dam is built where there's water flowing down a creek.  

And you would understand that, that the tens of millions of 

dollars that we wasted on that project had very little to do 

whether the project was union or non-union.  It simply was a 

huge waste because your government made a bad decision 

based on some very, very faulty information.  I might add most 

of the information you based it on being political and 

attempting to try to keep your premier in power over a longer 

period of time. 

 

So I say to you that the issue of union versus non-union is one 

whereby most governments in Canada, and I would expect all 

Conservative governments, both federally and provincially, 

have a policy of having both union and non-union.  Our policy 

in Saskatchewan is a policy of having union and non-union, 

which obviously we will try to balance out so that both those 

corporations and companies that are union and non-union have 

work in the province. 

 

When it comes to the water pipeline to Melfort, I think you 

were asking about, I'm not sure of that, about that bid, but I 

don't think any contract has been let there so I wouldn't get too 

excited about that. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, while you wouldn't get too excited 

about it, the taxpayers of Saskatchewan are plenty excited 

about it.  When they see information provided to them by the 

Saskatchewan Construction Association in quarter-page ads in 

their local 

newspapers and daily newspapers in this province showing the 

kinds of things that your government is about to do, the only 

reason they might stop it is because you got caught doing it, 

Mr. Minister.  Had the opposition or the Saskatchewan 

Construction Association not realized what was going on on 

that, this deal would have been done and you know it. 

 

You wanted to implement a policy that would allow for a 

pay-off to a few union friends of yours that would amount to a 

million-buck shot in one go, Mr. Minister -- $1,028,512 in one 

fell swoop is what would have been measured against the 

Saskatchewan taxpayers had no one picked up on the deal that 

you were about to implement. 

 

Mr. Minister, you suggest that the previous administration 

never did anything good, never did one thing good.  And yet 

we see organizations like the independent dealers association 

of Canada suggesting that investments, and I quote:  

Investments in items like the dams at Rafferty and Alameda, 

the Saskatchewan fertilizer plant, and the upgrader at 

Lloydminster helped to drive up capital spending in 

Saskatchewan by 17 per cent, Mr. Minister.  That's the kind of 

initiatives that were put forward by the previous administration.  

That's the kind of things that the business community realized 

were good for the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister. 

 

And they look at these kinds of things and they say they are not 

good for Saskatchewan when they realize that it's going to cost 

over a million dollars more on one project that only had a total 

cost of $3 million to begin with. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well there's no doubt that spending 

9 billion or $9.5 billion, which is what the debt went up 

between 1981 and 1992, created some jobs.  I mean I'm not 

arguing that there isn't some benefit from spending money. 

 

But if you're trying to say that building dams like the one at 

Rafferty . . . and you're still holding out and saying that that's a 

good project even though a couple of weeks ago when I was 

down there during the spring run-off, you could have walked 

across the Rafferty dam probably without even standing on 

your tiptoes and not got your chin wet.  There is no water there.  

There was no water there last year.  There hasn't been any 

water there.  And the previous government is the 

laughing-stock of Canada.  People come there and take pictures 

of this boat launch up on the side of a hill.  And there's no 

water within miles of the boat launch and there probably never 

will be.  And yet you today stand here and say that that was a 

good investment because it created some jobs while the dam 

was being built. 

 

But all of the objectives of the project -- one, you talked about 

tourism, you talked about irrigation, you talked about water to 

cool the Shand power station -- none of those real objectives 

that the tens of millions of dollars went towards is being 

fulfilled.  And I just don't know how the member opposite 

would stand in his place and defend that project. 



June 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2291 

I mean you weren't even there at the time.  I would think that if 

I were in your position, I'd be distancing myself from that 

project.  I'd say look, I wasn't around, so don't blame me for 

that Rafferty dam.  Some of these people in your front benches, 

they made a bad decision.  That's what I would say if I were 

you: I wasn't there; I couldn't help that decision. 

 

(2130) 

 

But no. Instead, he stands there and says the tens of millions of 

dollars put in the Rafferty dam was a good investment because 

it created some jobs for some cat operators when they piled the 

dirt up.  Well that's not what economic development is about. 

 

In fact, we did some quick numbers here and the number of 

people employed in 1982 in Saskatchewan was 426,000; in 

1991 it was 449,000, or increase of about 23,000 in that 

nine-year period.  At the same time the debt of the province 

went up by $9.5 billion.  If you translate that into a job creation 

project, it's $412,000, or close to a half a million dollars for 

every job that was created. 

 

That is not good performance when you're talking about job 

creation and investment.  Now not only that, but the debt on 

that $9 billion will go on and on and on.  And I say again, for 

governments in the future for many, many years, that debt will 

be like a millstone around the necks of working people and of 

businesses in this province for many, many years to come. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  It's nice to know that 

you finally acknowledge that the debt at the outset of 1982 was 

$6 billion, and the debt currently is $15 billion, for a $9 billion 

difference that you . . . like you folks like to go around and 

slam the previous administration for a $15 million debt when 

indeed there was $6 billion of that debt was there before the 

previous administration ever took office, Mr. Minister.  And I 

think that's fairly clear.  The previous administration went to 

the wall for things like agriculture, and that's why the debt was 

associated . . . driven up the way it was driven up, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

The premier of this province pledged the treasury of 

Saskatchewan to help Saskatchewan farmers.  And each and 

every farmer in this room ought to know that by the amount of 

support that was provided for him during that period of time.  

And one can only wonder if there's any support even remotely 

equal to that today, Mr. Minister.  The Minister of Agriculture 

himself over there knows very darn well that there hasn't been 

one sou, not one penny of help from this administration when it 

comes to agriculture in this province, Mr. Minister. 

 

You look at projects like the Rafferty-Alameda, and he likes to 

hold it up as an example and say that there's no possible way 

it'll ever fill up with water.  Mr. Minister, you don't know 

whether it will ever fill up with water or not.  People in this 

province believe that there is an opportunity for that dam to fill 

up.  The people down in Minot wouldn't have handed over $60 

million, I don't 

think, if they thought there was no opportunity for that dam to 

fill up and provide flood control for them, Mr. Minister. 

 

Not only that, Mr. Minister, but the project is overwhelmingly 

supported by the people of the area who know the area, Mr. 

Minister.  And I find it ironic that you can stand up and say that 

everyone down in the south-east corner of this province and all 

of the good folks in the United States in the community of 

Minot don't know what they're talking about. 

 

Mr. Minister, it's interesting to note, whenever there's a bit of a 

controversy the two things that you hark back on are things like 

the $15 billion debt, but then in a moment of weakness when 

you're not thinking perhaps as clearly as you ordinarily would, 

when you're trying to stick to the party line, it's only $9 billion, 

Mr. Minister.  Fifteen billion dollars on one hand when you 

give the New York-type speech, and $9 billion when you're 

cornered on an issue that you know is incorrect, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, that type of labour agenda that you are promoting 

in this province is costing the province a great deal of money, 

and people all over the province of Saskatchewan realize that.  

That's why . . . Why do you think that they're taking out 

advertisements suggesting that?  What possible agenda could 

people like the Canadian Federation of Independent Business, 

the Saskatchewan Construction Association, and all other of 

those types of advocacy groups, what possible agenda could 

they have that they would want to go against government 

initiatives and government programs if they realized that your 

initiatives were going to work?  Why would they do that, Mr. 

Minister, when they, I suspect, are trying to cooperate with 

your government the best they can to help out the members that 

they're associated with? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I explained earlier why labour will, 

from time to time, run ads putting forward their ideas that were 

maybe contrary to what the government was doing and why in 

this case business is running ads.  They are lobbying the 

government to try to get legislation that's more in line with 

their needs or their perceived interests. 

 

So I'm not surprised at all that the business community would 

try to get amendments to Bill 55 and 56, and I add again that 

when we went through the Bill tonight, Mr. Chairman, you 

may know how many amendments were moved and accepted 

that business had put forward to us.  But I can mention a few 

that we've jotted down here. 

 

Section 4, the objects clause -- they wanted it out; we took it 

out.  Pre-existing conditions of workers, section 10 of the Bill, 

we amended that to take into consideration the wording that 

business wanted.  I believe it's 33(1) which is the cost of 

rehabilitation programs; we used the wording of business there 

again.  Performance-rated adjustments, section 41, we dealt 

with that.  The new 41 section which capped the fee at a 10 per 

cent increase per year as a limit, we did that.  I think business 

people are going to be, while not 



2292 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 1993 

totally satisfied, will feel relatively positive about the 

amendments that were moved here to that Bill. 

 

The member says that we refer only to Rafferty when we talk 

about the legacy of debt.  And I want to remind the member 

that the Public Accounts of the day and the Crown Corporation 

reports in 1982 when we left office clearly indicated that there 

was something in excess, slightly in excess of $3 billion of debt 

in the Crowns and a surplus of 139 million in the Consolidated 

Fund.  Everybody knows that. 

 

There's no debate about this and what the debt was in 1982.  It 

wasn't 6 billion, it was a little over 3.  And the numbers are 

there. If you want to go to the library and get the books, we can 

go do that.  I'm not denying there was no debt nor has anyone 

in the government ever said that there was no debt in 1982.  

There was a little over 3 billion in the Crown sector which was 

a self-liquidating debt. 

 

We had a potash company.  We owned Saskoil.  We owned 

Power Corporation, insurance company.  And it was paid for 

out of the fees that people paid when they paid their power bill 

and paid their gas bill, paid their insurance.  They paid the 

interest on that $3 billion debt and were paying it down. 

 

The interesting thing is is the debt went from where it was at 3 

billion to 15 billion or a $12 billion increase when you include 

the interest which is what you're forgetting about here -- a $12 

billion increase when you add in the interest.  I'm talking about 

9 billion that was put in directly into projects. 

 

So let's not be confused about where that $12 billion in new 

debt came from.  It came from the 9.5 billion that went in 

directly plus the interest charges that were added on because by 

the magic of compounding interest this is where we're at today.  

So one would have expected that there would be many, many 

more jobs in the province than the meagre number that we have 

referred to here of, I believe it was 26,000. 

 

But I just want to quote from The Globe and Mail of February 

6, 1993 in a column that is written by Stevie Cameron of, 

"How the gravy train went off the rails."  And it certainly isn't 

only the Rafferty dam that is referred to in this article when it 

comes to where the money was wasted at.  They refer to the 

NewGrade Energy Inc., and we all know over the past week the 

$600 million that the taxpayers of the province have been 

exposed to there in a deal that has left many, many analysts just 

with their heads spinning as to how a government could sign a 

deal that would expose the taxpayers to $600 million in debt 

and get no return for it. 

 

Stevie Cameron mentions here Sask Property Management 

Corporation, and they go into how: 

 

. . . (Mr.) Otto Cutts (and) former security chief Harry 

Stienwand (once head of the RCMP's Saskatchewan 

intelligence unit) and Robert LaPorte, a Regina police 

officer now under suspicion, have been charged in 

connection 

with the purchase of $66,000 in bugging devices for a 

private security owned by Mr. Laporte.  Mr. Cutts' 

unauthorized use of a police computer at SPMC was 

criticized by the Gass commission. 

 

That's another one. 

 

Dome and Roberts & Poole -- you remember those folks and 

how they were using the taxpayers' money.  CIC (Crown 

Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan), Saskatchewan 

Diversification Corporation, you remember that secret 

corporation that set up the infamous Trinitel up in Melville to 

build telephones, and when we were elected there were rooms 

full of telephones, and you made telephones to beat heck to 

create a few people . . . leading up to the election, but the only 

problem was you hadn't sold one phone.  And worse than that, 

when they hooked them up after the election and tried to use 

them, no sound came through the phones; they didn't work.  

And so that had to be shut down. 

 

And that's what Stevie Cameron is referring to here when she 

talks about the Sask Diversification Corporation, is the 

telephone company. 

 

Promavia International.  Remember the $2 million we were 

going to put into the fighter planes up in Saskatoon?  These 

people made off with the $2 million and the taxpayers are still 

looking for that money. 

 

"GIGATEXT".  She says here: 

 

In 1988 Tory party pollster Ken Waschuk introduced (Mr.) 

Guy Montpetit, owner of Montreal GigaMos Systems Inc., 

to the Saskatchewan cabinet.  With help from the Montreal 

Senator Michel Cogger . . . 

 

And many will know him from the court reports out of 

Montreal, and the legacy of Michel Cogger go on and on.  And 

how: 

 

Deputy premier Eric Berntson arranged a $5-million grant 

to set up GigaText.  Mr. Montpetit loaned $150,000 of it 

to Mr. Waschuk, who put it in a new Bermuda holding 

company.  Mr. Montpetit also spent $2.9-million on a 

$39,000 worth of second-hand computers. 

 

Just listen to this for a minute, Mr. Chairman.  This is Mr. 

Montpetit, spent $2.9 million -- remember, that's taxpayers' 

money -- on $39,000 worth of used computers. 

 

And by the way, those were his own computers.  He didn't go 

out and buy them.  They were sitting in a warehouse.  He had 

obviously used them; they were worn out.  And he took $2.9 

million of taxpayers' money from Saskatchewan and bought the 

computers from himself.  And the story goes on and on. 

 

So when you say it's only Rafferty that we keep referring back 

to, it's just that we usually don't have 



June 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2293 

enough time in the day to list out all of the misappropriation of 

money that went on that led to the increase of $12 billion in 

debt in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, the groups around Saskatchewan, 

and they're numerous, Mr. Minister, they don't agree with a lot 

of your economic development strategy.  And one of the areas, 

as I mentioned, was the union-only policy.  And they're writing 

letters to municipalities and groups all over this province to try 

and urge them to become aware of the initiatives that your 

government is taking, taken, and also to try and bring some 

sense to the government by writing to their MLAs and 

discussing it with their MLAs in various parts of the province, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

And I just want to read you a part of one of the letters that went 

out from the Saskatchewan Construction Association.  The 

president of the Saskatchewan Construction Association, Jim 

Chase, said in Regina today that the association is strongly 

opposed to the provincial government's union-only policy.  The 

membership of the association is made up of both union and 

non-union contractors, and both groups have consistently 

voiced strong opposition to union preference in every survey 

conducted on the subject. 

 

Mr. Minister, so we see that not only are union companies and 

non-union companies opposed to this type of thing. I think that 

the people of Saskatchewan would also be opposed to this type 

of thing, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, I wonder if you would give us the commitment 

this evening that, on a job like this Melfort job that has been 

tendered -- and you say the tenders haven't been let, and that 

may well be the case -- I wonder if you could give the 

Assembly the assurance tonight that we will not see this type of 

thing happening, where a contract comes in at a million dollars 

higher from a union company than a non-union company and 

the tender be awarded to that union company. 

 

I think the people of Saskatchewan want a few basic things 

from their government, and one of the things that they want 

from their government is to know that they're getting good 

value for their money on things like projects like that, a 53 

kilometre pipeline that has a cost of $3 million and could be 

run up over a million dollars higher if the union-only policy 

truly does exist.  Will you give the commitment to the people 

of Saskatchewan in the Assembly tonight that your government 

will not be accepting that $1 million higher bid for this project? 

 

(2145) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The member says that there is 

problems with our economic development strategy and that 

some people are finding it not as positive as they would like, 

and I guess that will always be the case with any government 

policy.  But having said that, there are many people who think 

the economic development strategy in Saskatchewan is a very 

good 

one. 

 

I want to say, and I want to quote from World Business, a 

magazine that deals with economic development in Canada.  

And in their February 1993 edition, they say that under awards 

that they're giving out, they say: 

 

 For industrial and economic development organization, our 

1992 award in this category goes to the Government of 

Saskatchewan under Premier Roy Romanow. 

 

And it says that: 

 

 The Government of Saskatchewan has done a remarkable job 

of encouraging industry to locate in the province and in 

supporting industry that is already there. 

 

This is in the article in the magazine World Business.  It does 

an analysis of economic development strategies across the 

country. 

 

And I can, if you like, get a long list of letters, and I'll read 

them here, from business people who think we're on the right 

track.  Now obviously you can get another list of people who 

think that we're having problems.  And this debate could go on 

for a long time and I don't know who would win in the end. 

 

But all I'll say is that the trend lines, in the major statistical 

trend lines on things like housing starts, out-migration, the 

population which has started to grow now in Saskatchewan for 

the first time in six years, the job numbers in Saskatchewan 

which are very, very positive in May . . . Now they may not 

hold; we hope they do, and I'm sure you hope they do.  The 

lowest unemployment rate in Canada by a full two percentage 

points -- now lower than Manitoba Conservative and Alberta 

Conservative -- we're two full percentage points lower.  

Remember out-migration has slowed considerably from where 

it was during your administration.  The population is now 

starting to grow, however slightly; at least it's back growing 

again.  That those indicators would tell you that there is at least 

some hope that the economy is turning around. 

 

When it comes to your request that we not have a union-only 

policy, I can tell you quite clearly, that there is no one that I 

know of in our caucus putting forward a union-only policy.  I 

have not heard a discussion by any members.  There may be -- 

and you may want to do a survey of our members -- there may 

be someone who's promoting union-only policy.  But I have not 

heard. 

 

Not only don't we have a union-only policy, which you keep 

saying we have, I have not even heard a discussion in our 

government about a union-only policy.  So is it going to be a 

union-only policy?  Obviously not.  We've never had one in the 

past, in the 1970s.  Your government didn't have a 

non-union-only policy.  It's always been a mix and a blend of 

union and non-union.  I think that's what it 



2294 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 1993 

should be, and we'll continue to work with our business 

partners to try to achieve some balance between union and 

non-union workers and corporations. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, it's not only me that is saying you 

have a labour-only agenda.  You like to point to us and say that 

we're the only ones that are opposed to your strategy and we're 

the only ones that are saying that there's a union-only policy, 

and that's simply patently not true, and you know it, Mr. 

Minister.  Groups around the province, the Canadian 

Federation of Independent Business, the Saskatchewan 

Construction Association and others all agree, Mr. Minister, 

and all suggest, not necessarily the opposition, but groups like 

them, that we are getting dangerously close to a union-only 

policy. 

 

And you just have to look at some of the contracts that have 

gone out from your government, Mr. Minister.  And we have a 

number of them here where they state a union-only preference 

in them.  And it doesn't . . . and the minister gets up and he says 

to the Assembly, well that's fine.  And it is fine, Mr. Minister.  I 

don't have any problem with it being . . . if the union company 

can do it as cheaply and as good as a non-union company, I 

don't think anybody has any problem with that. 

 

What we're concerned about, Mr. Minister, is not whether you 

have a union-only policy or a non-union-only policy or any 

policy at all, what we're concerned about, is there going to be a 

higher cost associated with letting a company do the job simply 

because they're union over non-union?  If they're competitive, 

give it to them, by all means.  If they're lower cost, if they have 

a lower bid than the non-union companies, give it to them, by 

all means, Mr. Minister. 

 

What we're saying to you and what business groups are saying 

to you is they see, by evidence of contracts that have been let 

or contract tender calls that have been . . . gone out, that there 

is a substantial cost associated with some jobs and union 

companies, Mr. Minister.  And what we are asking for is 

simply value for the dollar for the Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 

When we see these types of things happening where there's a 

million dollars on a $3 million project, Mr. Minister, it can 

only lead one to conclude that the types of policy that you have 

is not in the best interests of the Saskatchewan taxpayer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, I have a difficult 

time understanding the union phobia that we're seeing here 

over and over again by members of the Conservative caucus.  

There is nothing to fear from unions in Saskatchewan.  Unions 

have been here ever since I can remember.  And what they are 

is organizations of men and women who get together to form 

unions.  I can't image what the members opposite are fearful of. 

 

You were in government for nine years and many unions 

worked in the province and had some sort of a 

relationship with your government.  It may not have been 

perfect or it may not have been good. But to continually beat 

up on the men and women -- because that's really what it is.  I 

mean you say union almost with vehemence. 

 

And union is nothing more than men and women with little 

kids at home, who go to work in the morning, many of them 

take a lunch bucket and go to IPSCO and by the sweat of the 

brow, they earn their living.  These are just ordinary folks.  I 

can't understand for the life of me why the despise and anger 

when you talk about unions.  These are pretty ordinary people.  

They belong to all political parties. 

 

I've known a number of union people who pack a PC 

(Progressive Conservative) card.  I hope and would like to 

think that more of them support the NDP than the Liberal or 

Tory. But they are really ordinary folks and I don't understand 

why you continue to run at them. 

 

You used union contractors when you were in government on a 

number of occasions.  We intend to do the same.  We do not 

have a union-only policy.  There will be those tenders where 

we will say there's a union preference, which is not union only.  

It says union preference.  That means that unions will be 

included as one of the criteria. 

 

But to go on and on in an attack on the men and women who 

have decided to unionize, to get together to pay a fee and try to 

improve their lot in the world, I mean the next thing you know 

you'll be out after the doctors for having a medical association 

to try to get better working conditions in their association. 

 

But no, there really is nothing to fear about this.  There's 

nothing to fear about our government's approach to having a 

mix of union and non-union contractors.  It's in the best interest 

of the province.  And it certainly, I believe, is in the best 

interest of working men and women in the province. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, how you 

could come up with that kind of logic out of the questions that 

we ask is beyond me.  We simply are saying that the people of 

Saskatchewan, I don't believe, are willing to accept the cost of 

$1 million on a project that is only $3 million.  Never said 

anything about me not liking unions or liking unions or 

anything at all about that, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, there are lots of people in this province that 

belong to unions, and we recognize that and more power to 

them if they can get better working arrangements with their 

employers around the province.  I have no problem with that 

whatsoever, Mr. Minister. 

 

If they want to be unionized -- fine.  I don't have a problem 

with that whatsoever.  I have no particular bias for unions or 

against unions. 

 

The only bias that I have and the only bias I think the 

Saskatchewan taxpayers have, Mr. Minister, is that 



June 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2295 

there's good value for the dollar at the end of the day.  That's 

the only criteria that I use when I look at projects, Mr. Minister. 

 

And one can only conclude, when you look at a project like this 

and when there's tender calls that go out and come back, that 

there is a reason why in this application that a union contractor 

should not be given . . . awarded the job -- because it's a $1 

million cost.  That's why.  End of story.  That's it, Mr. Minister.  

That's what the Saskatchewan taxpayers are telling us in the 

official opposition.  That's what they are saying to you, Mr. 

Minister.  It has nothing to do with union over non-union or 

anything else like that. 

 

It's like going, Mr. Minister, going down to your local garage 

and negotiating a deal on a car.  Look at it this way.  You go 

into one garage and the guy tells you that the car is going to 

cost you $10,000.  You go to the next garage and it's going to 

cost you $12,000 for what you consider to be both the same 

thing -- $10,000, $12,000. 

 

So you look at it and you say to yourself, well it appears to me 

the best interests of myself here would be to buy the car from 

the guy for $10,000 rather than handing another $2,000 to the 

other gentleman because he has higher costs.  And that's all that 

people are asking, Mr. Minister.  Why . . . and you say you 

have no union-only policy.  Well that's fine. 

 

We don't have a problem with that in the opposition, Mr. 

Minister, no problem with that whatsoever.  What we have a 

problem with is a $1 million additional cost on a project that 

could have been awarded to a company for a $1 million less.  

That's what we have a problem with, Mr. Minister.  It's not a 

problem with anything whatsoever to do whether that company 

is non-union or union.  If they were two non-union companies 

bidding, Mr. Minister, and there was a $1 million difference, 

my guess is on the same project you would take the lowest 

tender on that. 

 

Why then, Mr. Minister, on a project that the same criteria has 

to be met by those two companies, why then would you be 

willing to accept the $1 million higher cost on that project?  

Why would you do that to the Saskatchewan taxpayers when 

you can see quite clearly that a company, regardless of whether 

it's union or non-union, has come in with a contract 

substantially lower, Mr. Minister?  Why would you want to 

subject Saskatchewan taxpayers to that additional cost, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

And that's the type of questions that people all over this 

province are asking.  They look at the type of fanfare that you 

went through when you were trying to bring the Piper project 

to Saskatchewan.  They look at that, Mr. Minister.  They look 

at it and they say, here's a minister who's trying to promote a 

project for Saskatchewan; trying to bring in a project into 

Saskatchewan through a great big bunch of fanfare, Mr. 

Minister.  And then the project fizzles right before the 

Saskatchewan taxpayers' eyes. 

 

And the minister who has promised this, his 

government has promised to be open and accountable and 

provide all kinds of detail on all these things, he says, no, 

there's a remote chance this thing will still be able to be put 

together. 

 

It's those type of things, Mr. Minister, that the business 

community doesn't like.  It's those kinds of things that the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan don't like, Mr. Minister.  Bills like 

55 and 56 are other examples of why the business community 

in this province doesn't have any confidence in your 

government, Mr. Minister. 

 

That's why, Mr. Minister, that the business community is 

taking out large advertisements saying that your government is 

on a policy that is regressive -- saying, Mr. Minister, that your 

policies will hurt business confidence; will hurt the economy of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister.  And, Mr. Minister, that is why 

business groups around this province are calling for an 

economic summit. 

 

That is why, Mr. Minister, business groups all over 

Saskatchewan are saying they need an opportunity to have a 

chance to sit down with you, Mr. Minister, to sit down and talk 

to you about your agenda, your business agenda.  They simply 

want an opportunity, Mr. Minister, to have a chance to say to 

you: we think some of the things that your government is doing 

are wrong, Mr. Minister. 

 

Some of the things that your government is trying to promote 

in this province -- awarding tenders . . . or about to award 

tenders of a $1 million cost simply because you have a 

preference for one company over another and simply because 

that preference is best based on whether or not they are a 

union-affiliated company or not, Mr. Minister.  That's why . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  Order.  Order.  It now being near 10 

o'clock, the committee will rise, report progress, and ask for 

leave to sit again. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:01 p.m. 

 

 


