




















































Hansard: June 17, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2591 

 June 17, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I have 

some petitions that I would like to present to the Assembly this 

afternoon, Mr. Speaker.  I will read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to urge the provincial government 

to provide proper funding to continue the operation of the 

Souris Valley Regional Care Centre because it provides 

special services for persons with special needs which are not 

available anywhere else in Saskatchewan. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a number of petitions here from Moose 

Jaw, mostly from Weyburn, Carlyle, and a few other places 

within the province.  Mr. Speaker, there are 943 names to the 

petitions that I would like to present to the Assembly at this 

time.  And this is in addition to the 5,647 petitions already 

delivered to this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to present 

these petitions. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

 Of citizens of the province praying that the Assembly may be 

pleased to defeat any legislation introduced to redefine the 

NewGrade Energy corporate governance and financing 

arrangements. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I've 

certainly been swamped with unexpected guests today.  

Something seems a little fishy about it to me.  I want to though, 

if I could, introduce to you and through you, Mr. Speaker, to 

the rest of the members of the Assembly, members of my 

family up in your gallery, Mr. Speaker.  And if I could just get 

them to rise, please. 

 

My brother Reg from Goodsoil and his wife Yvonne, and their 

four children; the oldest, Janine, and Kyle and Reid and Eric.  

And remember, I have 19 nieces and nephews, Mr. Speaker, so 

I have a little difficulty here.  If you'd join with me in 

welcoming them here today, I would be pleased. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it gives 

me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to you and through you 

to all the members of the House, two ladies who are seated up 

in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, Mrs. Michelle Bellin, a 

constituent of mine; and Mrs. Shirley Winters from the city of 

Yorkton.  Both Michelle and Shirley are constituency assistants 

for our Member of Parliament, Mr. Lorne Nystrom, from 

Yorkton-Melville. 

 

And Shirley and Michelle are down here today as my guests.  I 

had the distinct pleasure of having lunch with them and sharing 

some very warm conversation.  And they're going to take in 

part of question period and then they're going to take in a tour 

of the legislature.  So, Mr. Speaker, I would like all the 

members of the Assembly to join me in welcoming them here, 

and hope they have an enjoyable stay in the city today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is my 

pleasure, to you and through you to the House, to introduce two 

people who are visiting with us here from a long ways away.  

They are a couple who have come to Saskatchewan for the 

summer from a community called Astros in Greece.  Their 

names Elefterias and Petrula Lagridonia.  They are seated in 

your gallery with my son, Dion, and I would ask them to stand. 

 

They happen to be the grandparents of my daughter-in-law, and 

that makes it very special for me to have the privilege to 

introduce them here today and wish them well and ask the 

members of the House to join me in extending a warm 

welcome to them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  In your 

gallery I would like to introduce to the members of the 

legislature and to you, Mr. Speaker, five individuals who are 

from Weyburn.  And I would like to introduce them to the 

Assembly as being Jean Hobbs, Vivian Kew, Lorie deVries, 

Karen Buchanan, and Debbie Button. 

 

These individuals all were, until recently, working at the Souris 

Valley Regional Care Centre and unfortunately there are only 

two of them that are still working at the present time, Mr. 

Speaker.  I would ask all members to give them a warm 

welcome to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- I would like to join with members in 

introducing some guests here today, if I may.  Seated in the 

Speaker's gallery are the parents of the secretary working in the 

Speaker's office, Mr. and Mrs. Johnson, who are here visiting 

in Saskatchewan from B.C.  I would ask all members to 

welcome the Johnsons to 



2592 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1993 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Funding to School Boards 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Minister of Education.  Mr. Minister, after the 

initial shock of communities across this province losing their 

hospitals many communities are now waking up to the reality 

of another war that's waging against rural Saskatchewan.  In 

fact, Mr. Minister, many communities are wondering what will 

happen to their schools.  Will they they be the next ones. 

 

The opposition received a letter from the Battle River School 

Division which outlines this scenario in spades.  And, Mr. 

Minister, the school division, like most others, is very 

concerned with the proposed 2.5 per cent increase in teachers' 

salaries in 1994, after your government cut the school 

division's funding by 4 per cent.  They find that unacceptable.  

They realize that the only way they can accommodate this 

situation is to cut teaching positions at the expense of quality 

education in rural Saskatchewan.  In fact in order to make their 

1993 budget work, they had to cut 11 positions. 

 

Mr. Minister, it would seem to me, it would appear to me, and 

certainly it appears to the school division, that this is an erosion 

of educational services in rural Saskatchewan, and there will be 

more to come.  Is that not true, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to respond 

to the member, hon. member's question.  And I want to say that 

I do not agree with his assertion or his suggestion.  Indeed the 

education system in the province of Saskatchewan is strong.  I 

have met since I have been given the honour of having this 

portfolio with the trustees' association and spoken to the 

teachers' association and met with various people who are 

involved in the education system.  They are working hard to 

provide the best possible education that we can in the province 

of Saskatchewan within the financial circumstances which we 

face, and they're doing an outstanding job. 

 

The member refers to what may be a settlement that has been 

arrived at the bargaining table where it ought to be arrived at.  

I'm not going to comment on that, because that is information 

which is not public.  And that's something for the school 

trustees and the Teachers' Federation to speak to when they 

report to their principals. 

 

But I might say, Mr. Speaker, that this is an agreement that is 

being arrived at in conjunction with the Government of 

Saskatchewan representing the taxpayers, and the trustees and 

the representatives of the teachers.  And I can say, Mr. Speaker, 

if they can 

agree then certainly that must be the right direction in which it 

should be going. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, and again to the minister.  Mr. 

Minister, the Battle River School Division like other school 

divisions across this province are finding that it seems that they 

are left with doing your dirty work. 

 

What you've done is eliminated substantial funding for them to 

give adequate education in their school division.  In fact what 

they've had to do is eliminate 11 positions this year.  And even 

though they've eliminated 11 full-time teaching positions, 

they're still left with an anticipated shortfall in 1994 of 

$275,000, which in order to achieve the funding needed to 

meet the shortfall it would mean seven more positions in the 

next term. 

 

Unless they did the other alternative.  And that alternative, Mr. 

Minister, would be to put an added tax burden on the residents 

of that school division through a mill rate.  It's either axe or tax.  

And I don't think that's a fair choice. 

 

Mr. Minister, pay raises like the one you gave the government 

employees' union will only make matters worse for everyone.  

Mr. Minister, do you not agree with the school divisions when 

they say it will mean less teachers in rural Saskatchewan, less 

education in rural Saskatchewan.  And what it will eventually 

mean for all of us is more taxes.  Is that not true? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, the problem, the 

problem with the members of the opposition is that they are 

still continuing to live in the past.  They still will not recognize 

that they left this province, this government, and the children 

who we are providing an education for, with an accumulated 

debt of $16 billion which they are going to have to at some 

time in their lives help to repay. 

 

Now in spite of that, Mr. Speaker, this government, along with 

the educators of this province and the trustees of this province, 

are working at providing the best possible education that we 

can for our children in order that we can provide for them the 

ability to meet that future which they are going to face. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite chooses to use very 

selective information which I regret very much.  But because 

when he talks about the agreement between the government 

employees and the agreement that's being arrived at in the 

Crown corporations, he talks about a two and a half per cent 

increase.  But he never talks about the zero per cent increases 

in two years prior to the two and a half that our public servants 

have agreed to in order to contribute to solving the financial 

problem which we're trying to solve, which they created and 

left for the future generations of this province. 



June 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2593 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and to the minister.  Mr. 

Minister, and Mr. Speaker, and for anyone who happens to be 

viewing, what we've seen again is the minister just using the 

blame thrower, bringing out and continually accusing the 

former government.  In fact, while they've added $2 billion, all 

of sudden that's a problem created by the former government.  

And I suppose until the next election, maybe even to the year 

2000, every increase is going to be because of the former 

government. 

 

Well people across the province are beginning to see through 

that, Mr. Minister.  In fact education students are beginning to 

see through that.  They're wondering where they're going to 

find a job.  In fact I had a couple of students in my office 

recently who said they've spent four years taking classes and 

four years of costs out of their pocket and their parents' pocket, 

and there isn't a job at the end of the road. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, your choices are creating a problem not only 

for health care workers, but for even young people in the 

educational field.  For every cut in funding, coupled with pay 

increases to teachers, it results in job losses and in this case 18 

positions in the Battle River School Division. 

 

Mr. Minister, my questions come straight from the letter that 

was sent to you, and I'd like to quote it: 

 

 The recent SGEU agreement has set a precedent which will 

make things that much harder for all employers in the 

province.  Instead of this kind of increase, our board believes 

that salary roll-backs should be given serious consideration at 

the bargaining table.  A zero increase should be the final 

position for the teacher bargaining committee.  This is a 

preferred direction to further major teacher lay-offs. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you listen to educational boards across the 

province rather than voice the opinions of your union friends?  

Will you do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, may I assure the 

member opposite that indeed we are quite prepared to listen to 

the boards of the province of Saskatchewan, and they are 

represented at the bargaining table by the Saskatchewan School 

Trustees Association who speak for them very well.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, because they speak for them very well and when there 

is an agreement -- and I understand that there is a tentative 

agreement that has been arrived at - 

_ I know that the voices of all of the school jurisdictions in the 

province have been well represented by the school trustees 

association who will have agreed to this agreement. 

 

And the member opposite also talks about the jobs that people 

in this province and the students of our province will need 

when they graduate from our 

schools.  Well I want to remind the member opposite -- and 

there is a lot more yet to be done -- that in spite of the huge 

debt which this province has, which the member opposite does 

not like to be reminded of, there have been in the period of 

April '93 to May '93, 23,000 more jobs in the province of 

Saskatchewan, an increase of 6,000 more jobs and people 

employed in Saskatchewan over a full-year period from the 

same time last year. 

 

Now that, Mr. Chairman, is a sign that the policies of this 

government are working.  And they're working not necessarily 

because of some dictum of the government; they're working 

because all of the people of Saskatchewan -- school trustees, 

the business community, and the workers of this province -- are 

pulling together to make it work in spite of the negativism and 

the gloom and doom that is projected by the members of the 

Conservative Party seated opposite, to your left, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Government Cost-cutting 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I direct my 

question to the Premier today.  Mr. Premier, I'd like to read 

from Hansard and I quote: 

 

 (We) have civil servants getting increases of 17 per cent . . . 

where is the fairness and why has this government gotten out 

of touch so quickly? 

 

This is the statement from your very own Minister of 

Economic Development, made on June 21, 1990, eight years 

into the previous government's mandate. 

 

Mr. Premier, given the fact that your government's ministerial 

staff received recently similar-size wage increases, does this 

not suggest that you are out of touch in nearly 19 months, when 

it took the previous government eight years to do similarly? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the simple answer to the 

question is no, because the hon. member opposite -- which is 

common for the opposite member's questions, if I may say so -- 

tends to ignore the basic facts.  The basic facts are that there 

are fewer MAs (ministerial assistant), and there's less total 

dollars spent. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Just give you time, Roy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- The Leader of the Opposition says, 

give us time.  You do, and we'll have even fewer MLAs 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) and fewer MAs and 

fewer expenditures. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- And fewer MLAs and fewer MAs.  

We're going down from 66 to 58.  And I don't expect to see 

many of my Conservative friends around here very much 

longer, so we'll have fewer MLAs and MAs.  Now those are 

the facts.  Those are the facts. 



2594 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1993 

And if the hon. member would also be absolutely honest with 

the legislature, she would acknowledge that the so-called raises 

that she talks about results in, the first time ever in recent 

while, job classifications which require MAs to go in in certain 

categories or rechange . . . or even reclassifications where 

there's a change of duties as opposed to pay increases. 

 

But even with that, there is still less money spent and less MAs 

than at any time in the last 10 years by a long shot, and we're 

going to do more.  So please practise the new politics and 

admit that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, I'm not going to 

practise condescension about the quality of your answers in this 

House.  Thank you for your response. 

 

I'm going to quote another of your front-benchers, the member 

from Regina Churchill Downs, and I do quote: 

 

 . . . I wonder if we might have a commentary on the bloated 

size of the current cabinet. 

 

 Wouldn't you agree, . . . that economy begins at home and a 

smaller, leaner cabinet would be appreciated by the public of 

Saskatchewan . . .  

 

That question was raised in Executive Council Estimates in 

June of 1990, Mr. Premier, when the size of cabinet was 18 

members.  And as your cabinet is now 16 and has only been 

reduced from 18 in the recent weeks, will you commit to us 

today that you will show some of that economy that was 

preached when you were on this side of the House and promise 

that you will reduce the size of your cabinet within the next 

few weeks to a substantially lower number? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, with the greatest of 

respect to the hon. member, I don't know where she's been the 

last little while but I don't think it's been in the Saskatchewan 

legislature.  We have 16 people in the cabinet, and 18 by 

choice, 18 by choice, 16 currently, 18 or 16; it is the smallest, 

one of the smallest cabinets in the last 10, 15 years.  And I ask 

you to compare the cabinets of Frank McKenna, or the cabinets 

of Clyde Wells, both in numbers, or any other jurisdiction, 

even Gary Filmon next door in Manitoba, and you'll see that 

the province of Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Yes, the promise I made, I fulfilled.  The promise I made was 

to reduce the cabinets from 25 to 16, 18, in that neighbourhood.  

That is the situation. 

 

Now again, I don't know what in the world it is about the hon. 

member who talks with total disregard to the facts.  Do you 

remember the day you got up in the -- was it legislature or the 

public? -- and said that we didn't have enough government in 

Saskatchewan.  Your proposal was . . . Oh no, you look 

surprised.  Did you forget?  You wanted a senate for the 

province of Saskatchewan to appoint.  Do you remember that?  

Do you remember that?  A senate.  Now today you get up, 

a year later, and you say, oops, I really didn't mean it; we need 

smaller government.  Please Madam MLA, facts, facts, facts, 

and integrity, please. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Premier, you wouldn't know a fact if it 

were delivered in a brown envelope.  I have never stated that 

the province of Saskatchewan should have a senate; I was 

talking about the information age and in fact having 

communication systems with people within the province.  And 

I am not here to have to defend what I consider to be the new 

kind of politics.  You . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'll permit the member from 

Saskatoon Greystone to repeat her question because I couldn't 

hear it and certainly the members over here couldn't hear it, the 

government side. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, 

what I am doing is quoting directly from your members -- your 

members, people who you are in essence, the responsibility, 

manager for.  And if they indeed did not say this, then what 

you're saying is that the facts are not correct from Hansard. 

 

You have not cut all of wasteful spending because the evidence 

speaks for itself.  You're telling hundreds of agencies around 

this province that funding is scarce, and yet your government 

authorizes the spending of several hundred thousands of dollars 

a year to supply flowers to ministers' offices. 

 

And you claim to save hundreds of thousands of dollars by 

cutting civil servants, and yet you did not budget for the 

severances that you'll be paying those employees.  You merely 

are charging the cost against the accumulated deficit and 

making a serious problem worse.  This is nothing less than a 

shell game. 

 

Now do you honestly believe that you are making the best use 

possible of taxpayers' dollars and that you are telling them the 

truth about your actions and motives? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, again I find this 

question somewhat interesting because the hon. member will 

know, or perhaps she will not know, that on our budget this 

year, had it not been for the interest on the public debt which 

we inherited, we would have had a surplus of over $500 

million. 

 

Now is this enough?  Is it enough to get rid of waste and the 

mismanagement?  The answer is no.  Can more be done?  The 

answer is yes.  But I find it interesting that the member says 

there's a double standard.  If there is a brown bag that comes 

out of her office about her advocacy for a senate, she's not 

responsible for it.  But if there's a brown bag that comes out of 

the government about something that we do, we are responsible 

for it. 

 

Now is this the new politics?  I don't think so.  And if the hon. 

member opposite says, by the way, that she is going to quote 

for me . . . and by the way, she says a brown bag. I have here 

January 29, 1993 Star-Phoenix 



June 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2595 

headline -- mind you, not that it's accurate necessarily, but it's 

the Star-Phoenix.  It says: "Haverstock latest to press 

government toward elected Senate."  Senate election a first 

step.  Liberal wants Senate vote.  And on it goes.  These are all 

positions that take place. 

 

So if the hon. member says that somehow she did not know 

about this, then I would say that, as my colleague here says, 

there is a high degree of selectivity of what you remember and 

what you do not remember. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- In my mind, Mr. Premier, there's a great 

deal of selectivity about what you remember as well.  Because 

in the Leader-Post, October 4, 1989, you say, and I quote: He 

sees (the Premier, present Premier) no use in expanding the 

size of cabinet to include associate ministers and promised an 

NDP cabinet would be small, very small, in tough economic 

times.  End of quote. 

 

Mr. Premier, in my reply to the budget speech -- and by the 

way, I do believe in an elected Senate; I fought for one -- I 

pointed out potential savings to the government in the order of 

$4.5 million.  And you scoffed, sir, at the $4.5 million as being 

insignificant.  And yet you've been telling people all 

throughout this province that your government has had no 

choice but to close hospitals and lay off health care workers to 

save just over $4 million on health care. 

 

Mr. Premier, you can't have it both ways.  How can you 

suggest that $4.5 million is completely insignificant, but in the 

same breath use a $4 million savings as the excuse to threaten 

the health care system? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, if I can't have it both 

ways, neither can the member from Greystone.  She can't have 

it both ways either. 

 

Leader-Post, March 26, 1990:  Liberals propose provincial 

senate.  It may not be accurate because it's in the Star-Phoenix 

too, but it's by Randy Burton, quote: 

 

 A Liberal government would establish a provincial senate 

that would allow local governments to vote on Bills passed 

by the legislature, says Liberal Leader Lynda Haverstock.  It 

would be made up of mayors, reeves, and Canadian band 

chiefs with the idea of establishing a partnership with the 

people, she told the party's annual convention in Saskatoon. 

 

Now just a few moments ago the Leader of the Liberal Party 

said she did not say that; it was a brown envelope.  Which is 

the truth?  Or are you entitled to have it both ways?  What is 

the truth? 

 

And I suggest the truth is, far from you being concerned about 

reducing and making government 

efficient, you want it expanded.  You want it expanded.  And 

what you really want to do is, for political purposes, try to 

expand a perception of cuts and reductions while all the while 

advocating provincial senate and elections. 

 

Now is that a brown bag or is that your view?  Tell us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Premier, surely you know better.  I 

never said in here that that arrived in a brown envelope at all. 

 

What I was talking about . . . And all you have to do is read, 

sir, and you can see that this would function as involving 

people from the local level; it has nothing to do with people 

who aren't already elected to positions.  You are the person 

who wants to control information and not expand it to the 

people, rather than having real input. 

 

Your government, sir, says that it must do what it can do to 

demonstrate to the public that it can be trustworthy and 

responsive.  And yet the proof is that your government has 

demonstrated neither, in spite of your rhetoric. 

 

In the past weeks we have seen you threaten to break another 

contract, which is quickly becoming a habit in this 

administration.  Hemophiliacs infected with the HIV (human 

immunodeficiency virus) have been told to wait and see if a 

compensation package will be coming. 

 

I want you to justify those actions to the people today -- justify 

of denying people their legal rights on three different occasions 

now, and your obvious lack of compassion for people who are 

running out of time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I say with the greatest of 

respect of the hon. member opposite . . . The hon. member says 

I don't have respect.  Well actually I do have, but I must say to 

the hon. member that it's greatly diminished when just a few 

moments ago in the full hearing shot of everybody in this 

legislature and in the press gallery and the public you said you 

never talked about an expanded senate.  It was a brown-bag 

proposal.  I produce evidence to the contrary and now you give 

us another example -- and you ask me to have respect? 

 

Well I'll tell, notwithstanding your answers, I still have respect 

for you, but you have to be factual and accurate in this 

operation.  When you say you want to save money, why is it 

that you come to the legislature, and what do you do?  You 

seek more money -- more money all the time.  You can't do 

your job.  You want to increase the funds for the constituency 

office.  Is that part of the money that's involved in the 

operation?  I don't think that it is. 

 

I think, Madam Member, you're inconsistency is getting well 

noticed here, and I think with the greatest of respect, this is not 

a question of who has more compassion -- you or me or the 

Leader of the 



2596 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1993 

Conservative Party.  We know that people with respect to 

hemophilia are in a tragic and sad situation. 

 

This is a national response.  All of the provincial governments 

are saying it's a national responsibility.  That's where we think 

it should lie.  That kind of compensation should not be 

dependent upon the ability of a province in any particular 

region to provide or not to provide.  This is a national moral 

responsibility. 

 

And to be very blunt about it, for you people to be raising this 

issue under the guise of compassion is a shameful display of 

politics with people that are caught in an unfortunate situation 

to which we're trying to solve the situation.  Instead of doing 

that, show true compassion by coming to sensible, logical, 

national solutions, which is what we're trying to do. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- So, Mr. Premier, it is perfectly all right that 

the member from Saskatoon Broadway and your Associate 

Minister of Health and the member from Regina North West 

and numerous people in your particular administration can 

come forward in 1990 and talk about how people with HIV 

who are hemophiliacs in this province should get support.  But 

it is not all right for me, as the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone who has met with these people for the last year, to 

bring forward similar concerns.  Somehow compassion is 

reserved for your administration.  Well give us a break! 

 

The people in this province are wondering why you approved 

$200,000 a year supply of flowers to ministerial offices.  Now 

you tell me why you can't come up with some sense of 

compassion for people who need some help now.  But you can 

approve this and think that this is good use of taxpayers' 

dollars? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Madam Member, and Mr. Speaker, 

you tell me why you keep insisting for more money for the 

Liberal Party and for yourself, and tell me how that is 

compassionate.  You tell me why you keep doing that. 

 

And I tell you, you cannot have a double standard.  You can't 

get up in public and say you didn't say what you did about the 

elected senate and then try to flip-flop so brazenly in public 

when the evidence is to the contrary.  You cannot have it both 

ways.  You cannot have it both ways. 

 

And I say to the hon. member opposite: she quotes about my 

members and what they've said.  Would she like me to quote 

back what some of her members say about her?  Because I 

want to say right now -- again it's in the Star-Phoenix . . . 

Leader-Post, so it may not be accurate -- and I don't want to get 

into this too much, but there it is, a letter written by somebody 

on the . . . You'll know this person very well.  He's a candidate 

in the last election, Mr. Randy Roman from Moose Jaw. 

 

 A lot of people don't know the real Lynda Haverstock.  She 

puts on a good front in the public, but where it really counts 

-- where you 

really need people around to get your party going and offer 

what the people want -- she just doesn't have it. 

 

You know something?  I don't share that member's assessment 

of you.  But I got to tell you I am shaken in my confidence in 

you by this kind of a heartless political display and, being very 

blunt about it, duplicitous example about what true compassion 

and principle is.  I'm sorry, Madam Member.  We expect more 

of you and members in this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave, introduction. 

 

The Speaker: -- Oh, introduction of guests.  Does the Premier 

have leave? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to thank all 

members of the House for giving me leave to introduce a very 

special guest who will be known to all members of this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, seated in your gallery with the other people -- but 

I'll only take the time of the House to introduce one -- is Ms. 

Maude Barlow who is the national volunteer chairperson of 

The Council of Canadians. 

 

Ms. Barlow is well known to Canadians for her devotion to the 

discussion of the impacts of the free trade agreements and the 

proposed North American free trade arrangement and its 

impact on the Canadian economy and our society. 

 

She's authored two books: Parcel of Rogues and Take Back 

the Nation.  I want to give Ms. Barlow a little bit of a plug for 

those royalties that keep on coming in to The Council of 

Canadians. 

 

She is tirelessly working as a strong advocate for a strong, 

independent, and united Canada.  She was in Saskatoon today 

for a very successful, large meeting of The Council of 

Canadians on this topic. 

 

And I say, Mr. Speaker, regardless of our views on this 

important issue, she is, I think everybody would agree, a person 

of great distinction and a person devoted to a vision of Canada.  

And I'd like all members to welcome her to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 1 -- An Act respecting the Conduct of 



June 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2597 

Members of the Legislative Assembly and Members of the 

Executive Council, respecting Conflicts of Interest and to 

enact Consequential Amendments resulting from the 

enactment of this Act 

 

The Chair: -- I would like the Minister of Justice to please 

introduce his officials to the committee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, I have Doug Moen back with 

me -- you'll recall he was here with me yesterday --  and Darcy 

McGovern of the Department of Justice who is well known to 

members of the House. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  And to the minister, 

welcome to your officials and I just want to say as I reiterated 

yesterday, thank you for the opportunity to sit down and 

discuss the Bill and I believe a number of the amendments.  

And just after we had finished we had taken just a quick minute 

to speak to . . . ask the minister regarding some of the 

amendments put forward.  I believe your department has taken 

some of the suggestions we put forward and put them in the 

form of amendments. 

 

And I think as we get into the Bill we'll probably just start 

moving through the Bill clause by clause.  There are some 

amendments that we'd like to make some comments on. But I 

think at the end of day, and I believe at the end of the day, Mr. 

Minister, certainly the idea is to have a piece of legislation that 

is here, that will let the public know that certainly individuals 

involved in public life and politicians are endeavouring to be as 

open and as forthright with the public and with all of their 

dealings . . . and even any investments and assets they would 

have. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, I think it's appropriate that we're doing 

this.  I guess as I would reiterate one more time, it probably 

would have been wise as well to have some input from people 

on the outside who do have the concerns, and I'm not sure if the 

minister had the time or the staff did -- possibly through the 

legal channels some input has been given -- but groups like the 

taxpayers and other organizations that would have just . . . at 

least asked them for some ideas because I think the perception 

can still be there where it's just politicians doing something to 

better themselves. 

 

And it's very important that we're really forward with this piece 

of legislation and that we're bringing forward that we're very 

clear so that even though the commissioner will be appointed 

by this body that the points and the guidelines are very clear so 

the public knows exactly where we're going. 

 

And with that, Mr. Chairman, unless the minister wants to 

respond for a minute, I think we can move into a 

clause-by-clause review. 

 

The Chair: -- Before the minister responds, besides the 

member who is on his feet and has been recognized by the 

Chair, there are about seven other conversations which are 

taking place in the Chamber. 

And although each conversation by itself doesn't create a 

problem, the number of them collectively do create a problem 

for the discourse of business.  And therefore I would ask 

members to respect that.  And if they feel the need to carry on 

conversations, perhaps they would like to do so outside the 

Chamber. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  We did two 

things that were in addition to the consultations that took place 

with the official opposition and with the member from 

Saskatoon Greystone.  The first thing we did was to examine 

the legislation and to speak to the officials involved in the other 

jurisdictions that have similar kinds of legislation.  And we 

went into some detail in connection with those conversations 

and got the benefit of their experience.  That includes Ontario 

and British Columbia and Alberta. 

 

The other thing that we did was to review all of the literature 

on the subject, and there is some Canadian literature on the 

subject and we paid special attention to that.  And in addition to 

that we had the consultations with your caucus and with the 

member from Saskatoon Greystone.  So I think we've got 

something here that will work. 

 

We have, as you have over the years, been alert to 

representations that were made to us, and our own democratic 

reform paper when we were in opposition tried to gather 

together our experience with respect to that.  We paid attention 

to that, as did you.  And I think we have something here that 

we can all be satisfied with. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, I just wanted to mention, in clause 

2 here it lays out a number of definitions and we had made a 

number of suggestions.  Now clause 2(1)(d) expands the 

definition of Crown in this situation.  And as much as we 

appreciate the fact that there's a broader definition of what 

Crown means, we were looking forward to something that 

would have included any corporate government involved . . . or 

as being a part of this definition as well. 

 

And I just wanted to bring that to the minister's attention and 

maybe they could comment as to why they would have left that 

portion out. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  If I could, I'd like 

to have leave of the Assembly to introduce some guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First of all I'd like 

to introduce an individual prior to my school, and that 

individual is Mr. Don Watson who is seated up in the gallery.  

He's from Hodgeville, 



2598 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1993 

Saskatchewan, a very good friend of mine.  And he's here 

today, probably for the Farm Progress Show, and has been 

interested in politics, he and his family, for a long time. 

 

And I would just like the Assembly to welcome him here 

today, along with the grade 4 and 5 students from Cabri, 

Saskatchewan.  They're here today dealing with . . . probably 

going to Agribition as well as . . . or the Farm Progress Show 

and as well to view the things in Regina here and along with 

the legislature.  I'm going to be meeting with them. 

 

They're here today with their teacher, Arlene Peltier, and 13 

chaperons, and I won't go into the detail about that.  I had a 

school earlier this morning where the chaperons outnumbered 

the students, and I think it's all to go to the Farm Progress 

Show. 

 

But I want to have the Assembly welcome these people to the 

Assembly.  They're from Cabri, and I want to have the 

Assembly join with me in welcoming them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Mr. Speaker, if I could have leave to tag on? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and colleagues.  I 

want to join the member for Morse in welcoming this group 

from Cabri, and particularly Arlene Peltier.  Arlene and I grew 

up next door to one another on the Beechy co-op farm many 

years ago, and it's a treat to see her here this day.  So I ask all 

members to join me in welcoming the group. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 1 

(continued) 

 

Clause 2 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, just before the minister responds, I 

should maybe just be a little clearer.  I meant . . . I should have 

suggested that what we were looking for was a corporate 

government control. And I'm just going to raise a suggestion 

we had put forward, and the minister probably has it in front of 

him, where any business or organization which Her Majesty 

the Queen in right of Saskatchewan appoints the majority of 

the board of directors, selects the chief executive officer, who 

owns the majority of the share capital, controlling interest -- 

that's the area we were talking of where we have a little broader 

interpretation of what it means by controlling Crown in this 

definition. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, we were at pains to be as 

responsive to the proposal from the official opposition as we 

possibly could be.  And when we 

used the words in the amendment that we will be introducing 

momentarily, we used the term: "including corporations in 

which the Government of Saskatchewan owns a majority of 

shares."  That, in our view, would cover all of the situations 

that are included in the proposal which the member has just 

outlined. 

 

For example, one of the concepts in the proposal from the 

opposition is the idea of a controlling interest.  And how do 

you know when you have a controlling interest and when you 

don't have a controlling interest?  Is a 5 per cent interest in 

Saskoil a controlling interest?  I think not.  In IPSCO, whatever 

shareholdings the government has there -- a minority share, 

very minor shareholding position -- is that a controlling 

interest? 

 

It didn't seem to be a very satisfactory approach to it because it 

lacked definition.  So we think that the formulation which we 

are prepared to move, corporations in which the Government of 

Saskatchewan owns the majority of shares, should cover every 

situation that we can think of.  And we thought by doing that 

that we were being fully responsive to your suggestions. 

 

There is a House amendment, Mr. Chair.  I move that: 

 

 Section 2 of the printed Bill be amended by striking out 

clause 2(1)(d) of the printed Bill and substitute the following: 

 

 "(d) 'Crown' means Her Majesty the Queen in right of 

Saskatchewan and includes departments, secretariats and 

offices of the Government of Saskatchewan and Crown 

corporations, including corporations in which the 

Government of Saskatchewan owns a majority of shares". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 3 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 8 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- We propose an amendment to section 8 

of the printed Bill, Mr. Chair.  I move that section 8 of the 

printed Bill be amended by: 

 

 Amend subsection 8(1) of the printed Bill by adding ", 

including a corporation in which the Government of 

Saskatchewan owns a majority of shares," after "Crown 

corporation". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 8 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 9 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, I move that section 9 of the 

printed Bill be amended first: 



June 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2599 

 (a) by adding the following subsection after subsection (4): 

 

  "(5) The commissioner shall file with the Clerk of the 

Assembly a copy of any notice given and any terms 

and conditions imposed pursuant to subsection (4), 

and the Clerk shall make the copy of the notice and 

the terms and conditions available for public 

inspection at the office of the Clerk during normal 

business hours of the Clerk"; 

 

 (b) by renumbering existing subsections (5) to (8) as 

subsections (6) to (9); and 

 

 (c) by striking out "subsection (5)" in renumbered subsection 

(7) and substituting "subsection (6)". 

 

I so move, Mr. Chair. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 9 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 10 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 13 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I have an amendment to propose, Mr. 

Chair.  I move that: 

 

 Amend section 13 of the printed Bill: 

 

 (a) by adding the following clauses after clause (1)(c): 

 

  "(d) the name and the address of each corporation, 

organization or association of  or any of the 

member's family is an officer or director; 

 

  "(e) the name and address of each organization or 

association in which the member holds a 

membership"; 

 

 (b) by renumbering clauses (1)(d) to (j) as clauses (f) to (l); 

and 

 

 (c) by adding the following subsection after subsection (4): 

 

  "(5) Notwithstanding subsection (1), the commissioner 

may exclude from a public disclosure statement the 

name and address of a corporation, organization or 

association of which any of a member's family is an 

officer or director if, in the opinion of the 

commissioner, the exclusion is a justifiable 

departure from the general principle of public 

disclosure." 

 

I so move, Mr. Chair. 

 

The Chair: -- We have the amendment by the 

minister.  I just want to hold it in abeyance for a second. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, in earlier discussions with the 

minister, we had I thought agreed to, in section (e) there, to not 

hold member's children in that clause.  But I thought that the 

member's wife, spouse, would be included in that. 

 

Now I'll give you an example.  As everyone knows, the hon. 

minister's wife holds a very prominent position in Canadian 

politics.  And I'm sure that the odd time he gets lobbied a little 

bit, either at the kitchen table or perhaps even in bed for all I 

know -- I don't know. 

 

But I would suggest that members' wives are very influential 

people in their lives.  And members' wives and husbands could 

be the director of company XYZ or union X or whatever.  And 

those people have more opportunity to lobby a member than 

anybody else does.  And I can see the point where your 

children living at home probably aren't going to be in such a 

thing. 

 

But I think it would be appropriate in this exercise if . . . I 

know my wife's got nothing to hide from this Assembly and I 

would think that all of us would feel the same way about our 

spouse.  And I'm wondering if the minister might entertain an 

amendment to that section, and I'll read it out for the minister's 

benefit and he can deliberate with his officials.  I would move: 

 

 That the amendment be amended in section (e) by adding 

after the word "member" the words "or his or her spouse". 

 

As simple as that, in this section. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The point is an interesting point and it 

was the subject of a very vigorous discussion in our caucus.  

The amendments arise as a result of suggestions made by the 

opposition, and I thank them for that.  I think it was a useful 

idea. 

 

The fact is that section 13, which sets out the contents of a 

public disclosure statement, covered really a very broad range 

of ideas but had overlooked the idea of membership in 

organizations and associations that were other than 

shareholdings or the other kinds of interests that are covered by 

section 13 that have to be disclosed. 

 

(1500) 

 

And of course membership in an association can be of such a 

nature as to create a conflict.  I think we all understand and 

accept that.  And that is particularly the case if the membership 

is more than just a matter of having a card, but actually 

participating as an officer or director. 

 

And so the present formulation, just so we're perfectly clear 

what's being proposed, the present formulation accepts the idea 

that was put forward by the Leader of the Opposition, actually, 

that the name and address of each corporation, organization, or 

association of 



2600 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1993 

which the member or any of the member's family is an officer 

or director . . . That applies then to the member and the 

member's spouse and the member's dependent children. 

 

That is a different order of involvement than just bare 

membership; that is active participation.  So those have to be 

disclosed. 

 

And then the clause (e) goes on to say that the name of each 

organization or association in which the member holds a 

membership.  That would be the kind of less intense 

membership, if I can put it that way.  And as I understood the 

member's intervention right now, I think that that satisfies his 

point. 

 

We had a vigorous debate about this in our caucus.  And I 

believe that I capture the conclusion correctly when I say that it 

was the feeling that there's a point at which you stop disclosing 

everything that is of no interest to the public. 

 

I used in my conversation with the member I think yesterday, 

the idea that one of my daughters at university might be a 

member of Beta Sigma Phi.  Well who cares?  Nobody cares.  

And it will not affect my performance as a member of this 

Assembly.  And if your interest of course is in my wife, she's 

caught by clause (d) I think quite satisfactorily, and caught by 

clause (d), and of course her life is an open book anyway.  So 

we should probably think of another example. 

 

But I think that we captured the idea, and there was such a long 

debate about this in our caucus that I have to respect the result 

of that debate.  I don't feel able in this committee to respond to 

the member's suggestion except to say this:  I agreed with the 

member and the member's formulation, and he will recall that, 

and I'll admit that frankly in the House.  Then taking it to my 

caucus colleagues, and after long debate there they were unable 

to accept fully the idea. 

 

So I have to leave it at that with some regret because we really 

did a good job of work on this in agreeing to these 

amendments.  I want to say, just in case I don't get a chance to 

later on, that I do appreciate the approach that the opposition, 

and particularly the Leader of the Opposition, has taken in the 

discussion surrounding this Bill. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, as well the minister in his 

amendment he's put before the Assembly, he's added an 

additional clause, clause 5. 

 

 "(5) Notwithstanding subsection (1), the commissioner may 

exclude from a public disclosure statement the name and 

address of a corporation, organization or association of which 

any of a member's family is an officer or director if, in the 

opinion of the commissioner, the exclusion is a justifiable 

departure from the general principle of public disclosure". 

 

I think by the addition of that clause, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. 

Minister, it may leave some doubt in the 

public's minds as to what are we trying to hide, and it would 

probably be fair to at least require that a notice is filed with the 

Clerk of the Assembly so that there is that idea of it at least 

being . . . it's not really out totally in the public, but the Clerk, 

the notice is filed regarding that exclusion and that in itself may 

be an indication to the public that we're being as forthcoming 

as we are.  I think that would be only fair, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I think that I'm not comfortable with 

characterizing this as the member does.  The general principle 

of public disclosure that is referred to in the amendment is the 

principles in . . . particularly in section 3 and in section 5, and 

of course the prohibition against the use of inside information 

in subsection (4).  That is the general principle of public 

disclosure.  It is disclosure of interests that may affect our 

performance as members of this Assembly, or in the case of 

cabinet ministers as members of the cabinet.  And what we run 

into though, in the case of some members, is situations in 

which their spouse has a position that is a nominal position, or 

a position of legal convenience. 

 

I cite for example, the Minister of Municipal Government 

whose husband is a lawyer and is a lawyer who is active in 

corporate matters and estate matters and the like.  He 

frequently finds himself in a position where he becomes the 

director of a company but it is a directorship of convenience in 

order to comply with the legal requirements pertaining to 

corporations and does not reflect any real interest on his part in 

the corporation.  He doesn't have an equitable shareholding in 

the corporation; he is simply a director of convenience, a paper 

director.  And therefore, having no interest in the corporation, 

the member herself will not have any interest which ought to be 

disclosed, having regard to the general principles of disclosure 

contained in the Bill.  So that's what we're trying to get at here. 

 

Furthermore, in connection with that case, the member's 

spouse, as a practising lawyer, has legal requirements with 

respect to confidentiality and privilege as to disclosing his 

client's affairs, and to some extent that question of privilege is 

raised in the ideas that I've just been talking about. 

 

So that's what we are aiming at here.  And to give notice of the 

problem is to defeat the purpose of the amendment.  I mean if 

we're going to have the notice and all of that recorded with the 

commissioner or with the Clerk, we then have the same 

situation as though we didn't have this section and the Minister 

of Municipal Government would have to, in effect, provide the 

same statement although it would not necessarily be disclosed 

to the public.  It probably wouldn't be, so that the second point 

I mentioned wouldn't be involved, that is the question of 

privilege.  But still the uselessness of the whole process of 

Grant Carson listing all of his directorships of convenience in 

order to . . . so that the minister can comply with the Act just is 

something that we ought to avoid.  And so the amendment is 

proposed on that basis. 



June 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2601 

Mr. Swenson: -- Just so I have it straight here.  The 

commissioner then will do these exclusions under this 

subsection, but no one but the commissioner will know that he 

did the exclusion, and the commissioner will do it from a 

general principle of public disclosure. 

 

This person is going to be an officer of the Assembly, or a 

servant of the Assembly, not an officer of Executive Council or 

anything else.  How do I as a member . . . because I quite 

honestly don't know what the general principles of public 

disclosure are.  That I suspect has many definitions depending 

on the jurisdiction you're into. 

 

Maybe what we have to do is define the general principles of 

public disclosure so that I have confidence that the guy that 

works for me as a member of the Assembly is . . . when he 

makes these exclusions, is doing it in a way that I understand.  I 

mean if we're not going to have it filed with the Clerk and 

we're not going to have it filed with the Assembly that he has 

made 103 exemptions this year because of general principles of 

public disclosure, I don't know if he's up to the mark or if he's 

not up to the mark. 

 

And it's not that I'm trying to mess this thing up.  I hope the 

minister understands.  It's just that it leaves it a little 

open-ended.  I guess that some in the public and the media 

might say, well how do we know that this thing is being 

handled in a proper way.  And I don't have the answer for it, 

quite frankly, Mr. Chairman, so I . . . Maybe the minister or his 

staff have got some way that we could feel more comfortable 

about this exemption being granted, when we have no sort of 

check and balance on it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I'm glad the member asked that question 

because I was not precise in my first . . . in my previous 

answer. 

 

When you talk about the general principle of public disclosure, 

I refer to sections 3, 4, and 5, which of course is not the 

principle of disclosure.  It is the . . . sort of the underlying 

principle which requires disclosure, yes. 

 

So the general principle of disclosure is that everything will be 

disclosed, and that's what section 11, 12, and 13 are all about.  

These are the disclosure requirements and the requirement is 

that all interests -- or a very wide, wide range of interests -- be 

disclosed, and that is the general principle that will apply.  And 

only if the commissioner is of the opinion that an exclusion of 

the kind of interest I've been talking about is a justifiable 

departure, will subsection (5) come into play. 

 

This has been a very convoluted discussion, made so in part by 

my reference to sections 3, 4, and 5.  But I think that at the end 

of the day we ought to be comfortable with this and we ought 

to really create the exception because it is a sensible kind of an 

exception, particularly for members who are married to 

lawyers, to chartered accountants, to certified public 

accountants, and I would think to people in business generally. 

So I . . . let me put it this way to the member, Mr. Chairman: I 

think we're satisfied.  We've worked this over very carefully 

and we're satisfied with this formulation, and we'd like to 

proceed on that basis. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, I wonder if we could just have a 

minute.  There's another couple of comments that an individual 

wanted us to bring forward and I'm not totally familiar with 

them, and I wonder if we could have just a minute before we 

move on further in discussion.  I don't think we want to move 

off of the amendments and vote them off until there's a little bit 

of information that the Leader of the Opposition is presently 

having some discussion with.  If that's fine, just take about a 

minute. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I accept the minister's explanation, and I 

guess we're just going to have to try this thing out and see how 

it goes as far as these exemptions go. 

 

Just for the record, I want to go back to the point I made 

earlier, and I perhaps was being unfair in picking on the 

minister's spouse, and I wasn't trying to . . . The minister's 

spouse is a well-recognized political figure in Canada, and 

those quite frankly aren't the people that I was directing my 

comments to.  If the minister remembers, my administration 

was criticized for a particular land deal with the YMCA 

(Young Men's Christian Association) in the city of Regina, that 

there was X amount of dollars. 

 

(1515) 

 

And I guess the kind of thing I was getting at, and I just want 

the members over there, if they had trouble with this in caucus, 

to think back that the building committee of the YMCA 

lobbied long and hard to have some things done with their 

building.  And lots of times, as the minister points out, that we 

have covered off directors in companies, and we've covered off 

the officers of organizations and unions. 

 

But the building committee of the YMCA, and your wife's on 

it, and she's a fairly high-profile person on that committee, 

that's the lobbying that I was concerned about.  I don't know 

why any of us that are in public life would want someone to 

say, well so-and-so's spouse is on the board of directors . . . or 

not the board of directors, on the building committee of the 

hospital or the building committee of this or that or the next 

thing, and we know darn well that that spouse is putting their 

two bits into the conversation with the elected member.  You 

don't have any choice.  You chose to live with that person for 

the rest of your life, okay . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well 

there's a good example the minister brings up -- Sinclair 

Stevens. 

 

I don't know, it just seems when we're going through this 

exercise . . . and I know I recognize the spot the minister's in, 

but I'm just saying, public perception-wise, my own 

government was criticized for what is recognized as a widely 

held public institution like the YMCA getting a land 

transaction 



2602 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1993 

done, and any one of our spouses could be on the building 

committee of the YMCA . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, 

not the officer. 

 

Most organizations will have different committees set up to 

handle things, and if we don't take ourselves above that, then I 

think we open ourselves for criticism.  I just want to make the 

point, Mr. Chairman; the minister can take it for that.  But I 

think it would behove us at this time to take that suspicion 

away.  Goodness knows we're under enough of it some days 

that we don't need a little bit extra because my wife or my 

husband is on a high-profile committee, but not a director, not 

an executive member of a functioning organization. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well that's a pretty compelling example.  

And I think we should leave it on this basis.  I've told the 

member the discussion we've had and the conclusion we've 

had; and in the context we're operating in we probably have to 

leave it where it is. 

 

But the commissioner will no doubt be reading the debate and 

the exchange that you and I have just had and will be alert to 

these situations in the work that the commissioner does with us 

members as we're sort of laying our lives open in the 

preparation of our disclosure statements.  And I think that it 

would be quite appropriate in this debate for us to alert the 

commissioner to the remarks that the hon. member has just 

made in this House and my response to it.  And that some 

attention be paid to this. 

 

And if it's something we should cover off, then let's cover it off 

in the next session by way of an amendment, if that seems to be 

a situation that deserves attention.  And I suggest to the 

member we can just leave it on that basis. 

 

Subamendment negatived on division. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 13 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 14 agreed to. 

 

Clause 15 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, maybe I'll allow the minister to 

bring his amendment forward, then I'll make a comment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I move that: 

 

Section 15 of the printed Bill be amended: 

 

(a) by striking out subsection (3); 

 

(b) by renumbering subsections (4) to (7) as subsections 

(3) to (6); and 

 

(c) by striking out "subsection (6)" in renumbered 

subsection (6) and substituting "subsection (5)". 

I so move. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, I guess as we look at the 

amendment brought forward by the minister, the question 

would be why we would eliminate section (3) from clause 15.  

Why is, at this time, the minister choosing to strike out 

subsection (3) of the clause 15 in the printed Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The only reason was that we have now 

introduced this expanded definition of Crown which includes 

all emanations of the Crown, and therefore we simply don't 

need subsection (3). 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 15 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 16 and 17 agreed to. 

 

Clause 18 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

That section 18 of the printed Bill be amended by striking 

out subsection 18(3) of the printed Bill and substitute the 

following: 

 

"(3) The commissioner shall be appointed by resolution of 

the Assembly". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 18 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 19 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, I move: 

 

That section 19 of the printed Bill be amended: 

 

(a) By striking out subsection (1) and substituting the 

following: 

 

"(1) The Assembly may, by resolution, remove the 

commissioner from office or suspend the 

commissioner"; and 

 

(b) By striking out "the Lieutenant Governor in Council, 

on the recommendation of the Assembly" in subsection (2) 

and substituting "the Assembly, by resolution". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 19 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 20 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, I move that: 

 

Section 20 of the printed Bill be amended by striking out 

"Lieutenant Governor in Council" wherever it occurs: 

 

(a) in subsection (1); and 



June 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2603 

(b) in subsection (3); 

 

And in each case substituting "Board of Internal 

Economy". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 20 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 21 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, I move that: 

 

 That section 21 of the printed Bill be amended by striking out 

the words "Lieutenant Governor in Council" and substituting 

the words "Board of Internal Economy". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 21 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 22 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, I move that: 

 

 Section 22 of the printed Bill be amended by striking out the 

words "Lieutenant Governor in Council" wherever it occurs: 

 

  (a) in clause (a); and 

 

  (b) in clause (b); 

 

 And in each case substituting "Board of Internal Economy". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 22 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 23 agreed to. 

 

Clause 24 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, I move that: 

 

 Section 24 of the printed Bill be amended by striking out 

section 24 and substituting the following: 

 

  24(1) Subject to subsection (2), the commissioner may, 

with the consent of the Speaker, use any employee 

of the Assembly as staff. 

 

  (2) Any officer of the Assembly may consent to act as 

staff for the commissioner where, in the officer's 

opinion, to do so will not unduly interfere with the 

officer's duties to the Assembly. 

 

I so move. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 24 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 25 to 28 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 29 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, I move: 

 

 That section 29 of the printed Bill be amended: 

 

 (a) By adding the following subsection after subsection (1): 

 

  "(2) A member who makes a request for an opinion 

pursuant to subsection (1) shall promptly provide 

the member who is the subject of the request with a 

copy of the application"; 

 

 (b) By renumbering existing subsections ((2) to (4) as 

subsections (3) to (5); and 

 

 (c) By striking out "subsection (1) or (2)" in renumbered 

subsection (5) and substituting "subsection (1) or (3)". 

 

I so move. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 29 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 30 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I move, Mr. Chair: 

 

 That section 30 of the printed Bill be amended: 

 

 (a) By striking out "member concerned" in subsection (2) and 

substituting "member who is the subject of the inquiry"; 

 

 (b) By striking out subsection (4) and substituting the 

following: 

 

  "(4) Where the request for an opinion is made pursuant to 

subsection 29(1) or (3), the commissioner shall 

report his or her opinion to the Speaker and to the 

member who is the subject of the opinion"; and 

 

 (c) By striking out "subsection 29(3)" in subsection (6) and 

substituting "subsection 29(4)". 

 

I so move. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 30 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 31 to 33 inclusive agreed to. 

 

(1530) 



2604 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1993 

Clause 34 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, I move: 

 

 That section 34(1)(a) of the printed Bill be amended by 

striking out the words "Crown corporation" and substituting 

"Crown corporation, including a corporation in which the 

Government of Saskatchewan owns a majority of shares". 

 

I so move. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 34 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 35 agreed to. 

 

Clause 36 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, I move: 

 

 That section 36 of the printed Bill be amended by striking out 

"subsection (3)" and substituting the following: 

 

 "(3) Section 11 is amended: 

 

  (a) by adding 'section 10.1 or' after 'Notwithstanding'; and 

 

  (b) by adding 'caucus chairperson,' after 'Opposition House 

Leader,' in clause (b)". 

 

I so move. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 36 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 37 agreed to. 

 

Clause 38 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, I move: 

 

 That section 38 of the printed Bill be amended: 

 

 (a) by renumbering it as subsection 38(1); and 

 

 (b) by adding the following subsection after subsection (1): 

 

  "(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of The Members of the 

Legislative Assembly Conflict of Interests Act, 

proceedings may be commenced or continued 

pursuant to that Act with respect to any conduct of a 

member that occurred prior to the coming into force 

of this Act". 

 

I so move. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 38 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 39 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to thank the minister and 

his officials for taking the time to be here to address the 

concerns.  I actually would like to also express my appreciation 

from our side of the House to the Assembly for the time that 

was also given in allowing the officials to sit down with us and 

the time the minister has taken to enter into some open 

discussion on the Bill, even prior to its coming in for second 

and third reading in this Assembly. 

 

I think it was . . . that discussion was fruitful in putting forward 

suggestions that the government and minister and certainly his 

executive could look at so that when we got to this point in 

committee that we were able to move through probably a little 

quicker than we would have otherwise. 

 

So I extend my appreciation for that.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, I want also to thank Mr. 

Moen and Mr. McGovern for their work in connection with this 

Bill.  This work has been ongoing for some time in the 

department and has been very, very difficult - 

_ a difficult project, and a project, I think, that was well done. 

 

I want also to say to the member, Mr. Chair, that we on the 

government side are grateful for the time and attention that the 

opposition has paid to this Bill.  I think it has been strengthened 

by the various proposals that they have made, which, for the 

most part, have been the substance of the House amendments 

that the committee has passed today. 

 

And so I do want to record the excellent cooperation that I and 

my officials have had with members of the official opposition 

and the member from Saskatoon Greystone as we worked our 

way through this.  It was an example of what we can do in this 

House if we work together and try and come up with a piece of 

legislation that meets all of our tests and is to the satisfaction of 

everyone. 

 

Bill No. 90 -- An Act to protect the financial viability of 

NewGrade Energy Inc. 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask at this time that the Minister of 

Justice please introduce the officials who have joined the 

committee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Seated beside 

me is Mr. Don Wilson of the law firm of MacPherson Leslie & 

Tyerman.  Behind Mr. Wilson is Donald R. Ching, who is the 

acting president of the Crown Investments Corporation.  And 

to my right is Darryl Bogdasavich, who is a senior solicitor 

with the Department of Justice. 

 

Clause 1 



June 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2605 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I think 

what we're seeing here in committee on this Bill 90 is an 

unfortunate occurrence.  It certainly is an occurrence that we as 

members of the opposition and indeed the cooperative 

movement throughout Saskatchewan could do without.  

Because fundamentally what is the problem here is that we're 

taking a look at a confrontation that the government is having 

once more over some very, very basic human and civil rights. 

 

And I think it is incumbent upon us as opposition members to 

continue on this struggle of making sure that the government 

does not, for the third time, embark upon a cognizant and 

thought-out and thought-through procedure whereby the basic 

human rights are once more going to be trodden upon as Bill 

90, Mr. Chairman, I would suggest to you, certainly does. 

 

And I'm going to suggest to you, Mr. Chairman, further that the 

government and the Minister of Justice in this case, who is 

obviously going to be taking the lead role here, is aware of that, 

and they are very uncomfortable with this type of legislation.  

And I say that, Mr. Chairman, because, as you get used to this 

House and you take a look at different Bills and so on that are 

before the House, Mr. Chairman, you can tell a lot by just 

simply taking a look at the Bill. 

 

And I'm not talking about reading the Bill in particular.  But 

this particular Bill 90, when I take a look at it, is called An Act 

to protect the financial viability of NewGrade Energy Inc.  And 

what becomes very noticeable is that on the very first page, on 

the very first page we see a number of introductory paragraphs, 

Mr. Chairman.  We see a number of whereases.  The whereases 

that I am referring to are, first of all: "Whereas the Government 

of Saskatchewan and CCRL are the equity sponsors . . . " And 

it continues on.  Then it says:  "And whereas the Government 

of Saskatchewan has invested over $230,000,000 . . ." And it 

continues.  And then it goes on: "And whereas a commission of 

inquiry appointed by the Government of Saskatchewan has 

identified problems . . ." 

 

You know, Mr. Chairman, introductions like that to a Bill are 

like red flags waving in the wind.  Because it sends up the 

notice . . . sends out the notice to everyone who's got any 

interest in the Bill, that oh boy we are a little bit concerned and 

we are uncomfortable about what this Bill is doing.  So 

therefore what are you trying to do in these types of 

introductions is simply justified.  It's an attempt at a 

justification by a government to tell the folks, well really we 

know that it is a cruel, unwarranted Bill, and these really, you 

know, are the reasons why we are doing it.  And then you've 

got your whereases in there. 

 

I think it's a strong sign of nervousness on part of the 

government that indeed they are in peril and that they are on 

tenuous legal grounds in doing this type of thing, and that there 

is a need for justification.  And I think this is a terribly, terribly 

undemocratic Bill.  And 

so do many of the people of this province.  And so do many, in 

particular 240,000 people, in this province as well. 

 

Mr. Chairman, to underscore what I am saying, I want to quote 

from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, June 1 in a letter to the 

editor.  And this writer at that time in the Star-Phoenix . . . and 

I want to read just a few paragraphs of his thoughts.  And he 

says . . . well it's Nolan Andres.  It's a public letter, it was in the 

Star-Phoenix.  So there is the identification of the author of 

this.  And I just want to quote some of the parts of his letter, 

Mr. Chairman. 

 

And he says: 

 

 I recently returned home to Saskatoon after spending several 

months in Central America. While there, I was frustrated, 

enraged and challenged by the tyrannical actions of their 

so-called democratic governments. 

 

 I remember being anxious to return to my home where justice 

had a chance and repression was the stuff of travellers' tales. 

 

 I was not prepared, however, to return to a place where the 

government we so readily elected would stoop to its own 

form of tyranny. 

 

And rather some more irrelevant points that he makes.  But he 

continues on and he says: 

 

 We also see our government refuse FCL's offer . . . give FCL 

a deadline and threaten legislation allowing the government 

to unilaterally rewrite a deal to which it agreed. 

 

 Then (he continues, Mr. Chairman), it has the audacity to 

accuse FCL of not negotiating in good faith. 

 

The concluding quote, Mr. Chairman, that I would like to make 

from this letter is: 

 

 In the same years the government has been repeatedly 

embarrassing itself and the province, FCL has been in the 

running for and winning the Saskatchewan Business of the 

Year award. 

 

Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, while your government is busily 

attacking FCL (Federated Co-operatives Ltd.) for political 

purposes -- and that's no other conclusion that I can draw as I 

try to follow the machinations that you're perpetrating on FCL 

in getting your own way -- while you're busily doing that, we 

have FCL out here as good corporate citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan winning the Saskatchewan Business of the Year 

award, according to Mr. Nolan Andres, as I have been quoting. 

 

And that's what seems so strange to me, Mr. Chairman, Mr. 

Minister, that in a Leader-Post article here from Saskatoon -- 

and unfortunately the date is not comprehensible at this time 

because of poor 



2606 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1993 

duplicating, but it does have the picture of Willard Estey on it.  

And I want to quote the article which says: 

 

 The man appointed to review the operation of the NewGrade 

Upgrader in Regina says it's an unusual inquiry. 

 

 "It's one of the first inquiries in Canadian history where we're 

not hunting down lost money or stolen money or money lost 

through negligence," Willard Estey said Thursday (Mr. 

Chairman). 

 

(1545) 

 

So why is the inquiry being conducted?  My conclusion is that 

it's got nothing to do with money, Mr. Minister.  My 

conclusion is that this is another one of those deals, be it 

Weyerhaeuser or be it the fertilizer plant, Saskferco, or be it the 

upgrader plant with the cooperative movement.  It's something 

that the government prior to you has done and of course all of 

those things must be put into as bad light as possible. 

 

Because I submit to you, Mr. Minister, this has got nothing to 

do with finances as such. 

 

Now a shake-up of some of the finances is always in order, to 

renegotiate some of the financial terms is done by many, many 

corporations all the time.  It's part of fiscal management.  But 

you, Mr. Minister, you and your government now are 

embarking for the third time on something that is inherently 

wrong -- inherently wrong, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Chairman, on May 15, in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, an 

article kind of summarizes . . . and for the sake of expediency I 

will just quickly read some of the parts in it, where it says: 

 

 If the government rams through a piece of legislation 

retroactively rewriting the upgrader agreement, it would mark 

the third time this government has used its legislation might 

to overturn contracts. 

 

Mr. Minister, and that's the basic premise that I have in 

objecting to this Bill.  You're trodding upon the people's rights 

of this province; where nothing that they can do in conjunction 

with a government is sacred because it's all now subject to the 

whim of the political people in this legislature to do what they 

want to unilaterally make decisions that will put the best 

political light on it for them in their interpretation. 

 

But it goes on, Mr. Chairman, to say: 

 

 The first came when Romanow administration eliminated the 

personal services contracts of dozens of provincial 

government workers . . . (That's what you did.) 

 

 Then came the GRIP rewrite. 

 

 After unilaterally changing the GRIP contract of 

Saskatchewan farmers and being challenged in 

court, the government cut the action short, again using 

legislative means. 

 

And saying, we're above the law; you folks have no right to 

question to us.  You have no legal right to do that. 

 

And now we see what is happening with the Co-op upgrader 

deal here, Mr. Chairman, where the same type of an approach 

is being used by the government.  And this article here 

concludes: "What's at stake here is the value of a contract." 

 

Mr. Chairman, I submit to the committee and to the minister 

right now is that what is at stake is the value of contract.  But 

what concerns me the most is the consequences of this type of 

an action.  And you can talk to any businessman you want -- 

and I've talked to some from Ontario, from Alberta, who are 

saying, what is going on in Saskatchewan?  Is it safe for us to 

go there?  Is it safe for us to make a contract in Saskatchewan, 

period, whether it be with the government or whether it be with 

other business functionaries, because we are concerned.  And, 

Mr. Minister, this is the message that I am getting because 

that's the message that we are sending out to potential investors 

in the country of Canada and in fact offshore investors as well. 

 

And that's why the Minister of Economic Development had to 

stand in his place here and listen to StatsCanada come and say 

Saskatchewan is one of the three provinces that is the lowest in 

Canada in terms of economic development.  These kinds of 

things, Mr. Minister, just don't wash in the business world 

because what they're doing is putting at risk the reputation of 

Saskatchewan as being a good place to come in and do 

business, putting at risk, Mr. Minister. 

 

I think we're all familiar with the advertisements that have been 

taking place in the two dailies and I notice even my weeklies.  

Federated Co-op Ltd. is taking on . . . they're taking you on and 

they're not taking this lying down because they too realize that 

this is more than just fiscal management that you're broaching 

upon, and they're listing the concerns that they have.  And they 

are simply saying, your rights, your property, your business, is 

at risk with this government.  That's what they're saying.  That's 

what the cooperative movement, that's what FCL, is saying to 

its 240,000 members. 

 

Now I know lately, Mr. Minister, there have been some of your 

cooperative members that are kicking back on your behalf, that 

are forming organizations now that are going to try to persuade 

the cooperative movement that the government isn't all that 

bad, in fact that it's their management in FCL that is at fault. 

But, Mr. Minister, that's not going to fly with these people. 

 

It's certainly not going to fly, because it says in the 

advertisement that your rights are at risk. 

 

 This legislation puts at risk: the future of CCRL . . . the future 

of retail Co-ops in western Canada 



June 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2607 

(not only in Saskatchewan) . . . (It puts at risk) the Province 

of Saskatchewan's credit rating . . . 

 

And I was just talking about that, the impression, the image, 

and the message that it's sending out. 

 

 Your rights are at risk and action is needed. 

 

Mr. Minister, I could go on on some of these things.  And I 

notice that some of your colleagues are urging me not to 

participate in this debate in committee on this issue.  But, Mr. 

Minister, I am too concerned about what's happening here just 

to let this thing drop.  And I want to make a few points, as I 

have already been making.  And those are not the points that I 

am making, but rather what I'm doing is utilizing, I guess, the 

concerns and the messages that other people have. And I'm 

relaying them, Mr. Chairman, to the committee and through the 

chairman, Mr. Minister, to you and to your government. 

 

We take great . . . or you take and your Premier takes quite a 

bit of glee, I suppose, in quoting Estey all the time.  Use Estey's 

fundamental message, we're being told.  Well you've heard the 

response to that, and that is that you should negotiate, not 

legislate.  Estey says he was that far away from a settlement.  

And if your colleague there, the tourism minister for Medicine 

Hat, had just allowed a little bit more time, then we would have 

had a settlement.  That's the implication, Mr. Chairman, of 

what has been happening here. 

 

And I can draw no other conclusion -- that you purposely did 

not allow enough time for the culmination of that settlement 

because it was not politically expedient.  But, Mr. Minister, the 

other point I want to bring about here is . . . This is from the 

Prince Albert Herald, June 9, 1993.  The headline reads, Mr. 

Minister: Co-op advised to walk away from new upgrader deal. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, who do you think would tell the co-op -- or 

suggest to the co-op, not tell; that's not an appropriate word -- 

but suggest to the co-op that they should walk away from the 

upgrader deal?  Well let's pursue this a little bit, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I'm quoting from this particular article: 

 

 But a report prepared by Deloitte & Touche's Saskatoon's 

office suggests none of the proposals for a new deal the 

government has put forward so far would benefit Federated . . 

.  

 

So none of your proposals are anything positive or probably 

neutral to Federated. 

 

 The Deloitte and Touche report suggested that if anything, 

the government's plans might endanger Federated's 

non-upgrader operations. 

 

Which means the refinery and in fact the entire cooperative 

movement as a result in Saskatchewan . . . no, not only in 

Saskatchewan, across western Canada. 

The article continues, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chairman.  The 

article continues: 

 

 The report was written by Don Gass, the chartered accountant 

who headed the government's Financial Management Review 

Commission. 

 

Mr. Minister, it's your own Don Gass that is saying that about 

that particular report, that individual that you're so fond of 

quoting when it suits your purpose.  But now when he is 

recognizing that there are some inherent dangers within the 

approach that you're taking, the demands that you are making 

on the Federated Co-operatives Ltd. that he is not in agreement 

with, apparently . . . That's what I'm reading into it.  I don't 

want to put words into his mouth, but I don't see what other 

conclusion I could come to. 

 

Mr. Minister, I think what you're going to have to answer to 

this committee is why are you not paying attention to that 

gentleman who wrote your financial review report for you.  

Why are you not listening?  I think these are legitimate 

concerns that you will have to address. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, this Bill is not good.  It is not good.  And I 

could tell you, Mr. Minister, that the government has now 

made it a situation where you have the right to say that if you're 

unhappy with any kind of a situation that you should be able to 

take it to arbitration.  And with that, Mr. Minister, I have no 

problem.  You can take anything to arbitration if you feel that 

something is not within the guidelines or the parameters of 

what would be good for the Saskatchewan taxpayer.  Well 

that's good.  That's fine.  That's dandy.  But when you make a 

determination like that, Mr. Minister, does that mean now that 

the cooperatives will have that same right?  If they are not 

concerned with something, the other side of the equation would 

be equitable and that they would have that same right.  Well, 

Mr. Minister, obviously according to this legislation no, the 

government may but the cooperatives can't. 

 

I'll tell you what's more.  Under this Bill only Don Ching will 

have the right to say what goes to arbitration. 

 

So what else does this Bill do, Mr. Minister?  Well it goes a 

step further.  And it says that Don Ching can refer things to 

arbitration, and then it says Don Ching can conduct the 

arbitration because it doesn't say that it can't, Mr. Minister; 

that's our concern.  We have one individual that can say this 

thing is going to arbitration, and then he will be allowed, 

through that legislation, to actually conduct the arbitration. 

 

In other words, this Bill is like a lawyer appointing himself to 

be the judge over his own case. 

 

Well does the Bill provide for any input into the arbitration 

process by co-op?  No, sir, it does not.  The law literally allows 

the possibility for one man to appoint himself to be the 

arbitrator and that we hear the Premier saying, well trust me.  

Yes, trust me.  There 



2608 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1993 

is, Mr. Chairman, absolutely no trust left by the people of this 

province in this government because of their actions and what 

they're doing basically on a daily basis. 

 

Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I say to you that the co-op 

trusted the Premier when he gave his solemn word in Prince 

Albert that he would not move against the upgrader agreement.  

They trusted him, and now look where it has gotten them.  It is 

now said throughout Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman, that the 

Premier is as good as his word. 

 

Well I want to just draw the attention of the members of this 

committee to what else this Bill contains.  Look at the 

provisions removing the co-op's right to seek justice before the 

courts, Mr. Chairman.  That's what this Bill does.  It would be 

bad enough if the law was to remove those rights in regard to 

the upgrader agreement alone.  And one would expect that 

since the government claims that the purpose is directed toward 

the upgrader agreement.  But then why doesn't it? 

 

(1600) 

 

But the Premier is not willing to stop at eliminating the co-op's 

right under the upgrader agreement.  They go beyond that and 

remove their rights.  And I quote: under any other agreement or 

any other Act or law.  Now listen to that, Mr. Chairman: under 

any other agreement or any other Act or law.  And that's where 

this tyranny comes in here, Mr. Chairman, because that's 

exactly what it has.  Because the co-op has literally hundreds, 

perhaps thousands of agreements across Canada, particularly 

across Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Chairman, by this Bill, those agreements can be void.  

They can be void.  Just in relation to the upgrader itself, I 

would suggest to the suppliers and the consumers of that 

upgrader to be warned, to be alert, because the co-op has been 

relieved of all recourse under your agreements as well.  That's 

what I say to them. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I'm going to submit to you how extreme that is, 

how extreme it is to exempt any organizations, let alone the 

co-op, from the protection of, and here I quote again: they've 

eliminated the protection of the co-op by any other Act or law.  

In other words, there's a blanket statement in this legislation 

saying to co-ops, just in case we didn't catch every little legal 

nook and cranny, we're going to take away any other Act or 

any other law that may have given you protection.  It's an 

all-encompassing Bill.  They remove the application of the law 

to the co-ops. 

 

Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chairman, if it's just about the upgrader 

deal, as the Premier is fond of saying, then why on earth have 

you removed the application of all law, all law, and eliminated 

the effect of all agreements?  That's what you've done with this 

Bill -- any agreement and any type of protection of the law.  

And particularly since we see the Minister of Justice sitting 

now, carrying this Bill, that's a travesty, Mr. 

Chairman, of the democratic process. 

 

I say to the government, if you're unhappy with that deal then 

negotiate; don't legislate.  That's what Don Gass said in as 

many words, said we were almost there.  You could have 

negotiated this thing.  You don't have to legislate it.  But then 

again I guess if you're bent on doing something and it's terribly 

unfair to that particular party that cannot agree to something 

like this, well you say, you either see it our way or we're going 

to legislate.  And with that threat hanging over the cooperative 

movement, you're not going to be coming into a negotiated 

term. 

 

What I'm going to submit to you, Mr. Minister, through the 

Chair, is that if we are talking about something that is not as 

you would have it, a crisis, I am going to submit to you what 

we're talking about here simply is a matter of debt 

restructuring. 

 

Debt restructuring, as I mentioned a few minutes ago, is 

something that is relatively common and is not an unusual 

phenomenon, Mr. Chairman, among major corporations.  We 

see that all the time.  We see that from General Motors; we see 

that from IBM; we see that from CP (Canadian Pacific); we see 

that in Air Canada.  And, Mr. Chairman, I might add, being in 

Saskatchewan here, we even see debt restructuring as an almost 

normal course of business for the farmers in this province now. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, debt restructuring is wise, and there's nothing 

wrong with it under certain circumstances.  But it's not, I'm 

going to say to you, Mr. Minister, the panic situation that the 

Premier and you are trying to make this to be.  There is no 

panic.  There is no particular rush.  The provincial government 

has not had to put a penny of deficiency payments to the 

upgrader for three years. 

 

Now if I'm wrong, Mr. Minister, I want you to get up when you 

have the opportunity, at your earliest opportunity, and correct 

me.  But what I'm saying to you right now, that the provincial 

government has not had to put up a penny in deficiency 

payments in over three years in this particular project.  There is 

no panic.  There is no rush. 

 

And I think, Mr. Chairman, people must understand some of 

the facts about . . . on behalf of the Co-op upgrader specifically 

-- that cash flow has been paying the bills, Mr. Minister.  Cash 

flow has been paying the bills. 

 

The interest rates, the operating costs are being made and, Mr. 

Minister, they are being made without the help of government.  

There are no government funds going into this, although 

admittedly, admittedly the principal is not being reduced.  

There's not enough cash flow, Mr. Chairman, for that.  That 

will be admitted.  And that's certainly not the best situation in 

the world. 

 

But what we're saying to you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, is 

that debt . . . is that it's wise perhaps to consider debt 

restructuring -- we've never been opposed  



June 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2609 

to that -- but not to the extent that you're prepared to force the 

cooperatives to do. 

 

But regardless, Mr. Chairman, the bills are being paid, they are 

being paid, and there is no imminent threat to the upgrader or 

to the taxpayers of this province.  The only threat, I would 

submit to you, that is imminent is the political threat that you 

are gearing up for in your vindictive approach to do away with 

another project of the previous government. 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, I want to spend just a minute now . . . and 

I know the minister is anxious to get on to his feet to do some 

rebuttal.  But, Mr. Chairman, I want you to look at the lengths 

that this Bill goes to to deny what for everyone else are 

considered to be human fundamental rights.  And we can see 

the markings, I believe, of some bitter retribution of members 

opposite. 

 

The Premier's law partner and the patronage appointment -- I'll 

be quite blunt about that -- Don Ching is given the power . . . 

Now the minister's upset when we start doing this.  But, Mr. 

Minister, Don Ching is given the power to unilaterally change 

any part of the agreement by fiat, by decree.  We have the rule 

of decree over the rights of 240,000 co-op members, and that is 

the totalitarian type of an approach that exists. 

 

And I submit to you, Mr. Chairman, that in spite of the 

minister's protestations, that is no exaggeration.  Because I 

want him to get up and prove to me that I'm wrong, that indeed 

there are no such powers for that individual in this Bill.  I want 

you to get up and do that, Mr. Minister, because I'll quote the 

section of the Bill: 

 

 Every decision of the minister . . . is final and conclusive and 

is not open to question or review in any court, and no 

decision . . . by the minister shall be restrained . . . 

 

Now you can listen to that and the back room or the 

back-benchers of the NDP (New Democratic Party) can listen 

to what this Bill is doing.  It says: every decision, not open to 

question.  And that is an absurdity in this legislative process, 

and the people back there are sitting and they are accepting 

that. 

 

Now I'm going to suggest to you, Mr. Chairman, that regardless 

of how members opposite protest, I say that any provision that 

says a minister may make a unilateral decision about absolutely 

everything and furthermore that those decisions cannot be 

questioned, is committing tyranny.  It boils down to that, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

And I'm going to repeat what I alluded to before.  I don't  . . . I 

say to you, Mr. Chairman, and to you, Mr. Minister, that this 

Bill is not about the upgrader agreement, and the contents of 

the Bill itself prove that fact.  I think, quite frankly, that this is 

an indication of the character of some members of the 

government who are willing to take their political retribution to 

this extent. 

Even when the government eliminated the rights of the 

government employees that I talked to you about before in the 

article, when it eliminated their rights to seek justice in the 

courts, it did not include such a totalitarian provision such as 

this.  Even when you folks across the way cancelled the 

contracts of 60,000 farmers and eliminated their right to go to 

court for protection, there was no such totalitarian clause such 

as this. 

 

And even when the government day after day brings forward 

laws that removes people's rights to be free from arbitrary 

search and seizure, even when they give NDP appointees the 

power to enter your property, search your property, remove 

your property -- all without a warrant -- even as they keep 

passing such laws, they restrict themselves to the 

search-and-seizure power and do not include such a totalitarian 

clause around which I have been construing my remarks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, quite candidly, this Bill creates a dictator in the 

province of Saskatchewan, a single person whose word will be 

beyond the reach of the judicial system, whose decisions, Mr. 

Minister, I say to you and I . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You 

say it's not fair.  You bet it.  That's exactly the point.  This is 

exactly the whole problem here. 

 

The Bill, Mr. Minister -- I'm glad you have agreed -- is not fair.  

Now I'm putting your words in your mouth but that's the point 

-- the Bill is not fair.  We're giving power to an individual, 

undreamt of, who has literally dictatorial powers. 

 

Now I want you to get up and refute that, Mr. Minister, and 

you will be getting that opportunity.  But you show me in the 

Bill whatever clause you want to that is going to refute what I 

have been saying about the power, the end power that this 

individual will have.  There's no recourse.  Decisions made by 

that man, sir, cannot be questioned, cannot be restrained.  

That's what the Bill says.  Now what do you mean I'm not 

being fair?  That's what the Bill says. 

 

And I challenge you to show any instance where such a 

regulation exists in any Bill across Canada.  Isn't that, Mr. 

Minister of Justice, part of a legal terminology . . . is that you 

will go out and you will find precedents for things or you will 

show well we can do this here because in A, B, C, and D's 

jurisdictions these things are.  Now I would be interested and I 

look forward, Mr. Minister, as part of your response to be able 

to cite the A, B, C, and D, these jurisdictions have exactly this 

in it.  And I think you're going to be hard put; you're going to 

be hard put to do that. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I think on this precedent business -- and I'm 

trying to cut my time a little bit shorter here than I normally 

would have taken -- but I think the thing that comes closest, the 

thing that comes closest to the precedents that you will be able 

to recite for members of this committee are The Crown 

Employment Contracts Act and the GRIP (gross revenue 

insurance program) contracts cancellation Act.  Those may be 

two precedents that come close. 



2610 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1993 

Those may come close. 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I'm going to repeat that the 

Bill is not about whether the NewGrade is a good deal, a bad 

deal, or somewhere in between as an indifferent deal.  If you 

want to renegotiate it, you can.  And that's exactly what Judge 

Estey told you to do: to negotiate, not legislate.  I don't think -- 

and I'm not going to put words in his mouth -- but I don't think 

the judge would agree with what you're doing right now. 

 

(1615) 

 

Just as we found that Judge Muir condemned the government 

for taking his recommendations on labour legislation and 

distorting those recommendations, I wonder if we don't find 

that as Judge Muir told you as Minister of Labour . . . or told 

the Minister of Labour, I should say, do not try to use my 

words to justify your deeds.  And I think maybe that's exactly 

what we're having here. 

 

The Premier is fond -- and I hear it question period after 

question period -- saying that he talks about this spirit of Estey.  

That's the phrase that he uses, Mr. Chairman: the spirit of 

Estey.  And I don't think that that spirit of Estey is nowhere 

near to what I've been talking about now about the attack of the 

fundamental democratic rights of the individuals of the 

province of Saskatchewan.  The principles of justice are not 

being well served in this particular Bill, Mr. Chairman. 

 

I have a number of questions.  I think what I'm going to do now 

is give the minister an opportunity to answer some and to rebut 

some of the arguments that I have been making.  So I'm going 

to give the minister an opportunity now, and then I perhaps will 

turn it over to my leader who is anxious to get his say in as 

well. 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, if the minister wants to respond to some of 

my concerns and alleviate the deep feeling that I have that there 

is something very fishy in this whole thing, I will be looking 

forward to his remarks. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, and to the member, the 

member took advantage of the opportunity, while he was on his 

feet, to raise a very large number of issues.  And I will not 

attempt to deal with all of them in the expectation that if the 

member really expects me to deal with some of these matters, 

he will come back to it later on as we consider the Bill clause 

by clause. 

 

But there are a number of things that I do want to say to the 

member and through him to the Assembly and to the public of 

Saskatchewan.  It has been the position of the government from 

a very early stage that we want to negotiate with Federated 

Co-operatives Ltd. respecting a number of issues surrounding 

the upgrader.  They know what these issues are.  We've made it 

perfectly plain to them.  And we have been pressing this 

position on them for a long, long time. 

 

Finally, in an effort to break the impasse . . . Let me just pause 

there and say what I mean by impasse.  What I mean is this.  

Our efforts to negotiate were responded to very, very 

negatively.  Federated indicated on a 

number of occasions and in a number of ways that they were 

not interested in negotiating any of the issues that we put 

forward with respect to the upgrader and the operation of the 

upgrader. 

 

They made that very clear.  They couldn't have made it more 

clear.  And all of our efforts to get something going with 

respect to a discussion of these issues and a negotiation of these 

issues was met with an exceedingly negative response. 

 

Now it pains me to say that because of the respect I have for 

the organization and for so many of the individuals who are 

senior officers in the organization.  But it is a fact that they 

have simply refused to enter into any meaningful negotiations 

with respect to the issues that we have felt deserve discussion 

and negotiation around the upgrader. 

 

And it's a very frustrating experience for anybody to encounter 

when you simply cannot sit down and have discussions about 

issues, particularly with respect to a partner of yours in a deal 

as large and as expensive and as complicated as the Co-op 

upgrader.  When your partner simply says, I'm not prepared to 

discuss any of the matters that you identify as issues, the 

situation is very, very frustrating to say the least. 

 

So in due course the government enlisted the assistance of Mr. 

Justice Estey.  And he came here and he worked for five and 

half months.  He was appointed under The Public Inquiries 

Act, and certainly it was an option available to him to have a 

public inquiry and dig into all of the facts surrounding the deal 

and what's wrong with the deal and what's right with the deal 

and submit a report.  If he had done that, he would have been 

acting in the style of commissions of inquiry, and there are 

countless examples of that process having been followed. 

 

Mr. Justice Estey, however, chose to approach this as a 

mediation where he would attempt to get the two sides together 

and resolve some of the issues that he identifies as issues that 

ought to be dealt with in order for this upgrader to be a 

functioning, viable, financially viable facility. 

 

He spent five and a half months in that role as mediator -- five 

and a half months -- at the end of which he has to report that he 

is not able to mediate a settlement, that he is not able to 

conclude negotiations with respect to the issues involved.  And 

he writes the report, which he has written and which I'm sure 

all members of this House have read. 

 

Following the receipt of that report -- and members here know 

the detail of what happened -- the government attempted over 

and over again to initiate discussions with Federated based 

upon what Estey had to say.  And we tried again and again to 

get something going.  Negotiations, discussions, call it what 

you will, some exchange of ideas, some negotiations about the 

matters that Mr. Justice Estey, who has spent five and half 

months out of his life looking into this, identifies as issues that 

ought to be addressed and resolved in order for this upgrader to 



June 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2611 

work. 

 

And the answer that we got was, no, no.  In one way or another 

the response was always negative.  And so we're at our wits' 

end.  What does one do, faced with this kind of a situation? 

 

Now members opposite, some of the members opposite have 

direct hands-on experience with negotiation with respect to this 

upgrader and they know how difficult the situation has been in 

the past.  I referred to some of that in my second reading 

speech.  I refer to it again today.  We have a partner who is 

unwilling to sit down with us and negotiate with respect to 

issues that we think are important and that Mr. Justice Estey 

considers to be important. 

 

But I want to say to the members opposite and to every 

member of this Assembly: we want to negotiate; we want to 

negotiate.  We are prepared to negotiate starting right now, 

starting any time at all.  Start tomorrow morning, any time.  

We'll go to  Saskatoon to do it.  We'll do it here.  We'll go to 

Timbuctoo to do it, but we want to do it.  That has been our 

position throughout and it remains our position. 

 

I want to say that to the member because that's very, very 

important, because over and over again we hear you asking us 

questions which seem to be predicated upon the idea that we 

refuse to negotiate.  We're legislating instead of negotiating.  

We don't want to do that.  We regret being here with this 

legislation. 

 

But what do you do when your partner won't negotiate with 

respect to the issues?  You've got to do something.  You can't 

just sit there and write letters and make phone calls saying, 

please negotiate, and your partner won't negotiate.  So here we 

are. 

 

Now the member, Mr. Chairman, used a number of expressions 

that he was reading from, that he was reading from 

advertisements and letters to the editor.  And I was glad he did 

that because it . . . I wanted to deal with that point. 

 

There is so much rhetoric being used with respect to this 

particular problem that has just blown the whole situation out 

of proportion and gotten us away from what is really at stake 

here, what is really at issue, and what this Bill is all about. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Which is rights and freedoms. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- It's not . . .  Well it is not about . . . The 

member says, rights and freedoms.  And I say to the member 

with great respect:  it is not about rights and freedoms.  It is not 

about rights and freedoms; it is about a deal that has gone 

wrong.  It's about a deal that Mr. Justice Estey looked at and 

reported in the terms that he reported. 

 

And I don't have to repeat that to the member.  He's read 

Estey's report and he knows the way in which Estey 

characterized the deal.  It just doesn't work the way it is.  It 

can't work the way it is; changes are necessary. 

So this Bill is not about rights and freedoms.  And I hope to be 

able to demonstrate that to the member so that he doesn't have 

to take his feet again, so that he can be persuaded by the force 

of my logic that this is not about rights and freedoms. 

 

The member read from a letter talking about tyranny and 

characterized this as some kind of a political attack or political 

agenda by the government, and characterized it in terms like 

that that are just totally wrong, just totally out to lunch.  What 

is at stake here is, as I said, a facility that doesn't work, an 

agreement that doesn't work.  And all this legislation seeks to 

do in a very modest way is to try and make parts of it workable.  

And let me now get into that. 

 

What does this Bill do?  Well the first thing this Bill does is 

address the question of arbitration.  You would think, looking 

at the upgrader agreement, at the operating agreement, that that 

wouldn't be a problem.  Because it is clearly spelled out in the 

agreement that disputes between the partners, between the 

government and Federated, or CIC (Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan) and CCRL are to be decided by 

arbitration -- plain, simple, commercial arbitration. It's an idea 

that's included in practically all commercial deals. 

 

And it should work.  It's a simple, relatively inexpensive 

process, and it works.  And it works in hundreds and thousands 

of situations.  And it ought to work and it ought to . . . It ought 

to work here, except it doesn't.  And it doesn't because of the 

rather peculiar way that they have structured the reference of 

disputes from the board of directors to the arbitration process.  

And the problem is that it takes a three-quarter vote of the 

board of directors to refer a dispute.  CCRL have half of the 

directors on the board of directors, so simply with their 

directors voting no, no dispute can ever be referred to 

arbitration.  And that has been the experience up until very 

recently from 1989. 

 

So although there were disputes building up, and I think four or 

five of them built up, the board of -- four of them had been 

built up -- the board of directors simply refused to refer them.  

So these disputes sit there.  I mean, they can't be dealt with.  

There's nothing that can be done. 

 

So that part in the agreement just didn't work because of that 

one little glitch.  It was a question of referring the dispute to the 

arbitration process. 

 

All this Bill does in that respect is to remove that little glitch.  

That's all is does, Mr. Member.  It removes that little glitch. 

 

Now this is the arbitration process.  I'll get onto the other parts 

of the Bill in a moment, but so far as arbitration is concerned, 

that's all it does.  The arbitration process in the agreement 

remains intact except as regards the provisions in the Bill that 

clear up the glitch that I was talking about earlier. 

 

If members will take the time to compare section 3 of 



2612 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1993 

the Bill with the arbitration procedure spelled out in the 

operating agreement, you will see the extent to which we have 

maintained the integrity of the process of arbitration as spelled 

out in the agreement. 

 

(1630) 

 

We have only affected it to the extent that we have clarified 

that question of the reference of the dispute and the associated 

matter of what happens when the matter gets to arbitration, 

who carries it and who represents who.  Because you got this 

peculiar situation where CCRL are running the refinery next 

door, they're managing the upgrader facility, they're an equal 

partner in the ownership and operation of the upgrader, and 

they are, at the same time, participating as board of directors in 

the referring of arbitrations, as I mentioned earlier. 

 

This section 3 with respect to arbitration, as I said, removes the 

glitches, and that's all it does. 

 

If you lay section 3 alongside the provisions for arbitration in 

the operating agreement, you will see very clearly that we have 

gone to every length we can to maintain the integrity of the 

agreement as it relates to arbitrations.  And I point out to the 

members that CCRL have the same access to that arbitration 

process as has the government and they will continue to have 

that same access and our members have never, never denied 

CCRL the opportunity to refer any dispute to arbitration and 

they will not do so.  They will not do so.  The agreement will 

continue to operate and operate as it should, as between 

partners, Mr. Chairman, and to the member. 

 

You and I were partners in a business and we were to refer any 

dispute to arbitration, we would refer each other's disputes to 

arbitration; it would be as simple as that.  For some reason, in 

this agreement that hasn't worked, and clearly Mr. Justice Estey 

points out that it doesn't work, and the members opposite know 

from their own experience that it doesn't work, and it is 

important to address it. 

 

Now it is true -- and I've said this in my second reading speech 

in the most positive terms -- that Federated have unblocked the 

process so that the existing arbitrations are in fact . . . or the 

existing disputes are referred to arbitration, and that's great.  

And as long as that continues, this portion of the Act will not 

be proclaimed.  We won't use this unless and until a problem 

arises such as the ones that we've experienced with the four 

disputes that are there now. 

 

And we hope that we will never have to use it.  But in the light 

of the experience in the last three and a half, four years, it is a 

subject that ought to be addressed.  It's a problem that never 

should have arisen, and it should not arise in the future because 

there simply has to be a way of resolving disputes.  And that 

should be in accordance with mechanisms set out in the 

agreement, namely, arbitration. 

 

So when you deal with that aspect of the Bill, Mr. Chair, and 

Mr. Member, when you deal with the 

arbitration aspect of the Bill, we are not overturning any 

contract.  We are not overturning any contract.  We are not 

reneging on a contract.  We are not upsetting a contract.  We're 

not doing any of the things that have been suggested by you in 

your questions during question period and in your remarks 

outside the House and indeed the remarks of Federated in their 

campaign outside the House.  This is not reneging on any 

contract. 

 

This is a question of making a provision for dispute settlement 

already included in the agreement a workable functioning 

process -- working, functioning procedure. 

 

The second thing that the Bill does has to do with the cash 

shortfalls, with the losses.  And as Mr. Justice Estey has 

pointed out, the agreement is silent on that point; the agreement 

is silent on the question of who bears the losses. 

 

We have said over and over again, and the government was . . . 

this was the position of the government before the last election 

that there is nothing in the agreement that says that the 

government has to bear the losses, that the government has to 

bear losses. 

 

And Mr. Justice Estey makes this clear in his report that there 

is no such provision.  And his solution to it, his solution to the 

problem is that the party should share the losses equally -- the 

whole thrust of the agreement would lead you to the conclusion 

that if the parties had thought about it during negotiations, if 

Federated had thought about it and if the government had 

thought about it, their conclusion would have been that the 

losses should be shared equally.  And that's the conclusion that 

Mr. Justice Estey came to and that would seem to be the fair 

conclusion having regard to the agreement as a whole. 

 

So we're not upsetting any contract when we provide in this 

Bill for how losses will be covered.  We are not upsetting any 

contract.  We're not overturning any contract.  We're not 

reneging on any contract.  We're not affecting any contractual 

relations.  We're not doing any of the things of which the 

opposition has accused or of which Federated has accused us.  

There is nothing in those two provisions that interfere or renege 

or upset or overturn a contract.  We have not done that. 

 

Now we come now to section 9.  And with respect to section 9, 

members will note that what is being provided against there, 

the main thing that is being provided against is what happens if 

it becomes necessary to protect the financial viability of 

NewGrade, to protect the financial viability of NewGrade. 

 

And the risk there, as I tried to explain in my second reading 

speech, was that something may happen that would threaten the 

continued operation of the upgrader.  Now members will recall 

what I said then, and I won't repeat it.  But I will say that the 

Bill goes on in section 10 to require that the minister, in 

exercising 



June 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2613 

these powers under section 9, will have to: ". . . lay before the 

Assembly the order in council and a report outlining the 

reasons for and the circumstances surrounding the order in 

council." 

 

Now that is a power to modify the agreement.  No question.  It 

is a power to amend or supplement the agreement.  No question 

about that.  But it is a power that is intended to be acted on 

only in the event that the financial viability of NewGrade is 

threatened. 

 

And so I submit to you in all fairness, that is not an overturning 

of contracts.  That is not interfering with individual rights and 

freedoms.  That is not doing anything except doing what we 

ought to do in order to protect the substantial interest of the 

province in that particular facility; to protect our large 

investment; to protect our future liability. 

 

Now I would think that that would be sufficient to say on that 

point, and that the member should realize that none of the 

provisions in this Bill do any of the things that the member has 

been accusing us of doing.  There is no tyranny, there is no 

tyranny in any of those three concepts.  There is no attack on 

FCL in any of those concepts.  There is no attack on the co-op 

movement in any of those three concepts.  There is no 

overturning of contracts. 

 

It is, I submit, a minimal response.  It is a minimal response 

from a government which is doing what any responsible 

government in this province would do, and that is act to protect 

the interests of taxpayers in this large and complicated and very 

important facility.  It is, I submit, something that the members 

opposite would be doing themselves in the event that somehow 

or other they had been successful in being re-elected in 1991. 

 

No responsible government can deal with the situation 

described by Mr. Justice Estey in his report.  No responsible 

government can do that.  I would just remind members 

opposite the effect of what I said in my second reading speech, 

and that is that no responsible government would have entered 

into this agreement in the first place.  It was a bad agreement, 

and it's an agreement that any responsible government would 

have to try and change. 

 

Now we wanted to change it by negotiation.  We still want to 

do that.  We want to get on with it.  We want to get serious 

about it.  We don't want to have to use any of these powers.  

We want to work it all out. 

 

But you can't negotiate with yourself.  In order to negotiate, 

you've got to have the other party to negotiation sitting there at 

the table with you, prepared to discuss the issues and to discuss 

them in good faith and try and work it out.  And that simply 

hasn't happened.  And every, every answer that we've got from 

Federated with respect to these requests has been treated in a 

negative way. 

 

I want to say parenthetically that there have been discussions 

going on in the last few days at the level of officials with 

respect to matters that I think are 

properly described as technical. And they're not right on the 

main issue, but they're the kind of discussions that should take 

place in order to properly deal with the issue. 

 

So we're not throwing cold water on what's happening right 

now.  We think it's encouraging, and we want those 

negotiations to continue and to escalate so that we can come to 

grips with the very real issues that are at stake here. 

 

So if those negotiations blossom into real negotiations dealing 

with the issues, no one would be happier than the Government 

of Saskatchewan, no one would be happier.  And let's hope that 

that's how this situation does play out because that's what we 

want, that's what you want, that's what the people of this 

province want, that's what the co-op members in this province 

want, and in all logic it is what should happen. 

 

And we stand ready and able and anxious to get on with those 

negotiations.  And if our partner will only agree and address 

these questions at the negotiating table, we will do that and we 

will be more than happy to. 

 

I have to address . . . and I'm sorry to be taking so much time 

with this, Mr. Chair, but there were many, many questions in 

the member's presentation.  He dealt at some length with the 

question of justice and access to the courts.  And this is a very 

complex matter that has received some attention in this House 

already in the Premier's Estimates, but which I have to try and 

address this afternoon. 

 

First of all, I want to say, Mr. Chair, that where the member 

talks about this Bill taking away CCRL's right to sue, he is 

mistaken.  It does not have the effect.  Section 12 does not -- 

and I repeat this to the member who's shaking his head -- 

Section 12 does not take away CCRL's right to sue any party to 

a NewGrade agreement respecting matters that arise except if 

the dispute arises out of the enactment of this Bill or the 

application of this Bill. 

 

Any other issue, any other issue that arises with respect to the 

relationship surrounding this upgrader that could go to court 

before this Bill is passed, can continue to go to court.  Any 

cause of action that exists apart from this Act continues, and it 

is not taken away. 

 

Now if this has a familiar ring for members opposite, it is 

because we discussed this same question in December of 1991 

when we were dealing with the government employment 

contracts Act, because we had a similar debate at that time.  

And this is the same kind of an idea that pertains here.  And it 

was difficult to explain and to understand at that time, and it is 

difficult to explain at this time because I realize it's very 

technical.  But that is the effect of it. 

 

The other arm to this that was touched on by the Opposition 

House Leader is what we call the privative clause, and that is 

section 16 of the printed Bill.  And I just want to say for the 

record what this is about.  The provision says that: 



2614 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1993 

Every decision of the minister pursuant to this Act and 

every certificate filed by the minister pursuant to this Act 

is final and conclusive and is not open to question or 

review in any court . . . 

 

(1645) 

 

And that is a provision that applies to administrative tribunals 

and decision-making apparatuses in government across this 

country in countless situations -- absolutely countless.  It 

applies, for that matter, to boards of arbitration in most 

jurisdictions.  It applies to the National Energy Board and all of 

the federal regulatory structures, and it applies to the 

Saskatchewan regulatory structures. And members opposite 

passed such provisions with respect to decisions that had to be 

made within government over and over. 

 

It is a well understood and a very limited concept in Canadian 

law.  It is limited by hundreds, even thousands of decisions of 

superior courts right across this country, right up to and 

including the Supreme Court of Canada in case after case. 

 

And what it means simply is this. The courts will not interfere 

with the decisions of the decision-making body unless -- and 

this is important -- unless the decision that is made is outside 

the jurisdiction of that particular body.  That's how it applies. 

 

Now members will know that I had the pleasure of meeting 

about 15 Westfair Foods employees in my office yesterday.  

They were there to talk to me chiefly about a decision of Mr. 

Justice Barclay of the Court of Queen's Bench.  Mr. Justice 

Barclay was considering a decision of the Labour Relations 

Board.  The Labour Relations Board's decisions are protected 

by exactly this kind of a clause; it's word for word the same as 

section 16(1).  Is exactly the same kind of protection there, and 

yet Mr. Justice Barclay overturned the ruling of the Labour 

Relations Board providing for the payment of partial wages 

because he found that the board did not have the jurisdiction or 

the right to make that particular order. 

 

And that's all this is.  It's not some magic new prescription for 

protecting decisions that are going to be made under this Act.  

This is just the normal course. 

 

And the point behind it is this.  We are saying in this Act that 

the minister is responsible in accordance with the traditions and 

the legal framework of ministerial . . . of the kind of 

government that we have -- parliamentary democracy and 

ministerial responsibility.  That minister is responsible.  

Through that minister, the whole government is responsible.  

That minister and that government have to report to this 

Assembly in respect to their administration of this Act and 

have to ultimately report to the people of this province.  And 

that's all this has to say. 

 

These are not decisions for the court to make.  The court is not 

going to decide any of the things that are set out in this Act for 

the minister to decide.  It is the 

minister that is responsible for deciding that.  And we do not 

want, I repeat, we do not want the courts to substitute their 

judgement for the judgement of the minister.  It is the minister 

who is responsible and not the courts.  And that's all we're 

providing here. 

 

And the check is that if the minister decides something which 

he does not have a power to decide, does not have jurisdiction 

to decide, then the aggrieved party can go to the courts and get 

an order quashing that decision, and this section 16 will have 

no protection for the minister in respect of such an order made, 

as I say, without jurisdiction to make it. 

 

So it is simply not an issue.  And if the members will examine 

those sections carefully and recall, in the case of section 12, the 

discussion we had in relation to the Act passed in December 

1991 and the information that I've given them with respect to 

the application of section 16, then I think we do not have a 

problem.  But I say again it is quite wrong for members 

opposite to be characterizing these sections as somehow taking 

away the legal rights of people, of interfering with their rights 

and freedoms.  It does no such thing.  It does no such thing.  It 

is a very limited number of ideas. 

 

And I hope we don't have to go through the whole 1991 

argument all over again.  I'm prepared to do it.  I'll stay here as 

long as I have to to do it.  But the plain fact is that no one's 

legal rights are being interfered with.  Anyone who had a legal 

right prior to the enactment of this Bill continues to have a 

legal right.  Anyone who has a legal right that does not arise 

from the . . . a claim that does not arise from the enactment or 

the application of this Act continues to have that right.  And 

that's the plain and simple fact of the matter. 

 

And so the member's idea that this is somehow interfering with 

democracy as we have known it and the running of the 

operation of our system based upon the rule of law in this 

province and in this country, they're just plainly wrong. 

 

I want to say something just finally about the member's 

arguments with respect to the financing of the project.  And the 

arguments seem to be that nothing was very wrong, that the 

situation was working pretty well, and that there was no cause 

for the government to be concerned.  And I simply want to say 

that that is not the case.  I want to say that the operation of the 

upgrader is close to the line.  That's obvious from the analysis 

of Mr. Justice Estey in his report.  It is also the fact, and I think 

that members opposite know it to be the fact.  This facility is 

operating close to the line.  It wouldn't take much of a blip; it 

wouldn't take much of a blip; it wouldn't take much of an event 

or occurrence in order to throw the viability of that project into 

grave, imminent danger. 

 

There is simply insufficient cash flow to handle the project.  It 

doesn't matter how you cut it or how you slice it, with the 

present debt structure and the present operations of that facility, 

there just simply isn't enough cash flow to make it work. 



June 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2615 

Now what could be simpler than that?  We know that.  

Federated know it.  You know it.  The province knows it.  Now 

what in the world is a government supposed to do when it's 

faced with a situation like that, where there is simply 

insufficient cash flow to handle the project?  Are we just to sit 

back and let it spiral down and down and down the drain until 

the cataclysmic event happens and the whole project collapses?  

Is that how a responsible government should behave?  Is that 

how we should treat this? 

 

I think the answer is clearly no.  We have to act.  Any 

responsible government would have to act.  You, in our 

position, would have to act.  And so we are.  We're acting, 

we're trying to act, in a measured and appropriate way.  But to 

suggest that we're embarked here on some kind of political 

exercise, on some kind of an exercise that isn't based upon 

reality and the facts -- the real, base facts with respect to that 

upgrader -- is not fair and not true. 

 

I want to, just as I'm sitting down, say to the member of 

Rosthern that you should attack me all you like and attack the 

Premier and attack any of Her Majesty's ministers who are 

sitting in this House and are able to stand up and defend 

themselves; but I don't think it's appropriate and I don't think 

it's in accord with the traditions of this House to attack a public 

servant, particularly one who is here for the service of the 

committee, bringing advice and knowledge to the committee. 

 

I say that with respect; the member knows how much I do 

respect him.  But I have to say this, that in my experience it is 

not in accordance with the traditions of this House for us to be 

attacking public servants who are not able to rise and defend 

themselves.  Let's attack each other.  I'm responsible for the 

actions of that public servant.  There are other ministers here 

who are directly responsible.  The Premier is here and he is 

directly responsible.  Attack us, but not the public servant. 

 

I'm sorry to have to raise that but I think it is something that I 

hold as a very important principle and I couldn't sit down 

without addressing that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- If the member's got a short comment . 

. . I gather we're going to Committee of Finance at 7, so if 

you've got a short comment, but we might as well rise before 5.  

I'll let you go ahead with the short comment, though. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well thank you, Mr. Chairman, that's awfully 

nice of you to give me a short comment here.  But I wasn't 

going to get up at all, and defer to my leader.  But, Mr. 

Minister, I don't like attacking individuals.  I don't make a habit 

of doing that, but when it comes down to something as 

substantive as a Bill like the NewGrade and the individual that 

is involved, I can say nothing else except that it's crass politics 

that is involved, why that individual is there to begin with. 

 

Now don't . . . it's the same thing as if Jack Messer was sitting 

in beside there or in Crown Corps . . . 

An Hon. Member: -- Or George Hill. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Or George Hill, for that matter.  There we've 

got it.  That, Mr. Chairman, is the fundamental . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . I'm glad, Mr. Chairman, that I have the 

Premier's attention.  There sits . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  Order.  I'll ask 

members to come to order and allow the hon. member for 

Rosthern to make his comments. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I say 

to the Premier and I say to the Minister of Justice that what I 

see sitting in front of me now is what used to be a fairly good 

law firm in this province.  Mr. Chairman, I think it's rather 

ironic that the law firm -- can I quote a law firm? -- of Mitchell, 

Taylor and Ching . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Romanow and Ching. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- And Romanow and Ching as well.  There they 

are.  It's the only law firm in the history of this province that is 

defunct because they are all sitting in the legislature of 

Saskatchewan, either duly elected as the Premier and the 

Minister of Justice, or those two get together and pull their 

crony in now to head this. 

 

Mr. Minister, this sounds ironic.  I'm not attacking the 

individual as an individual, but rather in the position of a 

political appointment.  And you, Mr. Minister, are exactly the 

man who stood up in this legislature and said -- and I'm sure 

that those words have come back to haunt you -- that we have 

not made one political appointment as a government. 

 

Now that has come back to haunt you on numerous times, I'm 

sure, Mr. Minister.  And that is why I say that you have given 

your political appointment to this particular position.  And you 

have given him inordinate powers that no other individual in 

this province has ever had to run afoul of the contract that has 

been duly signed by this government, the federal government, 

and the cooperative movement within the province. 

 

And now you are deciding unilaterally, oh, that's another one of 

the previous administration's doings that we've got to try to 

discredit -- as I'm sure you will Saskferco, as I'm sure you will 

Weyerhaeuser in due course.  I mean these are things that are 

coming.  These things are coming.  So therefore now you're . . . 

It amazes me why you will take this kind of an approach 

against a cooperative movement in the province -- the 

cooperative movement. 

 

Mr. Premier, I say to you that there were cost overruns because 

of fire.  But ever since that cost overrun, it has not cost the 

province of Saskatchewan one thin dime.  The upgrader is 

carrying itself.  Operating costs are being met.  They are being 

met on a daily basis.  Interest payments are being made.  Mr. 

Premier, that's the reality.  That is the reality on an ongoing 

basis. 

 

I would admit one thing to you, Mr. Premier.  I would 



2616 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1993 

admit to you that the principal is not being paid down, the 

principal is not being paid down because the differential isn't 

big enough.  What's the differential right now?  Somewhere 

around $8? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- 5.85 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Okay, so it's 5.85.  And in spite of that, the 

operating costs and interest costs are being met.  Now what if, 

and it will happen, the differential goes to $12, to $14 . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . He says, what if it goes to 4? 

 

What kind of an optimist are you, Mr. Premier?  That has not 

happened.  We have to work from the premise under which 

we're working right now, and that is that there is not a thin 

dime, there is not a thin dime being paid out by the province at 

all.  The taxpayers are not. 

 

Mr. Premier, what I'm trying to say to you is, there is no rush.  

It's politically motivated.  Mr. Estey said, we were that far to an 

agreement.  Then you pulled the minister of tourism for 

Medicine Hat out of the game and you put in the Minister of 

Justice to put a dastardly deed like this through this legislature, 

Mr. Premier. 

 

And that is what we are objecting to and that's why we're 

saying, let's slow this thing down, grow up, go back to the 

negotiating table without the gun to the head of the cooperative 

movement of this province and sit down and do a good job of 

that. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, being past 5 o'clock, I call 5 o'clock. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 

 


