




















































Hansard: April 13, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 945 

 April 13, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the other 

members of the Assembly an old colleague of mine from 

university, Gerald Langner, who I think is the principal of 

LCBI, the Lutheran Collegiate Bible Institute, at Outlook, but 

is for sure the choral director there. 

 

It was delightful on our way to the House now to hear much 

more harmonious a sound than often arises from here as we 

were coming and I want to thank him and his students, the 

LCBI concert choir, for their contribution to a wonderful 

atmosphere here and welcome to the House. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also on behalf of 

my colleague, the member from Arm River, would like to 

welcome the group that are in the gallery today. Mr. Muirhead 

couldn't be with us today and he just wished to pass on his 

regards to the students and their director from Outlook, 

Saskatchewan, and I would echo the words of the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose that it certainly is a nice melody to hear in the 

legislature on Tuesday. Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Yes, I'd like to introduce two 

guests. My sons, Alan and William, who are off school this 

week and have been down yesterday and today trying to get 

over the sadness of not being able to go to school by seeing the 

lights of the big city. And I know they're looking forward to 

their bus trip back to Saskatoon today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 

introduce to the Assembly through you, a group of ladies who 

are here. They're wearing white ribbons signifying their 

concern regarding some of the legislation that is going to be 

coming forward . . . or is brought forward in this House. And 

we'd like to welcome them to the Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Hospital Budget Allocations 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question this afternoon is to the Minister of Health. Madam 

Minister, I understand that you will be announcing today, 

perhaps even as I am speaking, the 

budgets for the hospitals in the Midwest Health District. 

Madam Minister, will you announce the date that you will be 

releasing the 1993-94 operating budgets for the other rural 

hospitals in Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There have 

been a number of hospitals who have been notified as to their 

operating budgets already. And the Department of Health is 

meeting with hospitals throughout the province and giving 

them information as to their '93-94 budgets. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Madam Minister. It would be 

interesting to have an understanding of why you're going 

piecemeal around the provinces, picking here and choosing 

there as to who gets their budgets and who don't. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, will the eight hospitals in the Midwest 

Health District have the opportunity to determine how this 

funding is to be distributed or have you already made that 

decision for them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to Midwest, 

it's my understanding that the Department of Health is meeting 

with the Midwest board today, will be telling them what the 

budget allocations are, and there will be consultation with the 

board and representatives from the facilities within the 

Midwest district. It's my understanding that this meeting is 

taking place today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. From that answer 

then, Madam Minister, would just confirm that they will have 

sole discretionary powers within that budget to spend as they 

would then like to and feel the need for? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, the Midwest board will be 

funded globally, and it will also be advised of the department's 

guidelines with respect to hospital funding. It will also be . . . 

have to meet provincial standards and deliver services in an 

adequate fashion throughout the district. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 

can you confirm that they will have discretionary powers 

within that global budget? Or are you saying that they will have 

to be operating within the parameters of your guidelines — the 

department's guideline — is that correct? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



946 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1993 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, there are provincial 

standards that have to be met with respect to providing health 

care services within a district. The Midwest district will be 

expected to do that. The Midwest district will also be advised 

what funding is available for each of the institutions within the 

district and will be expected to operate in accordance with 

those sort of guidelines. 

 

The Midwest district however will be funded globally, Mr. 

Speaker, and will be making decisions for the district as to 

where they want to provide specific services. They will do a 

needs assessment to determine how many acute care beds are 

needed, for example, how many long-term care, and through 

discussions with communities will be coming forward with 

suggestions as to how the funding is to be allocated within 

provincial guidelines. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you, 

Madam Minister, for confirming that the people will really 

have no say as to the direction which they're going, that they 

will have to operate by your predetermined guidelines. And 

your magic new resolutions and your new criteria, I would be 

very interested, Madam Minister, if you could table that for the 

benefit of the people of Saskatchewan, these new, so-called 

new guidelines that you're talking about. Could you table them 

for us, Madam Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, the Midwest district board 

will have a lot of say in terms of what services are provided, 

where they're provided, and what sort of allocation will take 

place. They are being advised however, as they have been all 

along, that what they will be funded with is the funding these 

institutions would have received on their own if they were not 

in a district. 

 

There will be cooperation between the Midwest district board 

and the communities involved in determining what services are 

to be provided and where they are to be provided, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Madam 

Minister, I do believe that we are making some progress. It's 

like pulling eye teeth out of a chicken, I guess, as we pull out 

one at a time, one hospital budget at a time, Madam Minister. 

So you are to be commended for gradually coming out with 

some of these budgets. 

 

But having done that, Madam Minister, would you then also 

say that you will give these hospitals time to consider what 

they are dealing with? Will you withdraw, Madam Minister, 

your closure motion and postpone further debate on this Bill 

until the hospital boards around the province have had a chance 

to figure out exactly what these numbers mean in terms 

of hospital closures and bed cuts. Will you do that, Madam 

Minister? Will you allow time for full consideration and a full 

public debate about the implications of your so-called wellness 

plan? Will you do that, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, hospitals will have time to 

consider — particularly those facilities where there may be a 

role change — to consider what sort of role change will take 

place. They will have time to get organized with other 

communities on a district basis and to come forward with a 

plan and a needs assessment. There is time being given to the 

people of Saskatchewan and to many of our smaller hospitals 

to look at these issues and how they're impacted and to deal 

with it in the context of a larger community. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Again, Madam Minister, I just remind you 

that the people across the province are asking us to ask you to 

whoa up, to give them more time. This is being rushed, Madam 

Minister. 

 

But, Madam Minister, you are continually suggesting that 

opposition members are somehow spreading misinformation. 

Madam Minister, the facts are, that we are putting out before 

the public, are coming into us from the public. 

 

Madam Minister, on Thursday we received a letter from the 

chairman of the Preeceville Union Hospital, and I'd like to 

make a little quote: 

 

 The government plan indicates that for the 20,000 people in 

our proposed Kamsack, Canora and Preeceville district, of 

the present total rated active treatment beds of 157, only 

20-30 will remain after the dust cloud settles. Due to the 

health care needs, geography and large percentage of elderly 

in our district, those numbers of beds are totally unrealistic. 

 

He goes on to say that it's . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I want the member to ask his 

question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. He goes on to say 

that this is giving . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I asked the member to ask his 

question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. Madam 

Minister, the people in this area are asking us to ask you: will 

you please do away with the closure motion and closure on 

closure that is coming up, so that they will have time to 

actually, practically assess and reassess the implications of 

your cuts that you are proposing on the people within that area 

and indeed across the province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the 



April 13, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 947 

bed targets of 1.5 per thousand, I have said on numerous 

occasions, repeatedly, that those are targets on a 

provincial-wide basis; that they will take into consideration 

geography, it'll take into consideration distances, it'll take into 

consideration the availability of community-based services. It's 

something for the people of Saskatchewan to work towards, 

Mr. Speaker. So the many people across this province 

understand that. Unlike some members opposite, many people 

do understand that. 

 

So I want to say this with respect to the 1.5 per thousand. They 

are targets. We're asking people to analyse their needs within 

the context of those targets. There will be time to do needs 

assessment within Saskatchewan and for people to come 

forward with their plans. We have said that repeatedly. Holding 

up the district legislation, preventing the passage of the district 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, is going to hurt our small 

communities. 

 

The government has made budget decisions with respect to the 

institutional sector which will be implemented. It will help 

many of our communities. 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Talk about a 

contradiction of ideas and principles, Madam Minister. We are 

asking you that something that the people across the provinces 

are asking us to ask you — time, you say they will have time. 

You've got closure in the House. You're trying to ram the thing 

through. You're trying to push it through so that there cannot be 

timely debate and yet you say there will be time, Madam 

Minister. 

 

I'm going to quote again from the chairman of the Preeceville 

Union Hospital. He says: 

 

 Implementation deadlines are too quick, the cut backs overly 

severe and will significantly affect the health care, economy 

and morale of rural Saskatchewan (Madam Minister). 

 

Madam Minister, the doctor from Dinsmore says, and I quote: 

If you don't care for people in their communities it will increase 

the migration of people out of rural areas. 

 

Madam Minister, what studies have you done? What studies 

have you done on the economic impact of your wellness plan 

on rural Saskatchewan, on rural communities? How many jobs 

will be lost? How many businesses will close? How many 

people will be forced to move and what alternative means will 

you be putting in place to keep communities in rural 

Saskatchewan viable and to keep people in rural 

Saskatchewan? 

 

What studies have you done, Madam Minister, that gives you 

the assurance that rural Saskatchewan will be taken care of? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to rural 

Saskatchewan being taken care of, the long-term plan by 

government is to develop services in Saskatchewan that 

actually enhance the availability of the needed health care 

services for rural residents. It's a question of need as opposed to 

wants. 

 

With respect to moving more slowly . . . the members opposite 

say move more slowly; don't . . . you know, don't pass the 

district Act legislation. 

 

I want to say this once again. We have certain guidelines we 

have to meet with respect to budget, and therefore budget 

decisions will be implemented, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Getting into a district is going to . . . getting into a district will 

protect our smallest communities, Mr. Speaker, and will allow 

people to develop plans in the context of a district, to develop 

plans that in the long run will enhance the services that are 

available to people in rural Saskatchewan. Getting into a 

district is going to save medicare and improve health care 

services for people in the future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. From your answer 

it becomes apparent to the people of Saskatchewan that your 

wellness plan is not about people — it's budget. And yet even 

there it is counter-productive, Madam Minister. 

 

Madam Minister, last week I invited you to a number of public 

meetings that will be taking place throughout the province in 

this week. Over the weekend, many new communities have 

decided to hold public meetings. There will be a meeting at 

Herbert tonight, Rocanville Wednesday, Moosomin and 

Kipling on Thursday, and in Macklin on Monday. 

 

And because of your government's heavy-handed introduction 

of closure last week, the public meeting in Kindersley has been 

moved up to tonight. These meetings are in addition to those 

already scheduled in Kerrobert, in Eston, and Codette. 

 

Madam Minister, will you and your Premier be attending these 

meetings to explain your action to the people of those 

communities and listen to their concerns? Will you do that, 

Madam Minister, before you use this closure motion to ram this 

legislation down the throats of the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, the legislation is not being 

rammed down the throats of the people of Saskatchewan. Many 

people are asking for this legislation to be passed. In fact if it 

hadn't been for delaying tactics opposite, we could have passed 

it last year. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, people want this legislation because they 

recognize across Saskatchewan that they need it in order to 

preserve medicare for future 



948 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1993 

generations. They realize that we have a very expensive 

infrastructure to maintain in this province and that we're not 

using it to its full capacity, that we don't need all these beds, 

and we should be spending our money more effectively. The 

people of Saskatchewan know that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And they are asking us to pass this . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I was not cutting the Minister of Health off; I 

was simply going to ask members not to interfere with her 

answering the question. There was a barrage of interference 

coming. And I'm asking you, please don't interrupt. I don't 

think the member was interrupted when he asked his question. 

 

Government Tendering Practices 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, over 

this last long weekend I think most people in the province of 

Saskatchewan were looking for an open and accountable 

government. Obviously from the answers we get today, all they 

found were Easter eggs and not an open and accountable 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Property Management Corporation of this 

province recently invited tenders for the provision of 

photocopier equipment to the Government of Saskatchewan. In 

spite of this government's pledge to have open and accountable 

tendering, Mr. Speaker, we find that this contract, which will 

be worth tens of thousands of dollars, is closed. 

 

My question is to the minister responsible for closed tendering. 

Mr. Minister, in closing bids you fly in the face of what public 

opinion has said to the Government of Saskatchewan, that they 

want fair and open tendering. Mr. Minister, you have cancelled 

a long-time practice. Would you tell the people of 

Saskatchewan that you will change that practice and open these 

bids up for this particular tender? Would you do that, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 

response to the member's question, first of all let me say that 

unlike the former administration, this government is 

determined to see fair and honest tendering in this province, 

and that includes the Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I am not aware of the 

circumstances or of the bids with respect to photocopiers. I will 

take notice of this question and respond in due course. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For the minister's 

information, the reference number on it is ITT69194. 

 

Mr. Minister, this flies directly in the face of what you and 

your party promised the people of Saskatchewan in the last 

election campaign. What we see instead is a government drunk 

with power, that simply says, we'll do what we want; we can 

break whatever promises we want. We saw it in the case of the 

aerial spraying contract which your government just took the 

highest bid, $150,000 over. 

 

Mr. Minister, the public is demanding of you, they're 

demanding of you that you open the process up. Would you 

give the commitment today that this tender will not be done in 

a closed-door session but will be open for public tender? Will 

you do that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 

have to admit to the member opposite, I'm not aware of the 

tender. I'm not aware of the circumstances surrounding it. But 

as I've indicated, I will take notice and I will get back to the 

member with respect to the details of the process. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 

people in this province and in this House demand that you have 

a more open approach than your Minister of Health has done 

on the health care issue. 

 

Recently we have seen proposals let for the installation and 

maintenance of services for Saskatchewan government's 

network of video lottery terminals and site controllers. Mr. 

Minister, can you tell me why, given the serious perception 

problems your government's handling of the gaming industry 

has had, given your promise of fair and open tendering, can 

you tell this Assembly why you have chosen to open the bids 

for the maintenance of video lottery machines behind closed 

doors? Why the secrecy, Mr. Minister, given that you have 

risked $20 million of taxpayers' money on this particular 

project? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With 

respect to the tenders and the proposals for the supplying of the 

VLTs (video lottery terminal) in this province, I think the 

member is well aware that two companies have been 

short-listed, and that the Gaming Commission is in the process 

of determining price and other factors. And as soon as those 

have been determined and an agreement has been struck with 

the two companies, a contract will be signed. And that, I'm sure 

the member is well aware, is the process. It hasn't changed 

from last week. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 13, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 949 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Obviously the 

minister had too long a weekend and his ears are still plugged. 

Mr. Minister, what we're talking about here is the maintenance 

of the machines. We're not . . . you can't hide behind your 

hidden report on these two companies. We're talking about the 

people that are going to do the maintenance on these machines, 

Mr. Minister. You have put an open . . . you've put a tender call 

out for it that you say that you're going to hold behind closed 

doors. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, it's one thing to hide behind your officials' 

secret report as far as spending the $20 million. We're talking 

about fixing these machines and you don't even want to do that 

in public, Mr. Minister. What is it about fixing your video 

lottery terminals that you don't want that tender opened in 

public, Mr. Minister? What is there about that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, let me say to the 

member opposite that unlike the former administration, this 

proposal will be tendered and we will choose the most 

appropriate one to accept the bid. I want to say that this is not 

the kind of government . . . and I think the member is stuck 

prior to 1991 to the system that the front-benchers on that side 

used. This government doesn't operate that way. We have 

indicated that we want people to propose a contract for tender 

and we will have a look at those bids, and I would suggest to 

you that the appropriate person will be chosen, sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, this 

flies directly in the face of the statements made by the member 

from Riversdale in the last election campaign. The tender call 

is number 032693-01 and it says: there will not be a public 

opening of proposals. Mr. Minister, what have you got to hide? 

Why do you have your officials go out with a request for 

proposal and then tell the public that they have no business in 

being part of that proposal when it is opened? What is it that 

you're hiding, Mr. Minister? Why do you have to do it this way 

in the face of all your promises? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, let me say to the 

member opposite that the request for maintenance — for the 

maintenance of the VLTs — is open. It's open to any 

corporation or to any individual in this province to put forth a 

proposal. I think that that is a fair way of doing things. We 

want to get the best dollar value that we can and we want to 

have the best service provided with respect to these VLTs, and 

that is exactly what this request for proposals is about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SGI Agreement with Glass Repairers 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question 

is to the minister responsible for SGI (Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance). Mr. Minister, on March 16 SGI sent a 

letter to all the auto glass dealers in Saskatchewan together 

with an agreement negotiated between SGI and the Glass 

Dealers Association. 

 

The letter stated that only glass dealers who signed this 

agreement and returned it by March 25 would have direct 

billing privileges with SGI and that SGI would recognize only 

those who sign this agreement as SGI accredited glass 

repairers. 

 

Mr. Minister, it's my understanding that the Glass Dealers 

Association of Saskatchewan represents only a small number 

of glass shops and that the majority of the auto glass shops in 

Saskatchewan are not represented by this association. 

 

How many auto glass shops are represented by Glass Dealers 

Association of Saskatchewan? And why does this group have 

the mandate to negotiate such an important contract with SGI 

on behalf of all the auto glass dealers in Saskatchewan, most of 

whom do not even belong to this organization? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: — In regards to the specific numbers that 

you've asked for, I'll get that back to you, you know, later on. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

thank the minister for a response that he will provide this 

information, but what is the reason for all of this? 

 

You negotiated an agreement that is absolutely essential to the 

viability of the auto glass dealers with your hand-picked 

association, and you gave the dealers a week, a few weeks, to 

sign up or you essentially said that you won't deal with them 

any more. 

 

Most dealers signed this agreement because they simply had no 

choice. This intimidation happened to SUMA (Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association); it's happening to hospitals 

and to others across this province. 

 

Is this the sort of intimidation tactic which is acceptable 

business practices for SGI these days? Why didn't you allow 

more time so that other auto dealers, not those represented by 

the Glass Dealers Association, would have some say in the 

terms of this agreement? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: — In regards to your comment on 

intimidation, I'm really surprised at your comments, you know. 

The Glass Dealers Association, you know, have been working 

in this province for a long time and 



950 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1993 

it's really disappointing to hear your negative comments here in 

this legislature today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, the minister may be 

disappointed in my comments but the people in Saskatchewan, 

the auto dealers in Saskatchewan, are very disappointed in the 

way he's running SGI and telling them, either you sign this 

agreement by March 25 or you will not be a representative of 

SGI any more. 

 

Part of the agreement reads, Mr. Minister: 

 

 I therefore agree that in every circumstance involving repair 

or replacement, my account upon being submitted to SGI will 

reflect my lowest advertised offered price in effect at that 

time. 

 

Mr. Minister, a number of people we have spoken to in the 

industry indicated that this means if they ever lower their price 

below the standard SGI rate even for a one-day sale, SGI will 

only pay them that sale price for any similar work from that 

point on. 

 

You're dictating the business practices and you're imposing 

your idea of communist central planning. Isn't this an attempt 

to restrict competition in the auto glass industry? And why do 

you place such restrictive limitations on the operating practices 

of auto glass dealers in this province in favour of your 

hand-picked few? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: — In answer to the member, we're trying to 

have the fairest system possible out there, and that's the 

decision that we have made. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1430) 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

PRIVATE BILLS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 02 — An Act to incorporate the Bethany Bible 

Institute and to amend An Act to incorporate Mennonite 

Brethren Church of Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I move 

that Bill No. 02, An Act to incorporate the Bethany Bible 

Institute and to amend An Act to incorporate Mennonite 

Brethren Church of Saskatchewan be now read a second time 

and referred to the Standing Committee on Private Members' 

Bills. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to 

the Standing Committee on Private Members' Bills. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' MOTIONS 

Resolution No. 5 — Economic Development Partnerships 

 

Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think I'll sit down 

right now. But seriously, at the end of my remarks I will be 

moving a motion: 

 

 That this Assembly recognize the efforts of the Minister of 

Economic Development and his department to revitalize 

Saskatchewan by developing, through partnerships a 

coherent, comprehensive and realistic economic strategy. 

 

On November 3 of last year, the Minister of Economic 

Development released a document called Partnership for 

Renewal — A Strategy for the Saskatchewan Economy. This is 

an important document. Its release in fact has not gone 

unnoticed even beyond our borders. Recently the 

Worldbusiness magazine, in its February 1993 edition, gave an 

award in the category of industrial economic development 

organization. And Worldbusiness said: 

 

 Our 1992 Award in this category goes to the Government of 

Saskatchewan under Premier Roy Romanow and Economic 

Development Minister, Dwain Lingenfelter . . . the 

Government of Saskatchewan has done a remarkable job of 

encouraging industry to locate in the province and in 

supporting industry that is already there. The Province has 

created a high level of awareness and responsiveness to 

industrial development opportunities and needs, has 

maintained a tolerable regulatory legislative environment . . . 

and, with a necessarily modest budget has promoted 

Saskatchewan as a fine place from which to do business. 

 

So when we're speaking about the minister's strategy for 

economic development, Mr. Speaker, the praise for that 

strategy does not just come from members of the government 

caucus, it comes from people who are quite knowledgeable 

beyond our borders and in fact who look at these matters from 

an international perspective. 

 

But also within our borders many commentators from a wide 

range of diverse groups have recognized the leadership that the 

minister and his department have shown. 

 

The business editor of the Star-Phoenix, Mr. Paul Martin, on 

November 7, a few days after the release of the document, said 

that: 

 

 The . . . paper . . . was the second major foray on the 

economic front. By all accounts it has won glowing praise. 

 

 First and foremost it shows the Romanow administration 

understands the way this economy works. 



April 13, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 951 

Then he goes on to point out that the paper recognizes that 

Saskatchewan is a trade dependent province and he indicates 

that the call for a new economic environment by the paper is 

drawing favourable reaction from the business sector. 

 

He goes on to say: 

 

 It marks a departure from the policies of previous 

administrations — including the Conservative Grant Devine 

who outspent all Saskatchewan politicians — that 

government . . . 

 

And he goes on to say that it marks a departure from the idea 

that the government can lead economic development through 

massive spending. 

 

 As we've heard Premier Romanow say so often, it's time for 

business to stimulate economic development because 

government can't afford to. By recalling the pioneering 

Saskatchewan spirit — a belief in self-reliance — Romanow 

has not only dealt with this fiscal reality, he's thrown down 

the gauntlet. It's time the rest of us did something about our 

economic situation. And that's the way it should be. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: — And in fact the government's position has been 

warmly greeted in many sectors. The Leader-Post called the 

paper a practical compromise the day after it was released. The 

Canadian Federation of Independent Business called it a 

pragmatic document. The Saskatchewan Construction 

Association called it a good plan with a good chance of 

succeeding. The Saskatchewan Federation of Labour called it a 

realistic plan. The chamber of commerce said the document 

was workable and made common sense, and the Saskatoon 

Chamber of Commerce calls it an excellent starting point. 

 

Now the question might be asked, why organizations which are 

so diverse from labour to business within Saskatchewan, 

outside Saskatchewan, media, have greeted the paper so 

favourably. And I think the reason why the government's 

blueprint for economic development, which is what the 

Partnership for Renewal is, has been warmly greeted, is 

because it was drafted in partnership with Saskatchewan 

people. It was drafted with the cooperation of hundreds of 

business, labour, co-op, aboriginal, and other groups who came 

together with the government to come up with a blueprint for 

economic development in this province. 

 

And I think it's very commendable, Mr. Speaker, that the 

minister, his staff and officials went all around the province 

over a period of six to eight months and listened to people and 

developed the strategy in concert with them. The process itself 

was key to coming up with a good document. And it was a 

process of partnership, not dictatorship. It was a process of not 

telling people what they need, but asking Saskatchewan people 

what Saskatchewan 

needs. 

 

And that process involved dozens of Saskatchewan people and 

hundreds if not thousands of people . . . I should have said 

dozens of Saskatchewan communities, and many, many more 

people. 

 

I think as a result, Mr. Speaker, the plan is very realistic; it's 

flexible; it's capable of being changed as circumstances change, 

but it provides a sense of direction and hope and renewal for 

our economy. 

 

One thing it recognizes is that government cannot lead 

economic development by itself. It is not something that 

government can or should be doing in a vacuum. Economic 

development is something that requires the cooperation of 

people all the way down to the local level. And I would say of 

all sectors of our economy, whether big business, small 

business, cooperatives, labour, working people, other 

organizations working together and identifying the strengths 

that we have here in Saskatchewan. And we do have many 

strengths and we have to build on them. 

 

The approach is one of partnership. And I should point out that 

anyone who wishes to have a copy of the Partnership for 

Renewal can obtain one by calling a toll free number which is 

1-800-665-3366, and the Department of Economic 

Development will make that available to them. 

 

The document recognizes that we do face a tough situation in 

Saskatchewan. For the last 10 years we've seen very 

irresponsible spending by government in the province. We 

have been spending more than we have been earning. Now 

because of the situation we're in, we have to face reality and 

have a realistic and workable plan to create new wealth. 

 

We've learned over the last number of years that economic 

development does not mean the government throwing money at 

large megaprojects thought to be quick fixes to all our 

economic problems. That strategy has been tried and we have 

all seen that it has failed. That strategy has left the province in 

a situation where we are in a strait-jacket of debt. 

 

So we have to look beyond the quick fix. We have to realize 

that 70 per cent of our jobs, for example, are created by the 

small-business sector. And we have to appreciate that all 

sectors of the economy are vital to economic renewal. 

 

The Partnership for Renewal recognizes this. It says that 

economic leadership goes beyond government to small 

business as well as big business, to cooperatives, to working 

people, aboriginal people, and communities. And it says we 

have to work together. It is not intended to be a detailed plan. 

Instead it is a statement of goals and objectives and strategies 

to achieve each of them. It does identify key sectors in which 

action is required. I think most importantly it contains firm 

targets and ways to measure our success in achieving them. 



952 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1993 

The strategy contains three broad goals, 23 specific objectives, 

and 31 strategies for achieving them. And very importantly, a 

time line for implementation is attached to each one. And I 

think that is important, Mr. Speaker, because the government is 

not simply saying we should do these things; it is saying how 

we're going to do these things and when we're going to do these 

things. It's like the provincial budget. It doesn't just talk about 

the need to reduce the deficit and balance the books, it tells us 

how we're going to do it and when we're going to do it. 

 

And in concert with that approach, the Minister of Economic 

Development in his document has said: we're going to do these 

things to improve our economy, and this is how we're going to 

do it, and this is when we're going to do it. It isn't a document 

that just contains words, it's a document that has a plan of 

action. 

 

And the vision of the document, as I said, comes out of 

consultation with the people. The vision stated is quite 

straightforward. It is that we foresee a province where by the 

year 2000, government, business, cooperatives, working 

people, and communities will have worked together toward 

prosperity and security. That's a very broad and general 

statement, but the document goes on to detail specific 

objectives and strategies to obtain that vision. 

 

The vision itself I think is realistic. It indicates that if we face 

the tough choices that we have to make, stick to our decisions, 

and if we can maintain some harmony in our province instead 

of promoting disharmony between different groups in our 

province, and regain the sense of purpose and confidence, then 

in the '90s there's no reason why we should not be able to turn 

Saskatchewan around. 

 

(1445) 

 

One of the most impressive things I think about the document 

is that anyone is in a position to judge the success of the 

government's economic strategy by looking at the deadlines 

imposed in the document itself, and seeing if the government 

has done what it said it was going to do. At page 20 of the 

document the minister and his department have said that: 

 

 The consultations leading to this strategy have encouraged 

the province to set specific measurements of progress toward 

the established goals and objectives. Success should be 

measured by: 

 

And then they set out seven measuring sticks, the first being 

whether the economy has been returned to a period of 

sustained, real growth. In other words, whether you do have 

growth in your economy. The second is whether the 

government has balanced the provincial budget over some 

reasonable period. The third is whether we have stopped 

out-migration from the province. And I might add in that 

regard, that in the first quarter of 1993, the population of 

Saskatchewan increased. And of course out-migration was 

considerably slowed in 1992, after five years of very 

heavy out-migration under the previous administration. 

 

And there are some other measuring yardsticks set out in the 

document. But the point is this: that the government has said to 

the people — and anybody can read the document — here's our 

plan, and not only are we going to say what our plan is and 

adhere to our plan, but you can be the judge of whether or not 

we have been successful. Because here are some tests that you 

can apply to us. 

 

And I think that's very courageous. I think that for the 

government to say to the people, you can be the judge; this is 

how you should judge us, and if we don't live up to what we 

say here, then you can judge that we will have failed 

_- and it's very ambitious, it's very courageous. And to me, it's 

an indication that the minister, the department, and the 

government, are serious about trying to improve the economic 

situation in Saskatchewan. And I think that's very 

commendable. And that's one of the reasons why I think the 

minister should be commended for the approach that he and his 

department have taken in formulating this strategy. 

 

The first major objective outlined in the document is to bring 

business, labour, co-ops, farm, and aboriginal communities and 

government together in a provincial action committee on the 

economy. And although the document was only released last 

November, the committee has already been formed. It's already 

met three times to provide input to the government with respect 

to budget, agriculture, trade, and labour policies. So as I said, 

the document says what should be done, but it doesn't stop 

there. The government is actually doing what the document 

says should be done. 

 

The second objective stated is to introduce a plan to restore 

fiscal integrity to the provincial government; to balance the 

books so that we have greater capacity to take action when we 

should be taking action at the government level. 

 

And as we all know, a plan has already been introduced in the 

budget, introduced by the Minister of Finance on March 18, to 

balance the budget over the next four years. And this Assembly 

has passed that budget, so that objective is well on the way to 

being met. 

 

Now the strategy document states that our efforts to improve 

the Saskatchewan economy will be judged largely by our 

success in creating greater job opportunities. And I think we all 

recognize that, that the bottom line is being able to stay and 

live and work and raise families in Saskatchewan. 

 

And to do that, we need entrepreneurial spirit. We need people 

with ideas and people who will act on them. And in fact there 

are people all over the province doing all kinds of interesting 

and innovative things. And we have to encourage them as 

much as we can. 



April 13, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 953 

There were some measures taken in the budget to assist small 

business and manufacturers, and I think that that's the right 

approach, that little by little and looking at the small businesses 

in larger communities but also in small communities, that is 

really the answer to having a healthy and stable economy. The 

answer is not to put millions and sometimes hundreds of 

millions into megaprojects which provide a few jobs but at a 

great cost per job. 

 

The three broad goals of the Partnership for Renewal are, one, 

to create a positive environment for renewal, which I think 

we're doing for the reasons I've outlined; two, to secure and 

build on our strengths, which have been identified; and three, 

to seek full employment. 

 

And to achieve those goals, we need to take the strategies that 

are set out in the document itself. I've indicated what some of 

them are already. Others are to review the tax structure for 

those proposing productive investments. That was in fact 

announced in the budget. To update labour legislation — that is 

under way, and some legislation will be introduced this session. 

 

The balance of legislation necessary to rewrite all of our labour 

laws will be introduced in 1994, so that by the end of 1994 we 

should have reformed our labour legislation, which of course 

has been very badly needed after 10 years of neglect by the 

previous government. 

 

An education council has been appointed and a target date for 

new education policy has been set as 1994, because the 

document recognizes that we have to improve education and 

skills training as part of improving our economy. It also says 

that we have to promote community-based economic 

development by building on regional strengths and 

opportunities. And $1 million was allocated in the recent 

budget to engage in community consultation toward 

implementation of that goal. 

 

Another thing the Partnership for Renewal says is that we have 

to develop a new agriculture and food policy to focus on 

markets and processing. And as in other areas identified by the 

Partnership for Renewal, the government is taking active steps 

to pursue the goals stated in the document. 

 

I said a few minutes ago that the document says we should 

have a balanced budget. So the Minister of Finance has 

introduced a plan for a balanced budget. 

 

The document also says we should have a new agriculture and 

food policy. Well the Minister of Agriculture recently released 

the paper "Forging Partnerships in Agriculture" and one of 

eight public meetings planned to discuss that document has 

already been held. So that is under way as well. 

 

The document states we should develop a comprehensive 

energy strategy. And as we all know, the energy and 

conservation institute in Saskatoon is up and running and 

recently the budget allocated 

$1.5 million toward that institute. And that is a very positive 

thing to my way of thinking for this reason: that this 

government has not said that we're putting all our eggs in one 

basket in terms of deciding how we're going to meet our energy 

needs. 

 

The previous government was prepared to sign an agreement 

which would commit us to building a CANDU 3 reactor when 

we don't even know if we will need the kind of energy a 

CANDU 3 would produce and we don't know if it's 

economically viable because that kind of energy production 

requires an enormous commitment of capital and is very 

expensive to produce, not to mention environmental and other 

problems that are yet to be worked out. 

 

But the point is that this government has said: look, we're not 

going to prejudge the issue. We're going to have an institute 

which is going to look at all of the possible energy options and 

come up with a comprehensive energy strategy for 

Saskatchewan. And that, Mr. Speaker, is the only sensible, 

responsible approach to take. And I've very pleased that the 

government is taking that approach which is also supported by 

the Partnership for Renewal document. 

 

The document also says that we will work toward expanding 

mineral development. And I think as most people know, we 

have three uranium companies which now have their head 

offices in Saskatoon, and that resource is going to expand, 

subject to the appropriate approvals at the provincial and 

federal level. And one project has now been approved to 

proceed. 

 

The document also says that we should identify new forestry 

opportunities, and that is under way. I understand that the 

Department of Economic Development is actively pursuing 

different opportunities in the area of forestry, working with 

industry. And I think that that is one of the industries that can 

help us get Saskatchewan moving the way we would like it to 

be moving. 

 

The Crown corporations can also be used to foster economic 

development, and that is recognized by the document. In fact 

SaskTel International is doing a lot of work around the world to 

develop telecommunications services in other parts of the 

world using expertise developed right here in Saskatchewan. 

SaskPower is going to be undertaking some co-generation 

activities with local suppliers in Saskatchewan and working 

with business. And I think that's a very positive thing, both in 

terms of local economic development and in terms of exploring 

other ways of producing energy. 

 

Also the Crown corporations are going to be committing 

approximately $500 million this year toward construction. And 

I think in concert with the $162 million committed in the 

provincial budget, notwithstanding the fact that it was a 

restraint budget, but $162 million was committed toward 

construction. That is going to help people get to work in 



954 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1993 

Saskatchewan which is really, at the end of the day, the most 

important thing that we have to do and what we should be most 

concerned with as legislators. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: — The document also says that SEDCO 

(Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation) will be 

replaced with the new provincial economic development 

institution which will work with the private sector. And my 

understanding is that that is being examined by the department 

and the government and plans are under way to achieve that 

goal. 

 

It says that we should coordinate a Saskatchewan trade and 

market development organization to target key markets. It also 

says that we should streamline business development programs 

to reduce overlap and provide a single window that anyone can 

call for information. And I think the department has already put 

into place a toll-free number and a single window and has 

almost achieved that objective, if it has not entirely achieved 

that objective. 

 

Other positive developments are occurring on the economic 

front as well. The western Canadian environmental industry 

capabilities survey has been released and will form the basis 

for project development. A draft federal-provincial 

immigration agreement has been negotiated between Regina 

and Ottawa and is waiting cabinet review. 

 

And Premier Romanow . . . I'm sorry, I should say the Premier, 

Mr. Speaker, has signed and sent a memorandum to all 

permanent heads in departments and Crowns instructing them 

to develop local supplier programs. And the Premier did that on 

December 11. I understand that Economic Development is 

working with departments to assist them in that regard. And I 

think that that is a very sensible approach for the government to 

take, that if we can use our procurement policies to take 

advantage of the labour and ideas and work and manufacturing 

of Saskatchewan people, then that's what we should be doing. 

 

I might add that under the previous administration, I think too 

often work to advertising firms, film companies, and others 

who were out of province was undertaken which really should 

have been undertaken in Saskatchewan, if at all, so that we 

could develop some of our industry here. 

 

(1500) 

 

Now I've gone on at some length identifying things that the 

document says we should be doing, but actually I've only 

named some of the concepts laid out in the strategy. There are 

others. 

 

As I said before, it's fine to have documents with nice words 

and laudable goals, but what is really impressive about the 

Partnership for Renewal and what shows that the government 

is serious about rebuilding and is accountable to the people is 

the fact 

that the government has set out a test for itself at page 20 of the 

document which anyone can read and anyone can be the judge 

of. 

 

It's not every day that governments say to the people, this is 

what we say we're going to do and here's how you can judge us 

to see if we've done what we said we were going to do. But in 

this document the government has set out seven specific tests 

and they've invited the public to watch the progress made by 

the government and to then decide whether the government has 

in fact done what it said it was going to do. And I think that's 

highly commendable. 

 

The department has committed itself actually to measuring its 

success on an annual basis and reporting to the people how it is 

doing in meeting the tests set out in the document. So it is 

courageous leadership because we're saying to the people, don't 

just listen to what we say, but judge what we do and make us 

deliver and make us accountable. And the standards are set out 

and they can be judged. 

 

There are some very positive economic developments 

occurring this year. And I wouldn't say that they're all because 

of what the government does, but I would say that generally 

speaking, given the situation inherited from the previous 

government, things are looking better in Saskatchewan and we 

are in fact on the right track. 

 

Some of those indicators are that the population in 

Saskatchewan increased by 300 in the first quarter of this year. 

Well that's not a great many people, but the point is that 

out-migration that has been going on has been considerably 

slowed. And I think that's very, very important and very 

encouraging. Employment has increased by 3,000 people in 

transportation, communications, and other utilities February 

1993 over '92, and by 2,000 in the same period in the finance, 

insurance, and real estate industries. Retail trade increased 1.1 

per cent in January. And new motor vehicle sales for 

commercial vehicles manufactured in North America were up 

5.4 per cent. Exports in Saskatchewan were up 15.5 per cent 

last year. And in terms of manufacturing, the value of 

manufactured goods in the wood industry rose by 27.7 per cent; 

machines up 12.9 per cent; electrical products up 7.7 per cent. 

Total value of manufacturing shipments was up 3.1 per cent in 

December of last year and total refinery production rose 16.7 

per cent last year. 

 

On the resource side, all of the resources were up, whether 

crude oil which went up 7.2 per cent last year; natural gas up 

3.4 per cent; coal up 7 per cent; sodium sulphate up 3.3 per 

cent; potash 3.1 per cent. Zinc sales were up 208.9 per cent; 

silver up 5.9 per cent; cadmium up 51.5 per cent. Uranium 

sales were up 38 per cent. 

 

In construction the . . . Saskatchewan led the way last year in 

terms of housing starts. They were up 87.3 per cent. And that is 

not the case across the country. In some places housing starts 

were not up that much at all, but certainly Saskatchewan led 

the way. Dwelling 



April 13, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 955 

completions were up 154.7 per cent in the fourth quarter of last 

year. Building permits were up last year and industrial permits 

also were up, in each case over 70 per cent. 

 

So all is not doom and gloom in Saskatchewan. And I think, 

Mr. Speaker, that what all of this indicates, and the figures are 

a bit tedious, but the point is that we do have a government that 

people have confidence in. They have confidence that the 

government has got the situation under control, has a plan to 

deal with a very difficult situation, and generally speaking is 

moving in the right direction. Not to say that the government is 

perfect or that its decisions are always correct. But generally 

speaking we have an honest, competent government and I think 

the people recognize that. 

 

I believe that we have a sensible and effective economic 

development plan that builds on our strengths. I think that the 

Partnership for Renewal document has done a good job of 

identifying our strengths. We need to let people know about the 

good things happening in the province, and we need to consult 

with people and work with them in areas where improvement 

can be made. 

 

The budget delivered on March 18 is a good one. For the first 

time in over a decade the budget gives us a plan to create jobs 

and strengthen our economy. It does this through the most 

effective job creation tool we possess and that is strengthening 

small businesses and co-ops. Two thirds of all new jobs created 

in the past 10 years have been created by these two groups. 

Jobs have not been created by give-aways, sweetheart deals, or 

megaprojects. Jobs have been created by Main Street, 

Saskatchewan, and it's time to give them the recognition they 

deserve. 

 

Things are beginning to turn around. On March 18 a document 

was delivered before the legislature. This document contained 

many things but it did not contain income tax hikes, it did not 

contain sweetheart deals, megaprojects, or wasteful 

government spending. It did contain reduced government 

spending, breaks in small business corporate tax, 

manufacturing and processing tax credits, rationalization of 

government services. 

 

It also contained a plan to create new jobs and end our 

operating deficit in four years, and that's a plan that I'm quite 

proud of. It utilizes our most effective job creation force, and 

that force is Main Street, Saskatchewan. And there are many 

examples of job creation that are occurring in Saskatchewan. I 

have a rather lengthy list of them here. I'm not going to go 

through all of them, but in my own community of Saskatoon, 

Hitachi has expanded and I believe it's a $9 million investment, 

25 new jobs. AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.) will bring 

140 jobs to Saskatoon. DSG Communications Inc. and APRO, 

Applied Robotics Inc., will be doing work for the Canadian 

Space Agency. Mercury Graphics Corporation has expanded, 

an increase of 30 jobs. Flexi-Coil implements, which 

manufactures farm implements in Saskatoon, is doubling its 

workforce to 800 employees and that's very encouraging. 

There are encouraging things happening all over the province 

and we should recognize that. We have to have a positive 

attitude as part of rebuilding our province and its economy. 

 

Some of the specific ways that the budget helped secure our 

future with job creation, I think, are the fact that the budget 

commits $162 million to capital projects which, as we all 

know, goes a long way toward producing construction jobs. 

 

The small business corporate income tax rate has been reduced 

by 20 per cent. There is a temporary manufacturing and 

processing tax credit for co-ops and small business. We're 

phasing out the education and health tax on direct agents used 

in manufacturing and processing, and investing $51 million in 

research and development, high technology, export, tourism, 

and industrial development. 

 

Another significant development, I think, is the improvements 

to the venture capital program; that is, the labour-sponsored 

venture capital program whereby tax credits can be obtained 

for investing in Saskatchewan businesses. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: — In summary, Mr. Speaker, I would say that the 

people in Saskatchewan are hard working and individualistic, 

but they have an instinct to work together as a team and that is 

why I believe we will rebuild Saskatchewan. 

 

And with that, I am pleased to move the following motion, 

seconded by the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster: 

 

 That this Assembly recognize the efforts of the Minister of 

Economic Development and his department to revitalize 

Saskatchewan by developing, through partnerships a 

coherent, comprehensive and realistic economic strategy. 

 

And I'm very pleased to move that motion. Thank you very 

much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join my colleague 

from Saskatoon Idylwyld in seconding this motion, and I 

support him wholeheartedly. 

 

The Romanow government has unveiled a . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Before the 

member continues, I think she . . . I just want to draw to her 

attention, you refer to the member's constituency, not by the 

member's name, when you're referring to a member in this 

legislature. If you refer to the Premier, you refer to the Premier 

or the member from Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Stanger: — Sorry about that, Mr. Speaker. I should 



956 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1993 

know that by now. I will continue. I'll try to remember. 

 

The Premier's government, the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale, has unveiled a solid, common-sense, no-nonsense 

strategy for rebuilding the Saskatchewan economy. And I must 

say, Mr. Speaker, that common sense hasn't been that common 

in the last 10 years. 

 

In our strategy there are three goals for renewing our provincial 

economy. Number one was creating a positive environment for 

economic renewal. Number two was securing and building 

upon our existing economic strengths, and that always makes 

sense. It's a common-sense approach — build from your 

strengths. And number three is seeking full employment in the 

province. 

 

(1515) 

 

In order to achieve these lofty goals, the Partnership for 

Renewal outlines specific objectives and strategies, complete 

with target dates for implementation. And I think that this is so 

important. People in my constituency of Cut 

Knife-Lloydminster want to know, when governments put out a 

strategy, when these will be possibly to be met. 

 

And I think that that is one of the things that I was so pleased 

when I read the Partnership for Renewal, was that there was 

going to be dates specifying the meeting of the goals. And I 

think that's very important. 

 

The objective and strategies are far-reaching, ranging from the 

development of a strong education system, which I believe in, 

to rejuvenating Saskatchewan's labour market policies and the 

creation of a provincial action committee on the economy 

which we call PACE (Premier's Action Committee on 

Economic Development) that will oversee the plan. 

 

I want to congratulate the Minister of Economic Development 

for the work that he and his department have done and the 

work that all of the colleagues in the caucus have done. Our 

approach is to focus on smaller community-based projects. No 

more megabucks for megaprojects; we know where that led us 

in the last 10 years. In this way, economic development is 

being distributed fairly across the entire province, and I am 

hopeful for a couple of projects in my area. 

 

Two-thirds of the jobs were created by small businesses and 

co-ops. And this is vitally important, that we keep our people in 

the smaller communities working. When you talk about people 

. . . The members opposite talk about being so concerned over 

rural Saskatchewan, but when you think about all the millions 

of dollars that were put into projects that weren't based on our 

natural abilities — millions of dollars just being thrown at big 

companies that came in here — and they were wondering why 

rural Saskatchewan wasn't growing and didn't survive. 

 

We have a sensible and effective economic development plan 

that builds on Saskatchewan 

strengths. We have been able to assist economic development 

in spite of the major problems that we have had financially. 

 

So this plan goes in a common-sense, goal-oriented, logical 

sequence. I won't go into details about some of the projects that 

have been started, but I'd like to name some of the few: 

Norquay Alfalfa Processors, 45 jobs; Hudson Bay Mining and 

Smelting, 375 jobs; Goldenhill Cattle Company in Viscount, 24 

jobs. 

 

These are the kind of projects that we're talking about — small 

economic development that's driven locally. Prairieland Pork 

Farms in Birsay, 12 jobs; Dartmore Processors in Aylsham, 16 

jobs. This is all rural Saskatchewan. Sask-Can Fibre in Canora, 

4 jobs; Babcock & Wilcox Canada in Melville, 35 jobs; 

Phillips Cables in Moose Jaw, 8 jobs. And I can go on and on. 

There is a whole line. I won't mention the ones in Saskatoon 

because the member from Saskatoon has mentioned these. 

 

But one that I'd like to specifically mention though, that he 

mentioned, was Flexi-coil implements from Saskatoon, 

doubling its workforce to 800 employees. Some great gains in 

the hard economic times. 

 

So we are securing our future. Some of the specific ways this 

budget helps secure our future with job creation strategies are 

— and we are very proud of these — reducing the small 

business corporate income tax rate by 20 per cent. My 

colleague has mentioned these, but I think it's worth 

mentioning them again because these were contained in the 

budget and I think it doesn't hurt to repeat them. 

 

Introducing a temporary manufacturing and processing tax 

credit for Saskatchewan co-ops and small businesses. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Never hurts to repeat . . . 

 

Ms. Stanger: — No, it sure doesn't. 

 

Phasing out the E&H (education and health) tax on direct 

agents used in manufacturing and processing. 

 

And here's another one that I'm particularly impressed with. 

Investing 51 million in research and development; high 

technology; export and tourism; and industrial development. 

Tourism, an area that is going to grow by leaps and bounds in 

Saskatchewan. And I think that this is an area that we can 

develop. 

 

An Hon. Member: — The sunny province. 

 

Ms. Stanger: — The sunny province is right, as my colleague 

says. More hours of sunshine in Saskatoon than in any other 

place in Canada. 

 

Spending 162 million in capital projects, as my colleague has 

mentioned again; this will get our construction industry going. 

 

Consolidation of rural development and co-op directorate 

which further the government's efforts 



April 13, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 957 

towards community economic development. Let's get the 

community involved. And later this month we will be meeting 

in some . . . the Minister of Economic Development, the chair 

of our caucus, MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 

like myself will be meeting with local communities to talk 

further on how we are doing in our partnerships for renewal. 

 

Business resort centres will be merged and reduced within new 

regional service systems which will provide a single window 

for economic development. If there's anything that 

small-business people were frustrated with, it was going hither 

and yon to try and develop their business plans. I think this 

single-window development is a good step in the right 

direction. 

 

Removal of E&H on 100 . . . on 1-800 telephones services, 

which my colleague also mentioned, but I am again hoping to 

get people's attention by mentioning it more than once. 

Improving Saskatchewan labour-sponsored venture capital 

program to encourage new investment. 

 

And last week we had a news release. And these are the kind of 

news releases that bring us good news and that we are proud of. 

And I'm going to read part of it: 

 

 Economic Development Minister Dwain Lingenfelter today 

announced that a government/industry partnership has led to 

pork sales to Cuba totalling $2.35 million. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: — These are the kind of partnerships that we are 

talking about — industry, government, and local people 

working together. 

 

 Lingenfelter was speaking at the 10th annual meeting of SPI 

Marketing Group, an industry umbrella group. 

 

And he explained the sales. 

 

 Lingenfelter said that the sales provide an example of what 

Saskatchewan companies can accomplish in the international 

marketplace. 

 

And I want you to note the next two sentences because I think 

they're very important: 

 

 Most export development activity is a patient, step-by-step 

process that goes on largely behind the scenes, in confidential 

negotiations. 

 

I think this is very important because I think that people 

somehow imagine that sometimes things happen overnight. 

They don't. It takes a common-sense approach, a slow, 

methodical approach, meeting many people, making contacts 

all over the world for this kind of economic development to 

happen. 

 

I think the Saskatchewan home builders will be happy to hear 

this bit of news. When we were at their 

convention last month they said that they were very pleased at 

the home starts last year, but in March it had slowed down. But 

again, that has picked up. And by this Saskatchewan housing 

start report, and I read from it: 

 

 Regina, April 8, 1993. Home building in the province 

continues to be ahead of last year said Canada Mortgage and 

Housing Corporation (CMHC). While March activity was 

slower than last year, total, year-to-date housing starts ahead 

of 1992 by more than 20 per cent. 

 

And we know that they were ahead of 1991. So that certainly 

was good news. 

 

So when we released our Partnership for Renewal we were, 

like I said, we had target dates on our objectives and how are 

we doing so far. 

 

Well here's a progress report dated March 25. And these are the 

kind of things that I'm very pleased about. Put out a blueprint, 

put your main three goals in the blueprint and then keep the 

updates coming so people can see how you are progressing. As 

the mover of this motion said, my colleague, it's not that you 

are going to be perfect and right on target, but if you have the 

goals and the targets, people can see in which direction you are 

progressing. 

 

Here is something . . . remember I mentioned the three goals 

the Partnership for Renewal outlined? — improving the 

climate for business, building on our strengths, and seeking full 

employment. Well here's a little bit of a progress report on how 

we're meeting those goals. 

 

PACE, the provincial action committee on the economy, has 

met three times to date to provide input on the budget speech, 

agriculture, and trade policies, and the labour agenda. So this is 

progress. 

 

The 1993 provincial budget on March 18 laid out a four-year 

plan to eliminate the deficit — very important for the 

government. It included a small-business tax package, which I 

have referred to just previously, and announced an ongoing 

business tax review. 

 

The new regulatory code was announced on March 8 for 

implementation effective April 1. The 1993 labour agenda is 

set. The provincial minimum wage was increased to $5.35 an 

hour effective December 1, and the new occupational health 

and safety workers compensation Acts have been announced. 

 

Now this is a very important Act. It's going to secure workers 

when they are in need of help, but also it's going to assure the 

business people that they have a healthy and an effective 

workforce. And I think what we have been able to do as 

government is to get the two groups together — the business 

people and working people — and this is another example of 

partnerships and are very important. 

 

The educational council has been appointed and will 



958 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1993 

begin to review findings from the eight reviews of the system. 

Four of them are complete and the education system is being 

reviewed, and we'll see where we are going once the committee 

has been able to do its work. 

 

Economic development has assumed the lead for native 

economic development. Now this is vitally important. The 

native people want to begin to be partners in economic 

development. They want more employment. In many areas the 

native unemployment is very high. And this economic 

development has set priorities and it has held meetings with 

both FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) and 

the Metis and so on. That's improving the climate. All of those 

things have been done. 

 

And how about building on strengths? What have we done in 

this area? A public discussion paper on agricultural policy, 

"Forging Partnerships in Agriculture", has been released and 

the first of eight public meetings has been held. And I was to 

the meeting that was held in my area — extremely well 

attended and a very, very good input from local farmers. And 

all of these suggestions will be taken into consideration. 

 

Uranium development is proceeding. The new NDP (New 

Democratic Party) policy of proceeding with uranium mine 

development in the North, combined with the announced 

AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.) move to Saskatoon and 

recent sales to Ontario and Korea, have improved expectations. 

 

McArther River, the first of five mine developments under 

federal-provincial review, has been approved for underground 

exploration and the province has been given approval for this 

35 million project to proceed this spring. 

 

SaskPower — again, mentioned by my colleague but worth 

repeating — SaskPower has announced a competitive bidding 

process to award contracts for a 25 megawatt co-generated 

power, a big project for SaskPower and good for economic 

development. 

 

Now how about the third objective — seeking full 

employment? The single window is being introduced through 

budgetary and other processes. Along with a 1-800 number and 

a new coordinated regional service centre, Economic 

Development is negotiating to develop a pilot co-location 

office in Saskatoon. 

 

(1530) 

 

A draft federal-provincial immigration agreement has been 

negotiated and is awaiting cabinet review. Sears announced 

plans to locate its new western regional calling centre in 

Regina, with a total employment of 900 expected by 1995. 

 

The Premier signed and sent a memorandum to all permanent 

heads in departments and Crowns instructing them to develop 

local supplier programs. Economic Development is working 

with departments to assist them — a very important step. 

Now many people are talking about depopulation. Well I am 

glad to tell you that in the last quarter of . . . in the first quarter 

of 1993, our population has increased by .03 per cent. Not a 

huge increase but at least we've plateaued and we are not 

decreasing. This is very important for people to know. 

 

Employment — employment has increased by 3,000 in 

transportation, communications, and other utilities in February 

1993 over '92 levels. Employment increased by 2,000 in 

finance, insurance, and real estate industries during February 

1993 over 1992 levels. Total retail trade increased by 1.1 per 

cent. These are modest gains but important if we can . . . In 

these hard economic times, if we can attain gains like this, I 

think it'll . . . we'll be doing very well in four years. 

 

Motor vehicle sales. This is something important. Sales of 

commercial vehicles manufactured in North America up 5.4 

per cent. Total domestic exports originating in Saskatchewan 

are up 15.5 per cent. 

 

An Hon. Member: — That's progression. 

 

Ms. Stanger: — Yes. In the agriculture sector, cash receipts 

from farming operations up 7.3 per cent from January to 

December in 1992. 

 

These next set of statistics . . . Some people think statistics are 

boring; I find them very interesting. Livestock sales up in 

January to October, cattle is up by 22.9 per cent, calves by 

146.4 per cent, sheep and lambs by 45.4 per cent, and hogs by 

6.2 per cent . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes. 

 

Members opposite are always so pessimistic. Look at these 

figures. Manufacturing — value of manufactured goods in the 

wood industry up 27.7 per cent last year; machines up 12.9 per 

cent; electrical products up 7.7 per cent. Non-metallic mineral 

products up 8 per cent, and chemical products up 4.2 per cent. 

These are substantial increases in a slow economic recovery. 

Total value of manufacturing shipments up 3.1 per cent; total 

refinery production up 16.7 per cent. 

 

Like I said, I find these statistics very interesting and I hope the 

members opposite are listening. Crude oil — production up 7.2 

per cent. My area of this is very important. The oil patch is 

doing very well. And the gloom and doom that people 

predicted during the election — they went from oil company to 

oil company trying to scare the oil workers: if the NDP get in, 

we'll shut down the oil industry — well this hasn't happened in 

my constituency and the oil workers are very pleased about it. 

 

Natural gas production is up 3.4 per cent; coal production up 7 

per cent; sodium sulphate, 3.3 up; potash, up 3.1 per cent — 

too bad we don't own some of the mines any more, but . . . I 

don't know what happened to those, or do we know what 

happened to those? — zinc sales up, zinc sales up 208 per cent 

from January to September of '92; silver up 5.9 per 



April 13, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 959 

cent; uranium sales up 38 per cent. 

 

Now how about construction, housing? Dwelling starts up 87. 3 

per cent from January to December in 1992; dwellings under 

construction up 71 per cent in the fourth quarter of '92; 

dwelling completions up 154 per cent in the fourth of '92; 

urban housing starts up 6.1 per cent in January of '93; value of 

residential permits up 70 per cent; value of industrial permits 

up 73 per cent. This is all in 1992. 

 

I can tell you that this is a totally different approach that was 

used in the last 10 years. We are using an economic 

development approach that's sensible. We are not giving away 

millions and millions of dollars for poor projects. And I think if 

you would read the annual report of SEDCO we can see where 

all the losses were: they were all in the Tory years. 

 

Now what is the difference between our plan and the Tory 

plan? Dare I mention some of the projects that . . . the 

megabucks that they threw at these megaprojects? GigaText, 

3.5 million lost; Supercart International failure, 8 million lost; 

Joytec failure, 5.2 million lost. 

 

How about the High R Door Manufacturing failure? Half a 

million dollars lost. How about the Austrak Machinery 

Corporation failure? — 700,000 lost; the Pro-Star Mills failure, 

490,000 lost. And how about the Nardei fabrication limited 

closure? With only six days left in the 1986 election campaign, 

the member from Estevan officially opened a $300,000 plant 

for this company in Regina. Three days after the election, the 

plant closed for ever. I can't believe this. I'm reading it but I 

can't believe it. 

 

The Canapharm, medical textile division joke. With only five 

days left in the 1986 election campaign, the member from 

Estevan announced a new $12.5 million bandage plant for 

Swift Current. To date this plant has not been built, half a 

million dollars lost. I think it was more than the folks from 

Swift Current area that needed bandage. I think the former 

government needed a bandage. 

 

Anyway I can tell you that I am proud to stand and summarize 

our economic development scheme, and I'm happy to support 

my colleagues and the minister. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I'm happy 

this afternoon to rise to discuss this private members' day 

question. As I conclude my remarks, I will pass a motion to try 

improve it a little bit so that the fruits of our labours for the day 

will be more productive in the eyes of the general public. And 

I'm sure that the government members will want to join us and 

go along with my motion of amendment in order to get the best 

possible return for our dollars for the day that we're spending 

here discussing these matters. 

 

What I do want to do first of all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is to 

reply to a few of the remarks that have been made by the 

members opposite in their opening remarks to 

the question. 

 

The member indicates that the economic development of our 

province is somewhat enhanced by the actions of our 

government, and she goes on to quote some very important 

names here. I see Hitachi and AECL. Both of these, 

unfortunately, were started by the past administration and have 

very little to do with the present government except that they've 

managed to survive them so far in spite of the fact that we have 

a socialist government. 

 

We've got things mentioned like the space agencies in 

Saskatoon, the program started by the federal government that 

has had absolutely nothing to do with the provincial 

government whatsoever, survived again in spite of the socialist 

government here. 

 

The Phillips Cables over in Moose Jaw, been there for years. I 

mean, they've been producing cable for many, many miles 

throughout the province and for sale in other places. How this 

government could ever hope to claim Phillips Cables as one of 

their enterprises is more than I can understand. 

 

I think maybe what you ought to do if you're going to stimulate 

some economic activity in the province, instead of trying to lay 

claim to things that other people did, maybe you ought to talk 

to some of your ministers like the member from Melfort that 

keeps preaching doom and gloom in this Assembly and outside 

of it as well, and tell them to get a smile on their face and act a 

little bit optimistic about the province instead of always telling 

us how terribly bad off we are. 

 

And now I want to also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, refer to some of 

the comments about the job creation that's been going on. It 

looks to me like my old neighbour's relative, Jack Lloyd and 

Oren Reiman, are about the only two people that can be laying 

any claim to having gotten a job in Saskatchewan lately, 

because everybody else has been out of work and having to go 

to Alberta to get a job, or some other place. 

 

So it looks to me like maybe we'll have to take another look at 

this whole proposition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to see where the 

real benefits are if there are any. 

 

We laid claim to community projects here a minute ago, from 

the member from the government. Community projects I 

suppose mean things like community bonds which were started 

by the past administration as well. Maybe they're referring, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, to the fact that they were able to harmonize 

the tax burden for Sears and company, here in the city of 

Regina. Which of course they fail to mention the fact that in 

order for that deal to be swung for Sears, they had to close 

most of the rural offices in the small towns throughout the 

province and kill just thousands of jobs and thousands of 

opportunities for rural people in order to bring one of the 

biggest companies in the country some prosperity that they did 

not really need. 

 

I wanted to suggest as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 



960 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1993 

when the member opposite wants to brag about things like 

building projects in the province, they ought to remember that 

in the city of Medicine Hat people are boasting that there's 

more building contracts in one city of Medicine Hat than we 

have in the whole province of Saskatchewan. Now I haven't 

checked those figures out exactly, but it seems to me like 

they're probably pretty well close to right. 

 

We've got things happening that don't seem quite as cheerful as 

the member would indicate with regards to things that are 

being started and supposedly going on in our province. For 

example, we have the government claiming that they've got 

economic diversification going on in our province and that 

they're making such great gains for our dollars invested. And 

here we've got, from the Leader-Post, an article that says: 

"Staff may lose (their) pay." 

 

Now can you believe it, about two months back or so the 

government ploughs a half a million dollars into a rabbit farm 

and here the whole thing has gone up in smoke according to 

this article. It says: 

 

 Not only have they lost their jobs, but 30 former employees 

of a nearby rabbit processing plant may also be out $20,000 

to $30,000 in severance pay . . . 

 

Now that's from a labour standards officer. 

 

Well there's no use going on through the whole article, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, because it is self-explanatory that here we 

have another venture that has gone rather badly. And we are 

going to be asking some serious questions when we get into the 

various departments in the budgetary process to try and find 

out where these monies have gone to. 

 

When we're going to talk about things like the economic 

advantages that this government is trying to bring about in our 

province, I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have to look at what 

they really are doing. I'm going to read you a whole bunch of 

things. The member opposite wants me to read some more of 

the articles. I'll read some articles for you. 

 

The member opposite wanted to talk about the benefits, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and I'm just going to go into some of the 

things that were mentioned with regards to what's happening in 

our labour and our statistics as far as our province is concerned. 

 

Now you may be interested in hearing these statistical facts, 

Mr. Member from Rosemont. The attached highlights sheet 

taken from the March issue of the Sask Trends Monitor 

shows a dramatic increase in social assistance case-loads — 

16.5 per cent increase in case-loads for Social Services in 1992 

as compared to 5 per cent in 1991. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a few minutes ago the member 

boasted that they've managed to stabilize the population of 

Saskatchewan, that it's no longer going down. Well let's take a 

look at what really is happening in the province with the real 

figures as they 

have been produced by people that do statistical data. Now if 

they're going to play with figures, let's play with the right ones 

and let's use them in the proper way. 

 

(1545) 

 

You've got 16.5 per cent more people on case-loads for welfare 

in '92 than you've had in '91. The cost of social assistance 

benefits rose by more than 18 per cent in 1992. And the 

number of new recipients increased by 4,500 per month, of 

which an average of 3,000 were considered fully employable 

— fully employable people. 

 

So what's happening? The people now are not leaving the 

province as fast as they did before, but they're going on social 

assistance faster than they ever have before and becoming a 

drain to the taxpayers. That's because this job creation program 

that this government sits here today trying to brag about is a 

failure, an absolute, total disaster for this province. 

 

The people don't have jobs, they don't have a place to go. 

They're going on social assistance. And the figures are here by 

the statistics provided by one of these reputable companies that 

does this as their workload. 

 

This article goes on, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Unemployment 

statistics are interesting as well. The unemployment rate in 

Saskatchewan for 1991 was 7.4 per cent. In 1992 the rate rose 

to 8.2 per cent. By February of 1993 the rate had reached 9.6 

per cent. 

 

The number of people employed in 1991 totalled 449,000 as 

compared to 425,000 in February of 1993. Now if my 

mathematics isn't totally wrong, that's 24,000 people less 

working now than we had before. 

 

So where are all these magical jobs that this government is 

creating with their economic diversification? Where is all of 

these great benefits that are coming about? I'll tell you, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. I think that the minister in charge of 

Economic Diversification must be very embarrassed today. I'll 

bet you he's sitting in his office with a red face, wondering who 

turned this guy in the back benches loose to bring those whole 

matter up today to allow us the chance to discuss it. 

 

Certainly he must not have wanted this to happen because it 

exposes everything that he's doing wrong, taking credit for 

everything that everybody else did in the past administration 

and producing nothing new absolutely whatsoever except a lot 

more welfare. 

 

Now that's a great claim to fame for any government, isn't it? 

— to increase your welfare recipients by those kind of numbers 

and create no jobs whatsoever that are physically visible to 

anyone. 

 

Now all of these statistics, Mr. Deputy Speaker, prove that the 

NDP's economic plan is a no plan. I've got a whole lot of other 

things I want to go into, but I've got to show a few more of 

these statistics just to make the government aware of the fact 

that they are not 



April 13, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 961 

following the realities of what's going on. 

 

It says here, migration patterns, Statistics Canada says, 

simultaneously released revised immigration and emigration 

population flows from the province for the new fourth quarter 

population counts. The changes to the international migration 

estimates resulted in a small downward adjustment in the 

province's population. 

 

Now isn't that an amazing kind of a thing here And this is for 

the fourth quarter, the very same period of time the member 

opposite a few minutes ago was talking about and was claiming 

had actually turned around and went up. Obviously they don't 

have the same statistician. 

 

So I want to just go to the back page here and say that Sask 

Trends Monitor is published monthly by the QED 

Information Systems, and reproductions of the newsletter in 

whole or in part is prohibited unless credit is given to Sask 

Trends Monitor. And I'll take that opportunity to give that 

credit to them at this time because I want to quote further from 

their documents. 

 

And I believe that they must have done a pretty good job. But 

obviously the government doesn't agree. They must have 

somebody else doing their statistics. I wonder who they hire 

and how much they pay them. Well that'll come up in another 

day. 

 

But let's go on to a few more things that are mentioned in this 

statistical report, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because we want to get 

some of this stuff on the record. 

 

Housing prices. Because of the increased housing activity and 

partly because of the increase in the price of plywood and 

dimensional lumber, new houses are costing more. Compared 

to January 1992, the cost of building a new house in Regina is 

now 6.7 per cent higher, and it's 1.4 per cent higher in 

Saskatoon. All that tells me is I guess you better buy a truck 

and go to Saskatoon to buy your lumber. 

 

The resource production. Some interesting things we heard 

from the member opposite, but let's take a look at them to be 

fair about it. The primary production estimates for most 

resource commodities are in for '92 and they represent a mixed 

bag. Oil production increased 8 per cent, while the natural gas 

production was down 2 per cent. 

 

Now isn't it amazing that the member opposite was able to 

remember the 8 per cent increase but she couldn't remember 

the 2 per cent decrease in gas. Well I guess it depends on what 

suits you. 

 

The coal production increased 7 per cent and sodium sulphate 

production increased by 4 per cent, and the potash production 

declined by 2 per cent. 

 

Now isn't it interesting that a few minutes ago we heard the 

member say exactly the opposite. Now I wonder again, where 

did she dig up her statistics from. I've quoted who at least 

produced this set of figures, and you can go right ahead and 

challenge them if you 

like, Madam Member. But the reality is that your figures have 

been contradicted — totally opposite to what you've just said. 

 

And the final figures for uranium are not in, but it looks like a 

record year, up 38 per cent in the first three quarters. In spite of 

the fact that this government has been threatening to shut the 

mines down, they're doing well and they're showing that they 

can make money for this province, because you tax uranium 

and you take in revenue from it. 

 

So we wish them well and we hope that the government 

continues to see the light of day in why you have to go ahead 

and allow these mines to operate. Quite realistically, if we don't 

produce the uranium in this province and sell it, somebody else 

is going to do it anyway. And so you may as well wake up and 

smell the coffee, build a CANDU reactor, and sell the power to 

the Americans because they want it and need it. 

 

So don't worry about having too much power. You'll get rid of 

it if you have any business sense at all. There's lots of people 

hungry for cheap power to make their economies and their 

industrial machine, metaphorically speaking, work. 

 

Let's talk about the social assistance that goes on in this report. 

Social assistance case-loads increased sixteen and a half per 

cent last year after an increase of 5 per cent in 1991. Now this 

is really sad news for the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

More than 3,000 of the average 4,500 new recipients per month 

were considered fully employable according to this document, 

fully employable people. Benefits expenditures rose more 

quickly than the case-loads which was up to 18.4 per cent. Now 

I don't know if that's an increase in the cost of living or the 

increase in the depth of the poverty of the people that are 

concerned. I suppose maybe it's a combination of both. 

 

But it's a sad, sad state of affairs, Mr. Speaker, when we find 

the people of our province having to go on social assistance 

with no chance of finding jobs for very working-minded people 

that are totally capable — 3,000 out of every 4,500 totally 

capable in this assessment — of being able to work. 

 

But they can't find jobs because this economic plan that this 

government has got is an economic plan and blueprint for 

disaster. It's creating no jobs whatsoever for anybody. 

 

Now for the first time . . . we want to talk about here for a 

minute, motor vehicle sales in the province. For the first time 

ever, it says here, at least in my records, according to this 

statistician, there were fewer than 2,000 vehicles sold in 

Saskatchewan during a one-month period. The 1,980 units sold 

in January was 12 per cent lower than a year ago, and 23 per 

cent from five years ago. 

 

Now here again this sounds like an economic plan 



962 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1993 

that's not working too well. I haven't heard anybody say 

anything about spring seeding money — let's go find some 

dollars for the farmers; let's find some money for fertilizer or 

spray. We haven't heard anything like that. All we hear about is 

these great economic plans that this government has got to 

reinstigate a list of things that are working well, and the 

problem of course being for them that they have to dig up 

things that the last administration already had in process. 

 

Well let's talk a little bit about these numbers that they like to 

throw around. I want to just quickly go through a few numbers 

here about the labour forces in thousands from the province of 

Saskatchewan labour force and employment data, the annual 

and monthly averages from 1990, 1991, 1992 and 1993. 

 

Now under the both sexes, and that's obviously the 

combination of the figures from men and women, in 1990 we 

had 483,000 people and in 1993 that's down to 470,000. And of 

course there's a major loss there, but it manages to work out to 

a minus .2 per cent for the year to date. 

 

And of course that doesn't sound so bad until you look at what 

happened to the men, they went down .4, a minus .4. Women 

were actually up .2 so they have fared a little better in the 

province for some reason. But the net figure of course is still 

down, which totally contradicts what the member opposite had 

just said. 

 

Unemployment rates for the province, Regina and Saskatoon. 

We're looking at 7 per cent in 1990 for the province. And we're 

down — up to, rather, 9.6 per cent for February, 1993. Says 

here, right here, in this statistical data. 

 

So where is all this great economic advantage and 

diversification that's going on in the province? Where's the 

benefit? What are we getting out of it? Where's the jobs? Tell 

me: has this guy got statistics here that are not right? What's 

happening to this economic diversification and this plan that 

was supposed to create all this work? Where are the jobs? Why 

do we have everybody on unemployment and welfare and the 

numbers showing very clearly that our numbers of people 

employed are going down? We've got the employment in 

thousands. 

 

Well I've dwelled on that page long enough, because every one 

shows exactly what I've said. The member doesn't know what 

she's talking about because she hasn't used the right statistical 

data. Or maybe she dug up something that she planned. 

 

I want to talk about the Social Services case-loads, though, on 

page 12 of this report. And just to very quickly show what 

we're talking about, we're going here from dollars in . . . 

receipts here for in the millions of dollars, and considering that 

these are millions of dollars, we go from 26 to 33 in 1991. 

 

Now that is a significant increase in the cost of Social Services 

to our province and to our people. Increases of, as I said before, 

goes to 18.4 per cent increase. And 

that's just a phenomenal load on the taxpayers of our province, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the members also wanted to dwell a little bit on the great 

things they're doing. The first speaker talked about the labour 

legislation that's been through this process of this government 

last year and what's coming forth, he predicts, in a week or so 

or whenever it's coming, along with he predicts in 1994 they're 

going to do some more to us. Well and I mean they're going to 

do it to us. This is not for us. This is doing it to us. 

 

Listen to this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Here we have from the 

Leader-Post. Again I'll just refer to an article: "Workers' 

Compensation costs to rise. Business groups opposed." Very 

simple headlines. So if it's so great for everybody, how come 

everybody's so excited? 

 

 The government plans to introduce changes to the Workers' 

Compensation Act within three weeks over the protests of 

business groups that say their costs will skyrocket. 

 

They're not talking about increases, they're saying words like 

sky-rocket. 

 

 Labour Minister . . . (I won't say the name, but it's there) said 

Thursday that opponents of the changes are overstating the 

effect it will have on job creation and economic development. 

 

 "I think the negative impact it will have on the business 

community is overrated, so long as the assessments remain 

competitive with Alberta and Manitoba." 

 

That's what the minister said. Okay? Giving him the benefit of 

the doubt. He's had his side of the story. And we estimate the 

assessment will go up by 15 per cent. Now even 15 per cent 

increase in costs in a depression sounds pretty significant to 

me. Now if that is not a substantial increase, on the other hand, 

as I've reminded business, it will be the second lowest in 

Canada. 

 

 But . . . (the minister's name again) word that contributions 

will rise by no more than 15 per cent has had no effect on the 

fears of business. 

 

Well if it has no fears on the effects of business, we'd better go 

on and check what business has to say. They even give us an 

assurance of a proper actuarial study ahead of time. Okay . . . 

They can't, rather. It says: 

 

 "They can't even give us an assurance of a proper actuarial 

study ahead of time," said Dale Botting, director of provincial 

affairs for the Canadian Federation of Independent Business 

. . . 

 

 "We see a group of children playing with actuarial matches." 

 

I don't think I need to read any more. That's the 



April 13, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 963 

statement of what business thinks about this whole process that 

you're going into. And I'll just paraphrase for them and say to 

you members of the government that businesspeople in this 

province believe that you're heading into a total disaster and 

that your costs and your downloading and the changes that 

you're making to these programs are in fact going to do nothing 

but drive people out of this province and shut business down. 

And when you shut down some small business . . . isn't that 

ironic, we talk about small business? 

 

A few minutes ago in this very Assembly, Mr. Speaker, the 

members opposite laid claim to the fact that small business are 

the very people who are going to create the most work and the 

most jobs. And yet here we've got this government right on the 

other hand, introducing all kinds of labour legislations that's 

going to make small business so uncompetitive in this province 

that they will no longer be able to exist or continue to function. 

 

They're going to go broke. They can't survive. They won't be 

competitive with the other provinces as long as we have free 

trade between our provincial boundaries, which of course the 

Premier of this province has himself said that he believes in 

and supports. 

 

And if we're going to have that, and we're not competitive with 

the rest of the people in the other provinces, they're going to 

come in and do whatever work we've got to do because they 

can do the job cheaper. Our small businesses are out of 

business. That's what this whole plan is about — putting our 

small businesses out of business, not into business. 

 

(1600) 

 

I'll just talk to you a little bit more about this labour thing. I'm 

going to quote a little bit out of a news release here. 

 

 The Saskatchewan employers question Department of Labour 

proposals to amend The Workers' Compensation Act. These 

proposed amendments carry crushing costs at a time when 

many businesses in the province are struggling to maintain 

viability. Statistics clearly demonstrate the successful efforts 

by Saskatchewan employers to develop and implement 

programs that promote the safety, education and accident 

prevention, and that focus on recovery and rehabilitation. 

 

 Continuing trends indicate fewer claims, less lost-time 

accidents, and for shorter periods of time. Controversially 

there has been no empirical evidence to support the need for 

the changes. The reality of the changes proposed are creating 

a form of payroll tax on every Saskatchewan employer. 

 

Listen to that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They themselves, the 

small-business people of this province, are saying that this is in 

fact nothing else than a payroll tax on 

every Saskatchewan employer that will ultimately have an 

impact on wages and the availability of jobs. An actuarial study 

commissioned by the Workers' Compensation Board indicates 

the proposed changes would create a horrendous unfunded 

liability and more than double assessment rates paid by all 

employers. 

 

Now isn't that a very different story than what we've been 

hearing from the members opposite about economic 

diversification and creation of jobs and all these good things. 

 

Well if we want these good things, we can have them. But you 

can't do it both ways. You can't stab them in the back and hope 

they're going to live. I'll go on just a bit more here: 

 

 Saskatchewan is the envy of every other jurisdiction in this 

country with respect to its workers' compensation system. 

Employees have the most comprehensive benefits, employers 

are assessed some of the lowest rates, and our Workers' 

Compensation Board is one of the only two fully funded 

boards in the country. We have a major comprehensive 

advantage in attracting much needed economic development 

in the province. 

 

That goes according to the old methods that are being used. 

And those statements are made if we stayed with that kind of 

program. But here we have the Saskatchewan Business 

Coalition releasing a news release stating these absolute facts 

that they believe in. And I'm quoting from them and I'll dwell 

on it a little later in a few minutes in my own way of surmising, 

but I want to quote on: 

 

 Workers' compensation programs in many jurisdictions in 

Canada and in the United States are in serious financial 

difficulty, the results of liberalisation of benefits combined 

with recession. Programs for workers are deteriorating, 

employer assessments are sky-rocketing, and the boards have 

incurred enormous unfunded liabilities. Saskatchewan 

employers ask, "is this a model we want for our province?" 

 

That's what they're saying to you about your economic 

development plans here and your changes to labour legislation. 

 

I'll just finish off by quoting one more little bit out this letter. 

 

 Members of the Saskatchewan Business Coalition believe it 

is absolutely urgent that the number one priority in this 

province's agenda must be economic renewal and job 

creation. Changing a successful workers' compensation 

system for unsubstantiated reasons is very far removed from 

this objective. 

 

That makes sense to me. And I'm not saying that there aren't 

some people, Mr. Speaker, who have not 



964 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1993 

received the kind of benefits from Workers' Compensation that 

they should have had. There are some problems. I'd be the first 

one to admit that in our society and in our workforce we have 

some things that don't work 100 per cent. But let's not throw 

the baby out with the bath water here. The reality is that those 

people that have individual problems should be given an 

opportunity to have their problems addressed realistically and 

very quickly. I'm appalled at some people having to take two 

and three and four years out of their life to fight the system and 

then of course win some compensation, but in the meantime 

they've suffered all kinds of mental anguish. 

 

Well if you're going to have economic recovery and economic 

rejuvenation, you can't have an unhappy workforce to that 

extent. We've got to solve those problems. But we can't destroy 

the whole system in so doing. We don't want to go to a system 

like Ontario's where they've got $10 million in unfunded 

liabilities. That is not economic diversification and 

development; that's going into more debt. It's an unfunded debt 

that the government of the province of Saskatchewan ends up 

picking up. 

 

Nobody else picks up that debt once you've got it. It becomes 

the debt of the government. Workers' Compensation runs in the 

hole. If you've got a debt you will end up having to accept the 

responsibility as a government. And the very thing that you say 

you're fighting to stop in this province is the very thing that 

you're going to initiate. 

 

Well I've dwelt on that issue long enough, Mr. Speaker, 

because there are some other points that we have to make here. 

 

Now this private member's motion talks about economic 

diversification and wanting to take credit for and have pride in 

economic diversification. And I want to talk about a specific 

issue that happens to by a stroke of fate fall into my 

constituency, and that of course is the Cypress Hills and the 

wood-cutting problem that we have there. 

 

We've got a government that's claiming it's got economic 

diversification on its mind and wants to go out and create some 

jobs. What do they do? They get a message from one person, 

one fanatic who says that we've got to save some little flowers 

out in the west bloc of Cypress Hills. They don't look into how 

you can save this flower. What they do is they cancel all the 

logging permits, put a whole bunch of people out of work, stop 

everything. They don't investigate how you could save the 

flowers and at the same time improve the forest by selectively 

cutting some of it that should be cut down because it's so old 

it's going to burn or it's going to be so badly diseased it's no 

good for anything. 

 

That's the kind of economic planning we've got going on in our 

province. It's not planning; it's anarchy. You drive 25 families 

out of work, you've got no back-up plan, no contingency work 

for them, no job creation, no nothing for anybody, and you shut 

the whole thing down because you haven't got the intestinal 

fortitude 

it takes to ask a second party for an opinion of how you could 

save the things that need to be saved out there. 

 

And I'll tell you right now, members of the government, go and 

talk to a few of the ranchers that live out there. They'll tell you 

those flowers have been there for ever, as long as they can 

remember. They've been there for a hundred years, their 

families, lots of them. And they'll tell you how to save those 

flowers. You can put up a few fences here and there, a little bit 

of management, and you can have the $2 million spin-off from 

the cattle industry without driving all the stock out. You don't 

have to set fire to the forest to clean up the bugs and the 

beetles. You can selectively cut the timber that needs to be cut 

and use it for some practical purpose. 

 

But that's what this government has been calling economic 

development in our province — shutting things down. Well it 

happens to hit close to home sometimes. And when it does, I 

get a little bit excited, Mr. Speaker, but I'll get on to some of 

these other issues. 

 

Let's talk a little bit about the development and economic lack 

of development in rural road construction. The government 

decides this year . . . one step further back. Last year they 

decided to cut the grants in the province for rural 

municipalities. And they way they did it — one of the ways 

they did it — was they took the futures grants that were owed 

by the government to the municipalities, they split them in half 

and said, we're only going to pay half back now each year 

instead of the full amount it was before. So if you were owed 

by the government for three years of futures, now it's going to 

take you six years to get your money back. That's the way the 

plan works. 

 

Now in so doing . . . That wasn't so bad. Most of the 

municipalities were saying: okay, that's fine; we'll still try to 

put up some money to build some roads, to fix our road 

structure and keep the bumps out and keep some of the 

contractors working, and we'll take it in year five or year six or 

year seven, down the road sometime. That's okay; we're willing 

to accept that. We'll take on that responsibility. 

 

Now the government decides to come up with a new accrual 

accounting system, and in so serving that accounting system 

they say ah, but we're going to put a limit of two years of 

futures that you can have in your municipality owing to you 

from the government — a maximum of two years after they 

split in half. In other words if you were owed one year last year 

and that was cut in half, that makes two years. Now you're out 

if you've got, even from the previous year, one year of futures 

coming. Because now it's two and now you're limited and you 

can't build roads. 

 

So we've got a situation in eastern Saskatchewan for an 

example for you. Members of the government will want to pay 

attention to this. You just entered a program where you're 

going to split $70 million to build highways in this province; 

the federal government's going to put up half the money. You 

ought to be singing the praises out on the street 



April 13, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 965 

corners and yelling it to all the news media. 

 

Haven't heard a word. We've had to bring it out and have the 

media bring it to us and us bring it to them, so that you could 

even get the recognition for the little bit of good you are going 

to get as a result of making a deal. 

 

Well what are you doing to these municipalities? You got 200 

miles . . . or 200 kilometres — I'd better get in the right 

distances here — 200 kilometres applied for by rural 

municipalities in the east side of this province for 

reconstruction and 81 of those kilometres have already been 

turned down and quite a few more, I suspect, will be turned 

down because these municipalities can't meet the new criteria 

of the limitation on their futures grants. And that means that 

these roads won't be built and our rural road system is going to 

be going downhill. It's going to get deteriorated to the point 

where it's going to cost double the money to fix them later on. 

 

But more importantly, Mr. Speaker, in this conversation of this 

debate today, this economic diversification so-called plan, what 

it means is that our contractors are going to be without work. 

Our people that would be out there picking the rocks and 

running the machinery and cutting the weeds and filling the 

holes and all those things that go with the construction of these 

rural roads are all going to sit by idly doing nothing this year 

because the new rules prohibit them from going ahead with 

these projects. 

 

We talk about creating jobs and economic diversification on 

one hand and we stab the whole system in the back on the other 

hand. It doesn't make any sense whatsoever. Everything that 

seems to be going one step ahead is two steps backwards. I'm 

sure that's not a new philosophy in this Assembly, but we saw 

it all back in the '70s before and we'll have to see it change 

again. But the reality is, Mr. Speaker, that this whole process is 

just going backwards. 

 

I can talk to you about how the economic plan of this province 

has gutted the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 

program so there isn't any money for people to seed their crops 

and how people are phoning around these days trying to find 

other people to farm their land because they haven't got the 

money to put their machinery in the fields. 

 

I could talk to you about specific people, specific instances, 

specific cases, but I'm not going to bother because the members 

of this government are perfectly aware of these situations. Half 

of them are involved in the agricultural industry themselves 

and they know very well what they've done to rural 

Saskatchewan in their rural revenge perpetrated by their leader, 

the Premier of this province. 

 

But let's talk a little bit about health care because you all can 

say, well we heard about agriculture a long time. Okay, let's 

talk about health care. That doesn't just affect farmers, that 

affects everybody. And believe me, if the people in the cities of 

this province think for one minute that only rural hospitals are 

going to be 

shut down and only rural people are going to be out of their 

jobs as nurses and doctors and have to get out of the province 

or go to the cities, believe you me, it'll happen in the cities very 

quickly as well. You're going to see a cut-back in your medical 

care. 

 

This medical care system is shot, it's dead, and it's gone, and 

this socialist government is the one that's taken it away from 

you and nobody else. Medicare in this province is dead. All we 

got left now is to bury it; and they'll do that very quickly as 

well, you watch them. You just watch them. Health care will 

affect everybody in this province. You'll be standing up in line 

to get into Alberta to be in the hospital in Medicine Hat or 

Calgary. 

 

The workers of this province, Mr. Speaker, have been 

absolutely betrayed. This was the government that was 

supposed to be their champion. This was the government that 

was not only going to make everything better, they were going 

to create all these great new things, and do so much more. This 

was the government that promised no more new taxes. This 

was the government that promised that everything would be 

better for everybody. And here are the workers of the province 

struggling with 16 per cent increase in welfare recipients. 

We've got unemployment up to 9.6 per cent from 7 two years 

ago. And this is the government that betrayed them, nobody 

else. The biggest betrayal in the history of this province. 

 

And at the same time they have the nerve to stand over there 

today and talk about how they're going to negotiate with the 

native people to find them some new working conditions and 

some new prosperity and they can't even settle a little matter 

like White Bear. Now you tell me how they're going to 

negotiate with those folks to get anything going at all when 

they can't even handle one first situation that comes up. 

Blueprint for disaster, that's what this is all about. It's not a 

blueprint to help anybody. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, a few minutes ago the member opposite 

said small business creates 70 per cent of the jobs in this 

province. Most of her statistics have been proven wrong here 

today, but just on the surface I'm going to say let's take that at 

face value and say that it's true, because it probably is — 70 per 

cent of the jobs are likely created by small business. I don't 

know if she includes agriculture in that or not, but that's 

immaterial. 

 

But the reality is that if you impose labour laws and labour 

regulations, if you impose 9 per cent tax instead of 7 per cent 

tax — which you've already done — if you impose such great 

burdens on that small business community that they can no 

longer exist, what is the first thing that they will do? Lay off a 

worker. That's the first medicine for a business that's starting to 

fail — you start trimming out your extra workers, you fire 

people, you reduce the labour force, you don't improve it or 

increase it. 

 

And if you can't see that happening, go to Maple Creek, 

Saskatchewan, and find out what's happening 



966 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1993 

with people going over to Alberta to shop. They're going in 

droves because this government has made the situation totally 

unbearable. Small business can no longer survive in this 

province and it's not now just restricted to that hundred-mile 

line on the west side of the province. It's starting to go through 

the entire province. 

 

The iceberg budget of this government, Mr. Speaker, has 

totally wrecked any kind of bright future. The Premier says, the 

train has left the station. Well I say to you that the train has left 

the station and there's a light at the end of the tunnel, and it's 

the train that's being driven by the Premier of this province and 

he's going to run over everybody that gets in his way. 

 

(1615) 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I didn't want to dwell on this topic as long 

as I have so what I want to do is to get on with my motion. The 

day goes on, and we have to get on to a more realistic approach 

to this debate so I want to read my motion. I move by myself, 

the member from Maple Creek, and seconded by the member 

from Moosomin: 

 

 That all of the words after the word "Assembly" be deleted 

and the following be substituted therefor: 

 

 condemns the Minister of Economic Development for his 

failure to carry through on any of his stated goals for the 

province, and in particular for failing the people of 

Saskatchewan by: abandoning any pretence of an economic 

development strategy for rural and urban Saskatchewan; 

refusing to pursue a nuclear industry; providing tax 

incentives to Sears resulting in the closure of rural facilities 

in trade for part-time jobs in Regina; repeatedly announcing 

the success of the Piper deal and repeatedly failing to deliver 

on his announcements; incurring a dead loss of $47 million 

last year in SEDCO; expending $50 million of taxpayers 

money on his own department with no discernible economic 

benefits; refusing to build an ethanol industry at no cost to 

the government; presiding over the collapse of 

Westank-Willock without any serious attempt at an employee 

take-over; failing to maintain a competitive climate for the 

Saskatchewan livestock industry; crippling the province's 

grain industry; undermining major industries through public 

campaigns of innuendo, coercion and threats; secretly 

spending $20 million to go into partnership with 

organizations alleged to have mafia connections and 

activities under criminal investigation around the world; 

promising the relocation of 700 businesses to the province 

without delivering a single one; promising to increase 30,000 

new jobs and instead losing 11,000 in one year; attacking the 

basic infrastructure of the province such as the effort to 

plough under paved highways; increasing all costs of doing 

business in the province from 

utility rates to the paper burden involved in meeting 

government decrees; and the repudiation of Saskatchewan 

business in the government's proposed costly labour 

legislation agenda. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — This amendment has been moved by the 

member from Maple Creek and seconded by the member from 

Moosomin. It is not possible for me to check whether or not the 

amendment is in order. It's a fairly lengthy amendment. So I 

will allow the debate to continue concurrently on both the main 

motion and the amendment, and in the meantime I will check 

over the amendment. 

 

But before I do so, I do want to just ask members that many of 

these arguments that are put in here . . . or the facts that are put 

in here should be used as arguments in debate and should not 

really be included in the amendments. But I do want to check it 

over, but in the meantime I'm going to let members debate the 

motion and the amendment concurrently. 

 

Mr. Roy: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to say 

it's a pleasure for me to engage in this particular debate. And I 

want to say that I wholeheartedly support the motion that was 

put forward by the member from Saskatoon Idylwyld and also 

the seconder, the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster, 

commending the Minister of Economic Development and the 

Department of Economic Development on doing a wonderful 

job and having the foresight to lead Saskatchewan into the 21st 

century with this particular economic development strategy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I get into that strategy, I just want to 

comment briefly on some of the comments that the member 

from Maple Creek made here just previous. It ceases to amaze 

me, Mr. Speaker, how the members opposite can stand in this 

particular legislature and rant and rave against the government 

of the day, Mr. Speaker, when they know fully well that they 

are the reason, they are the responsibility, Mr. Speaker, for the 

plight that we find ourselves in today in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you when they talk about rural 

revenge in Saskatchewan, I think they have to look at 

themselves in the mirror, Mr. Speaker, because for 10 long 

years they racked up $1 billion of new debt each and every 

year. And, Mr. Speaker, that is the reason this government has 

to look at new economic development strategies, has to look at 

fiscal responsibility, and put priorities on those particular areas, 

Mr. Speaker. They are the reasons for rural revenge. They are 

the reasons, Mr. Speaker, that the rural areas of this province 

are having the difficulty they are having. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 13, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 967 

Mr. Roy: — Mr. Speaker, it also amazes me how this small 

Tory rump can stand up here and lambaste the government on 

its budget and on its economic development strategy, the 

Partnership for Renewal, Mr. Speaker, when right across this 

country and in fact outside the country there is accolades being 

shown towards the government. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan is being praised by financial 

consultants, accounting firms, lending institutions, other 

governments, other government departments. The Government 

of Saskatchewan is being praised on its initiatives and its . . . 

the responsibility, and also for tackling the huge financial 

strait-jacket and huge financial mess that we have in place in 

Saskatchewan. And that is what we are being praised on, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

How can the members opposite, how can the members opposite 

stand up and deny, deny that the government is really tackling 

these particular problems? Mr. Speaker, it defies reality. Don't 

they read the papers? Or do they selectively read what they 

want? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I tell you that I was reading a few days ago quotes 

from right across Canada from some of the major newspapers 

across this country. They were commenting on Saskatchewan's 

budget and on Saskatchewan's economic plan. And I'll tell you 

that those were some of the most positive statements that have 

been printed in papers in the last six months to a year, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to correct the member from Maple Creek 

because he went on on various issues and various subjects with 

no authority whatsoever. And certainly some of the numbers 

and some of the information he was providing certainly is 

erroneous, and I want to correct him right here, Mr. Speaker, 

and in particular on one particular subject. He commented on 

the closure, or the closure of a rabbit processing plant in Swift 

Current, Mr. Speaker, and he laid the responsibility, or the 

blame, at the feet of the present government in Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to correct the member from Maple 

Creek. And I will quote from the Leader-Post on April 10, in 

which it states the reason for the problem with severance pay is 

that: 

 

 The federal act was changed a year ago, but a crucial part of 

the new legislation — a $50 to $60-million wage fund, was 

omitted . . . 

 

 That fund would have paid out severance in the event a 

company declared bankruptcy and no money was left for 

employees after the sale of the assets. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member from Maple Creek should 

pick up the telephone and phone his friend Brian in Ottawa and 

lay the blame at his feet, not at the feet of the New Democratic 

government in Saskatchewan. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: — And I would also advise the hon. member that he 

should get his facts straight before he comes in the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to comment about confidence, and in 

particular investor confidence. Now how do you build investor 

confidence, Mr. Speaker? First thing you do, Mr. Speaker, is 

you have to create a climate in which investors will be 

comfortable in coming to a particular region or a particular 

province or a particular state to invest. And, Mr. Speaker, the 

first pillar of that confidence, of that house of confidence, is to 

have your financial affairs in order. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you are a government in a province like 

Saskatchewan that has a $15 billion debt, total public debt, Mr. 

Speaker, what that signal sends out to investors is that the per 

capita debt in Saskatchewan and the percentage of the gross 

domestic product is too high. And they want to see a 

government committing itself and doing things, concrete 

evidence that the government is serious about getting its 

expenditures under control. That's what you've got to do first of 

all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's what the Government of Saskatchewan has 

done. In this budget which we presented in March, the 

Government of Saskatchewan has set a bold, new direction, a 

balanced budget plan which sets out a plan for getting . . . 

achieving a balanced budget by '96-97 fiscal year. 

 

Now how much more of a solid indication to investors is there 

than that, Mr. Speaker? What we are demonstrating to investors 

is that we have got our financial house in order. We've reduced 

expenditures last year by a total of 3 per cent; this year it's 

going to be over 7 per cent. And, Mr. Speaker, that is going to 

build confidence in investor markets because they're going to 

want to come to Saskatchewan because they know that we have 

the finances and the financial house in order. So, Mr. Speaker, 

that is the first part of building that confidence to attract 

investors. 

 

A second part of that, Mr. Speaker, is to ensure that some of 

the other areas are being addressed, such as economic 

development and the whole idea of stimulating the economy. 

Mr. Speaker, the history of Saskatchewan has been a mixed 

economic model. And, Mr. Speaker, we've had a balance of 

public, private, and cooperative investment in the province. Mr. 

Speaker, those have been the three main pistons in the 

economic engine of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the years in Saskatchewan's history, 

depending on the time, Mr. Speaker, there may have been more 

percentage of investment in one particular sector than others. 

But they balanced out over the years, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. 

Speaker, what did we see when the previous government came 

in? They decided that they were going to rip out one engine . . . 

one piston of that economic engine, and that was the 

cooperative sector. 



968 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1993 

Mr. Speaker, it was shameful the kind of treatment that they 

gave to our cooperative organizations in this province. In 1987 

the culmination was that they disbanded the Department of 

Co-operation. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, brought in the 

department of diversification and privatization. Mr. Speaker, I 

want to tell you, that was shameful. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have those three main pistons. And, Mr. 

Speaker, what we are trying to do now is trying to regain that 

balance. And one of the main parts of that is of course to make 

sure that the cooperative sector is brought into that . . . into this 

mix. 

 

I want to just touch on the . . . our Partnership for Renewal 

strategy document which was released last fall, Mr. Speaker. 

And it has some basic approaches and principles to it, Mr. 

Speaker. And I want to tell you that our government and the 

Minister of Economic Development and the department went 

to great lengths to ensure that we would have consultation and 

we would bring all of the stakeholders into this consultation 

process. And I want to commend our government for going the 

extra mile to ensure that that consultation took place. 

 

And I think we can be proud of the kind of meetings and the 

kind of input we had into this document. I think it's something 

that we have not seen in the history of this province, and I think 

that is why this document is so vital to moving Saskatchewan 

towards the next century, the 21st century. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Roy: — Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the 21st century 

and certainly moving towards a new world economy. And I 

think everybody recognizes that we are going through 

tremendous economic changes globally. There's no doubt that 

the former Russian country, now it's being . . . it's going 

through tremendous upheaval, economic and otherwise. What 

will happen at the end of that, I'm not sure of. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we've also seen an escalation of regional trading 

blocks such as the European Economic Community. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we're now starting to see that move. We're starting to 

move towards that even in North America. We certainly are 

reluctant in wanting to move toward something in that nature 

but unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, that is the direction we're going 

in. 

 

So all of this, this new economic structure that will come out of 

this, is going to make it imperative that we get our economy 

prepared for that new competitiveness. And there will be new 

competition, Mr. Speaker, and it will be a very fierce 

competition, Mr. Speaker, but I'm sure that Saskatchewan 

businesses and the province of Saskatchewan will fare very 

well in the next century. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit also about . . . a 

little bit more about building a climate of economic renewal. 

And it's very, very important that we get the economy rolling 

again because that is the only way . . . it's one of the ways in 

which we are going to meet our trajectories. And, Mr. Speaker, 

I might add that if you take a look at the budget which we 

brought down in March, there is a plan, a balanced budget plan. 

And, Mr. Speaker, if you take a look at the Partnership for 

Renewal, there is a plan and it is a very structured and very 

defined plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think . . . I want to concur with what my 

colleague, the member from Saskatoon Idylwyld stated, that 

never before has a government put its credibility on the line by 

stating such an ambitious plan and stating it and defining it and 

saying to the people of the province of Saskatchewan: here is 

our economic plan; here's how we're going to get there; and 

you will be able to judge us. And if we do not meet that, then 

you will be able to render your judgement upon us. Telling 

you, that takes guts, Mr. Speaker. And that is what this 

government has done. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that that is ambitious and it is 

certainly something that has not been seen in a long time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the role of government in 

economic development. And I think a classic case can be made 

by looking at the years 1982 to 1991 when the former 

government was in place, about how you do not get 

government involved in some of these large projects. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we do not announce economic development 

projects from the top of Regina buildings. When it comes to 

economic development, Mr. Speaker, and the role of 

government in economic development, our two feet are firmly 

planted on the ground. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the role of government — what is it? How far 

should it go in economic development? Well I think our 

partnership for economic renewal speaks of that, Mr. Speaker. 

We believe that government has a very important role in 

economic development. And the strategy also documents quite 

clearly how far the government should go, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to tell you that the public sector in Saskatchewan has 

always played a major role in economic development. And as I 

said, it has been one of the economic pistons in the economy 

and we will continue to do that, Mr. Speaker, but we will 

commit our attention to small- and medium-sized, existing and 

new businesses in Saskatchewan. That is where 80 per cent of 

all new jobs in the last 10 years were created, and that's where 

we are going to focus our attention, unlike the opposite 

government that put millions and billions of dollars towards 

megaprojects — megabucks for megaprojects. 

 

And we are seeing the results of that, Mr. Speaker. We are 

seeing that the bond-rating agencies across the world are 

pointing to some of the debt commitments, the guaranteed 

debts that we have that were 



April 13, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 969 

comprised or were made up by the previous government, 

telling you our government is not going to be taking that 

particular road. We are going to go where we get the best bang 

for a buck and that is with small- and medium-sized businesses. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in closing I just want to commend our 

government. I want to commend the Minister of Economic 

Development and the Department of Economic Development 

for this particular strategy, for putting out a blueprint for the 

future. 

 

I think it is bold. I think it's going to lead us to economic 

renewal, and certainly I would ask the members opposite to 

take a closer look at this particular document. Because if you 

look at it closely and look at the results that are happening out 

in the economy, you see that we are meeting our targets and 

they're right in this document. And you can compare them, Mr. 

Speaker. I'm proud of that. 

 

I also want to compliment my colleague from Saskatoon 

Idylwyld and my colleague from Cut Knife-Lloydminster for 

their great presentations. And, Mr. Speaker, through the 

commitment and through the cooperation of all stakeholders in 

the economy in Saskatchewan, we will reverse this situation. 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm going to 

obviously oppose the motion and support the amendment. I 

would like to begin, Mr. Speaker, by saying to the member 

from Kinistino, that I was just in Cudworth and there was an 

opening where Joe Saxinger, the former MLA from Kinistino, 

had a kind of a grand opening of his new store, where he sells 

farm machinery supplies and various kinds of short-line 

equipment. 

 

And he's been very successful over the years and I suspect 

there's a 150 or 200 people showed up for this grand opening. 

And they were talking about the economic strategy in the 

province of Saskatchewan under the socialists, under the NDP. 

And I'm sure that the NDP MLA might have wanted to attend 

but he didn't bother to show up. And I can understand why he 

didn't show up because all I could hear, Mr. Speaker, was 

significant and severe criticism of the NDP administration. Not 

only on health care policy, and not only on agriculture policy, 

but particularly on their financial and their economic strategy, 

which is doom and gloom, and a disaster, and increased 

deficits, and declining credit ratings, and picking on rural 

people. 

 

So the NDP from Kinistino, the NDP member, didn't show up 

at Cudworth for this grand opening. And there were people 

there who had voted CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation) or voted NDP. And the recent ones that had voted 

NDP were not very proud of it. In fact most of them were hard 

to find because not many people these days admit they voted 

NDP. 

Well there's one over here — the new cabinet minister from 

The Battlefords did admit it. He put up his hand; he admits that 

he voted NDP. 

 

Well there's not many that admit it any more because they're so 

ashamed of the policy, they're so ashamed of the economic 

policy and the social policy and the health care policy that 

when you go out and talk to them at the rinks or at community 

functions, they say, well where's my NDP MLA? He doesn't 

show up any more. She doesn't show up any more. They don't 

come out to functions because it's so unpopular to be NDP. 

 

So in Cudworth, Mr. Speaker, there was no sign of the NDP 

MLA. He wouldn't show up. Two hundred people show up and 

they have a nice barbecue and they have sausages and it's a 

grand opening and they say: he doesn't bother showing up at all 

any more; he just doesn't go to functions. And the reason is he's 

ducking and he's hiding. 

 

And if you look at the economic strategy, he's getting his lead 

from the front benches of the NDP administration, because the 

health care minister won't go out and talk to the public. She 

went out to Weyburn. She went out to Weyburn with the new 

wellness model and she got thoroughly booed. And other 

cabinet ministers went along. It was a disgrace; it was 

embarrassing for them. 

 

And she had some colleagues who admit that they were along 

and they were booed as well. And they even said, well I might 

come back in four years to visit you. And they got booed even 

louder. 

 

So they've decided, Mr. Speaker, that no sense going out and 

trying to justify or explain this new economic development 

strategy because it's non-existent. And it's not only 

non-existent, it's an embarrassment. It's an embarrassment. 

 

And if they won't show up in Cudworth to a grand opening 

where 200 people show up, that tells you something. They 

speak here in the legislature, where they think it's safe, or they 

hide here in the legislature, defending their so-called wellness 

model, but you invite them out to the country or you invite 

them out to the town hall or invite them out to the new opening 

and guess what? — they either show up and get booed or they 

stay home and they hide because the economic strategy is 

non-existent. In fact it's worse than any strategy. In fact if 

they'd have done nothing, we'd be better off. 

 

I'm going to quote, Mr. Speaker, the highlights from Sask 

Trend Monitor, which has statistics about the success or the 

failure of NDP strategy, the economic development strategy 

that they're so proud of. 

 

Not only are people leaving the province, not only are towns 

and villages dying, not only are bankruptcies increasing in 

agriculture but in other parts of the economy, but the doom and 

gloom associated with the NDP's increase in taxes and the 

decline in the credit rating pervades the province now where 

people 



970 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1993 

don't even believe it will get better. In fact they don't believe 

now that the NDP can balance the budget. They don't believe 

that they will have any signs of success for bringing new 

businesses in. 

 

And in fact, Mr. Speaker, what we're finding out, if you look at 

the polls coming forward now in the next federal election, that 

the NDP could virtually be wiped out — wiped out. They're 

down to 9 per cent, single digit, not just because of Ontario, not 

just because of B.C. (British Columbia), but because of the 

kinds of strategies that are resulting in the decline of economic 

activity here in the province of Saskatchewan and the kind of 

strategies that prevent NDP MLAs, like the member from 

Kinistino, even going to grand openings because he's ashamed 

to show his face. And that's what you see in the statistics 

coming forward. They're ducking, they're hiding. 

 

Every once in a while they'll have a big clutch in here to say, 

oh we're really doing well. But they won't go out and meet the 

people because they either get booed or they get cornered or 

they get verbally abused for hurting farmers, closing hospitals, 

kicking people out of their nursing homes; generally providing 

the largest tax increases that we've seen in the history of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And they said, well we have to do this because this is the new 

wellness plan for the province. This is the economic wellness 

plan, this is the health wellness plan. This is the new 

agriculture wellness plan — can you believe that? No wonder 

they're afraid to show up. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they may not like to hear this, but I'll just 

give them their statistics so that they can revel in the joys of 

their success. This is the highlights of current Saskatchewan 

statistics, March 1993. It's from the recent Sask Trends 

Monitor published results. 

 

(1645) 

 

Social assistance case-loads. Try that one on. Social assistance 

case-loads increased by sixteen and a half per cent. Now this is 

the new socialist government that is going to provide assistance 

to low income people, help people on food banks, eliminate all 

kinds of problems that people face as a result of no jobs, and 

we find social assistance case-loads have increased sixteen and 

a half per cent last year after an increase of 5 per cent, which is 

a total of twenty 

_one and a half per cent increase in people who are looking for 

work but can't find it, need more public support, need more 

assistance. 

 

And the claim to fame in economic strategy according to Sask 

Trends Monitor is the case-load for social assistance is up 21 

per cent. And they're bragging about it. They have the audacity 

to stand in the legislature and say: oh we're really doing well; 

social assistance case-loads are up 21 per cent '91 over '93. 

 

More than 3,000 of the average 4,500 new recipients per month 

were considered fully employable. And what that means is 

these were able-bodied men and 

women who could be employed, who could be employed but 

were not employed in the province of Saskatchewan as a result 

of the economic strategy put forward by the NDP 

administration. So more and more and more people are on 

social assistance. The government has to help these people on 

social assistance because it has no economic development 

strategy. 

 

And this motion brought forward is supposed to brag about the 

NDP industrial strategy . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, the 

reality is more and more people in Saskatchewan are on social 

assistance as a result of the NDP economic strategy, and that's 

the facts. Those are the facts being published today by Sask 

Trends Monitor. 

 

So how can they make all this up in here, Mr. Speaker? They 

stand up and say: we're really doing well; the farmers are happy 

and seniors are happy and there's lots of new jobs. Yet today 

the statistics say that there's sixteen and a half per cent increase 

in social assistance clients and most of them are employable 

but they can't find a job in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

That's why they're ashamed to show their face in the country or 

show their face out at town hall meetings, why they won't talk 

to other people outside the legislature, because they either get 

booed or they get beat on. And they're subjected to severe 

verbal abuse because the people know the truth — 

unemployment is increasing; social assistance numbers are 

increasing; taxes are increasing at the same time that we've got 

this new industrial financial strategy that's caused our credit 

rating to fall. 

 

And on top of that they're nowhere near balancing the budget. 

They've added $1.3 billion to the debt with the current deficit 

forecast to be just under $300 million, added to the debt, added 

to the deficit, added to unemployment. 

 

And then they turn on the people and say, well we really have 

to make this work and the new wellness model will take you 

out of your hospitals, will cut you out of your nursing homes, 

will take you off the farms, will reduce the number of rural 

MLAs so that we'll only have to worry about the cities. And 

then we know why they don't show up in places like Cudworth 

for grand openings, because even when somebody has the 

courage to open it up and to open a new business, the NDP 

MLAs don't even show up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, benefit expenditures rose more quickly than the 

case-load. They're up to 18.4 per cent. In other words, people 

need — desperately need — help and social assistance as a 

result of the unemployment in the province of Saskatchewan. 

And the NDP just sit there and they laugh and they say, this is 

our new wellness model, associated with economic 

development. And you've got case-loads increasing like this? 

 

And then they make up some sort of phoney motion about how 

good they are, how fancy it is, how nice it 



April 13, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 971 

is. Well I don't . . . and I know the people are not fooled. I'll tell 

you the people at Cudworth and surrounding area that came 

there to talk about economic conditions weren't fooled at all. 

And they weren't cheerleading. It wouldn't matter if the 

member from Riversdale or the member from any place else 

stood up there in front of them and said, well really, it's really 

good. They'd say, nope, not on my farm, not in my town, not in 

my province; maybe you think it's good here in the legislature 

but it's not good where we are. 

 

Because they recognize Sask monitoring trends are accurate. 

This is what's going on. People are unemployed and people are 

hurt and people have lost hope. And this is sound economic 

strategy. This is the new socialist strategy, just like we saw in 

France, right? What do you think the people of France figured 

out? What did they figure out? Socialist strategy is a failure. I 

don't think they won a seat in the last elections. Kicked them all 

out of office. 

 

Well I must have got their attention, Mr. Speaker. They say 

that there was one socialist elected in France, one. Well 83 per 

cent of the population didn't vote for the socialists in France 

because they said it's a colossal failure. No plan, no strategy. 

 

They had a wellness model in France too. Real new wellness 

model. Fancy ideas. They're going to be competitive, create all 

these jobs, but do you know what they got in France? They got 

a big surprise. No wellness model, no balanced budgets, lots of 

talk, lots of plans, and more and more people on social 

assistance. 

 

That's the facts in Saskatchewan as it is in France. More and 

more people on social assistance and it's costing the taxpayers 

more and more. And they've raised taxes in France. They said, 

oh we must do it. Got to raise taxes to balance the budget. They 

never balanced the budget, just like this bunch here — $800 

million deficit, then a $595 million deficit, now almost a $300 

million deficit. And in four years they say they're going to 

balance it, and they've added 1.5 billion to the debt. And the 

credit rating continues to go down. 

 

Look at the labour force, page 9 of Sask Trends Monitor — 

labour force in thousands, it's falling in the province of 

Saskatchewan. From a previous month it's down minus .9 per 

cent; from the same month last year, minus .9 per cent. The 

number of unemployed in thousands has increased by 17.9 per 

cent over last year. 

 

The number of unemployed in the province of Saskatchewan 

has increased 17.9 per cent over a year ago. And they're 

bragging here today about their economic development 

strategy. So people leave, people quit, people go on social 

assistance, and these figures now say on top of that you've got a 

17.9 per cent increase in unemployment. 

 

Sask Trends Monitor, this is telling the people, or the NDP, 

the truth of how the people feel. They don't like 

what you're doing. They've either quit the labour force, moved 

out of the province, or they're on social assistance. 

 

Now if you take a 17.9 per cent increase and you do that two or 

three years in a row, you've got yourself a 25 to 30 to 40 to 50 

per cent increase in unemployment among those that are left in 

the province. So the out-migration is increasing. The number of 

unemployment is increasing. The number on social assistance 

is increasing. And you are here bragging about your new-found 

strategy. 

 

You've increased power rates, telephone rates, health care rates, 

SGI rates, every other tax you can think of. People know that 

there is now a 9 per cent PST (provincial sales tax) in the 

province of Saskatchewan and no provincial sales tax in 

Alberta, so that they're moving that way at least as far east as 

Regina and Saskatoon, shopping in Alberta. And you're 

standing here with this motion that you'll all cheer for and say, 

aren't we doing well. 

 

Unemployment rate. The unemployment rate has increased 2.4 

per cent over a year ago; 2.8 per cent in Saskatoon; 2.4 per cent 

in Regina; 1.5 per cent in the province. Employment in the 

thousands. And this is particularly difficult for young people, 

Mr. Speaker. If you look at 15 to 24 years of age, it's dropped 3 

per cent from a year ago. So the young people, 15 to 24, 

graduating from universities, graduating from high school, 

graduating from technical institutes, looking for work, have not 

been able to find it in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Employment by regions. And you look at some of this, it's 

really difficult — the south-east part of the province, the 

employment has dropped 14 per cent over a year ago, and that 

excludes the city of Regina; 7 per cent from the area of 

Yorkton and Melville, a decrease. Well, Mr. Speaker, the 

members opposite can make fun of this or they can say its 25 

per cent increase in unemployment is not serious. But it is 

serious. 

 

And the people in this province know the pain. And what 

they're finding out by watching this debate on television, is 

here the NDP members are standing up in this House, not 

reaching out to help people, but bragging in public about their 

new-found economic wellness model that is causing all this 

pain. I mean is this what this new administration is about? Brag 

about this new economic development strategy when you've 

got this kind of unemployment, this kind of pain in the farm 

community, this kind of fear in towns and villages where 

people are losing their hospitals and their nursing homes. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, no wonder people want us to stop the 

closure on closure, to say take time and talk to people; want us 

to stand in this legislature and make very, very sure that at least 

the NDP, no matter how arrogant they can be, and they are, at 

least take the time to listen to the real concerns of people. 

 

When the NDP were in opposition they said, my gosh, 



972 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 1993 

if we had to pay $50 deductible for drugs people would have to 

choose between food and prescription drugs. I remember them 

saying that and the Minister of Social Services said that. And 

now he charges them up to $800 per quarter and it still doesn't 

matter. They said no, this is the new wellness model; we have a 

fine economic development strategy. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they should be ashamed of their strategy. 

They should vote against a motion that brags about this callous 

disregard for people and their lives and their health. 

 

We see here on page 12 as well, Mr. Speaker, Social Services 

case-load is up 18.4 per cent — 16.5 per cent in numbers, 18.4 

per cent from a year ago. So the case-load is increasing by 18 

per cent, the unemployment is increasing by 18 per cent, the 

number of farmers are decreasing, unemployment is increasing. 

They're adding to the debt, the credit rating's going down, and 

they say, well isn't this a nice plan? 

 

And on top of all of this, Mr. Speaker, what we find out is that 

these people promised that if they just had a little bit of NDP 

good management there'd be no tax increases and everything 

would be just fine. They'd have increased money for health and 

education. They'd eliminate food banks. You'd have full 

employment. 

 

And we hear of them call: they will, they will, they will. Well 

they've had now three budgets and they're going the wrong 

direction. They've added 1.3 to 1.5 billion in the deficit and 

people are unemployed and it's hurting, Mr. Speaker. And 

they're standing up here bragging. 

 

Consumer bankruptcies from the previous period are up 32 per 

cent. Consumer bankruptcies are up 32 per cent, Mr. Speaker, 

and they are bragging about their wellness model. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am going to, I'm sure, have the opportunity to 

speak more about the wellness and economic strategy of the 

new administration, but looking at the time, Mr. Speaker, I 

would move that we adjourn debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Estevan has moved 

adjournment of the debate. But before I put the question on the 

adjournment, I have looked at the amendment that has been 

proposed and I find parts of the amendment not relevant to the 

motion and also parts of it which are argumentative. And I 

refer all members to Beauchesne's, paragraph 565, where 

Beauchesne says: 

 

 A motion should be neither argumentative, nor in the style of 

a speech, nor contain unnecessary provisions or objectionable 

words. 

 

Secondly, I refer all members to Beauchesne's, 

paragraph 568: 

 

 It is an imperative rule that every amendment must be 

relevant to the question on which the amendment is proposed. 

 

Parts of the amendment I do not find relevant, and I have 

dropped those words. Therefore the amendment will read as 

follows: 

 

 That all the words after the word "Assembly" be deleted and 

the following be substituted therefor: 

 

 condemns the Minister of Economic Development for his 

failure to carry through on any of his stated goals for the 

province and in particular for failing the people of 

Saskatchewan by abandoning any pretence of economic 

development strategy for rural and urban Saskatchewan; 

refusing to pursue a nuclear industry; providing tax 

incentives to Sears, resulting in the closure of rural facilities 

in trade for part-time jobs in Regina; repeatedly announcing 

the success of the Piper deal and repeatedly failing to deliver 

on his announcements; incurring a dead loss of $47 million 

last year in SEDCO; expanding $50 million of taxpayers' 

money on his own department with no discernible economic 

benefits; refusing to build an ethanol industry at no cost to 

the government; presiding over the collapse of 

Westank-Willock without any serious attempt at an employee 

take-over; promising the relocation of 700 businesses to the 

province without delivering a single one; promising to create 

30,000 new jobs and instead losing 11,000 in one year. 

 

That is the amendment and the member has moved 

adjournment of the debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Speaker, could I ask for a point of 

clarification on your ruling? Not to be argumentative, but you 

did say that the sections that you decided to leave out, Mr. 

Speaker, were based on . . . some of them were argumentative, 

some of them were irrelevant . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I made my ruling and there is 

no clarification on the ruling. If the member wishes to discuss 

it further, he should come to the Speaker's office and I will 

discuss it with him privately. 

 

It now being 5 o'clock, this House stands adjourned until . . . 

Oh I'm sorry. Oh I'm sorry. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — . . . to move adjournment, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:03 p.m. 

 


