




















































Hansard: March 23, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 515 

 March 23, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that 

I shall on Thursday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

 Regarding the children's dental program: (1) how many 

children benefited from the services of this program in the 

last year; (2) what was the value of the benefits offered to 

those children; (3) how many of those children were from 

families on the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan; and (4) how 

many of the children receiving benefits are from families 

receiving payments from the Family Income Plan? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you today, Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce 

someone in your gallery, a constituent from the community of 

Perdue, Mr. Alvin Hewitt. Mr. Hewitt is also chairman of the 

board of the Western Development Museums, is on his way 

through here today going on to visit a new grandson that has 

arrived to the Hewitt family. So I'd like the Assembly to 

welcome Mr. Hewitt here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — I'm happy today to introduce several 

employees, recent employees, of the Saskatchewan Liquor 

Board. They have come, Mr. Speaker, to be with us this 

afternoon to observe how the democratic process works in its 

actual operation. They are seated in your gallery and I'm sure 

that all of the members of the Assembly would join with me in 

welcoming them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you 

. . . to you and through you to the Assembly I'd like to 

introduce Fred Herron, the executive director of the 

Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation, who is seated up in your 

gallery. And I would ask the Assembly, welcome him here 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I just wish to add from 

this side of the House our welcome to Mr. Herron, the general 

secretary of the Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Liquor Board Lay-offs 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My questions 

today are to the minister for the liquor and gambling. Mr. 

Minister, we have visiting with us today a number of 

employees who were given the four-minute firing ceremony of 

your government. All come from the licensing inspection 

branch of the Liquor Board. These are Saskatchewan people, 

Mr. Minister, who are very concerned about your budget 

choices. 

 

So will you just tell these folks, Mr. Minister, and this is my 

question to you: did you personally approve, not only of the 

firings, but the methods used in the firing process? Are you the 

one responsible for this, Mr. Minister? A yes or no answer 

would be fine. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank 

you for the question. I would want to say with respect to the 

consolidation of the Liquor Board and the Gaming 

Commission, there will be a number of job losses, Mr. 

Member. I would want to say with respect to approval of the 

firings the answer is no, I had no knowledge of who was going 

to be removed. With respect to the methods I am unaware of 

the method you speak of, but I will ask the chairman of the 

Liquor Board to give me a report. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now, Mr. Minister, 

I find it absolutely amazing that you would be bucking for a 

job in a ministry . . . in a cabinet where obviously the Premier 

is going to be forced to fire someone by public pressure before 

very long and you don't even know what the heck's going on in 

your department? I don't believe this. 

 

Mr. Minister, it has become painfully obvious that your 

government doesn't know what it is doing when it comes to 

gambling in Saskatchewan. You have handled the situation at 

the White Bear Indian Reserve extremely poorly and you have 

been less than forthcoming about your dealings with the 

American gambling partners, your partners, the VLC (Video 

Lottery Consultants). 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister: given all the 

confusion and mishandling of this issue that you've created, do 

you really expect, Mr. Minister, that four people are going to 

be able to police 1,600 bars in this province? Is that your 

realistic position, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 

responding to the member's question, I would want to say that 

there was a duplication in terms of the services that were 

provided by the inspection, different bodies of inspection with 

respect to health, fire, and municipal building inspections, that 

there was some cross-duplication. And I want to say to the 



516 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1993 

member opposite that I am fully aware of what is required in 

the Gaming Commission and the Liquor Licensing 

Commission. 

 

As a matter of fact, sir, I'm fully aware of what is required 

because of your mismanagement, your government's 

mismanagement for the last 10 years, that there is a desperate 

need to consolidate to save the taxpayers of this province 

money. And part of this consolidation, sir, will save this 

province in the neighbourhood of $5 million a year. And that's 

because we're paying in the neighbourhood of $750 million a 

year on interest on a debt accrued by your government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it almost 

sounds like the old song and story from the used car salesman: 

trust me; I know what I'm doing. Nobody else does, but he 

knows what he's doing. 

 

Mr. Minister, it is obvious to a field mouse that four people 

cannot handle the inspections for both the gaming and the 

alcohol for the whole province, particularly in this start-up 

phase of gambling in the province. 

 

Your excuse for this budget choice, firing these people without 

cause, is that four will do the job. Given that excuse, will you 

commit on record, Mr. Minister, give your word on behalf of 

your whole government — since God only knows how quickly 

you might be replaced and we'll see a new minister of gambling 

and booze in this province — give your word, Mr. Minister, 

that you will not be hiring additional inspectors within the next 

24 months? Will you make that public commitment here today 

to these people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the line of 

questioning is somewhat confusing. On one hand he tells me 

that he recognizes four inspectors can't handle the job. On the 

other hand, and two minutes later, he asks me to give a 

guarantee that we're not going to hire any more employees to 

look after the licensing role. 

 

Let me say this. In the restructuring of gaming and of the 

Liquor Licensing Commission, there will be changes. There are 

changes in terms of the requirements for the inspectors and that 

will be dealt with in due course as the restructuring takes place. 

What I would also want to indicate to the member opposite, 

that he may be unaware of the fact that the Licensing 

Commission deals closely with municipal police forces, with 

the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) around this 

province. There is a good rapport built. And in terms of 

whether or not the public interest will be served, I give you my 

commitment that it will. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think what 

the minister really has said is that we're going to have a new 

job description after a while and some new people will be hired 

to do the same old jobs. Political buddies of course will be the 

only ones that'll qualify. 

 

Mr. Minister, it seems that the vice-president in charge of this 

branch is the brother-in-law of the member from Quill Lakes. 

The budget keeps this high-priced relative of a cabinet minister 

on staff when he has almost no one left to vice-president over. 

What is more, Mr. Minister, the budget also keeps a chief 

inspector who should be capable of chiefing the few who are 

left in this staff. 

 

Is this not simple proof, Mr. Minister, that you are not 

interested in fairness, that you have jobs for your friends and 

your relatives, but that you are very quick to cut out the knees 

of the average family in this working community within our 

province. 

 

Mr. Minister, my question: how can you possible justify 

keeping this vice-president on? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this line of 

questioning becomes more and more bizarre. Perhaps you 

might want to lean across to the member from Estevan and ask 

how he continued to employ this gentleman over the tenure of 

his leadership as premier of this province, because this 

particular individual, sir, has been employed with the province 

of Saskatchewan for over 20 years. He's a professional civil 

servant and I think it's unbecoming a member of this legislature 

to drag a professional civil servant through this legislature. 

 

Now let me say, sir, with respect to patronage, a government 

with the record of the PC (Progressive Conservative) 

government of the 1980s should not even be raising its head 

with the word patronage, sir. This is a new era; this is a new 

way of governing. We are going to be employing people based 

on their ability to do the job, and that is the criteria. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Minister, 

I think you may have heard some of my colleagues comment 

that formerly this vice-president had a department, of which he 

had some control over. He now has no department. What is his 

job? Now you've got two people doing the same thing, and yet 

you fire the people who were actually doing the work. 

 

As far as the past, my friend, I don't care what was right or 

wrong in the past; I care about what's right now. This is your 

government in the future. You can't talk about a future because 

all you guys can think about is doom and gloom and the failure 

of our province, and the inability of our people to run anything 

on their own. 

 

Mr. Minister, as you say, the gaming and liquor functions are 

being combined. How do you justify to these employees in the 

gallery that while they get the 



March 23, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 517 

four-minute firing squad, you keep not only a vice-president 

and a chief inspector of liquor but you also have hired a chief 

inspector for gaming about whom you were crowing 

yesterday? Why do you need two chief inspectors, my friend? 

Tell us that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in answer to 

the member's question, let me be very straightforward. I 

understand why you don't want to talk about the past, that's 

quite clear given the record of the PC government in the l980s. 

Everyone in the province understands that. 

 

With respect to the reorganization of the Liquor Board and the 

Gaming Commission, that will be done. We will have in place 

a leaner administration than was ever there under your 

operation. It will be there to serve the industry and it will be 

there to serve the public. We will have professional civil 

servants doing the jobs, not based on patronage as was the 

practice under your operation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think we will talk 

about the patronage a little bit later. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to address my question to the Premier, a 

new question to the Premier. Mr. Premier, only two 

departments got staff increases in your budget. Your own 

office, the Executive Council, is expanding at taxpayers' 

expense. And your political department, the newly created 

Department of Provincial Secretary, is getting a boost in 

employees at taxpayers' expense. 

 

You are hiring people to do policing things and fly around 

talking to other politicians in other places, and even it appears, 

to organize the NDP federal election efforts in Saskatchewan. 

That's all he's doing. These are the choices your budget is 

making, Mr. Premier. 

 

And, Mr. Premier, my question to you is this: Will you 

guarantee to meet with these employees, explain to them why 

more staff for you and more staff for your Deputy Premier is a 

higher priority than ensuring that the children of this province 

are not sold alcohol. Will you explain these budget priorities to 

the people who are most affected, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to comment on 

the member from Maple Creek's observation that there has 

been an increase in number this year in the Provincial 

Secretary's department over previous, when there was no 

department. And I want to make it clear that it would be 

difficult to have fewer when you start out without a 

department. 

 

As to the role of the individual, the Deputy Premier in the role 

of Provincial Secretary, one of the main roles will be to work 

with the federal Tory government to try to increase the 

procurement . . . Mr. Speaker, I wonder 

if we could get a little bit of control of the members on the 

Tory benches who yell and holler and obviously not wanting to 

hear the answer. But I say very clearly that the procurement 

from the federal government, which is presently at 2 per cent of 

the total amount spent by the federal government, come to 

Saskatchewan. We have 4 per cent of the population. 

 

One of the main roles of the Provincial Secretary will be to 

coordinate with the federal government. And when this 

function is fulfilled — which it never was under your 

administration, I say to the member from Estevan — this 

position will pay for itself 10, 15, 100 times over. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the new Acting 

Premier, I want to say that any kind of semblance of 

cooperation between this government and Ottawa will amaze 

everyone in the world — not just Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Premier, you said that you had to make some tough choices 

in your budget. You have said that the budget called for 

sacrifice, but it also showed compassion. Well, Mr. Acting 

Premier, let's talk about who gets to make the sacrifices and 

who gets to get the compassion. 

 

You choose to summarily dismiss 11 long-time Liquor Board 

employees with about four minutes notice. At an average salary 

of about $40,000, this move will save the province $440,000. 

At the same time, you choose to increase the administrative 

budget for the Provincial Secretary, your Deputy Premier, by 

over $800,000. 

 

Mr. Premier, you gave $800,000 more to an NDP (New 

Democratic Party) cabinet minister with no responsibilities 

other than running the federal NDP campaign. At the same 

time, you were putting people out on the streets with four 

minutes notice. That's what your budget was all about, Mr. 

Premier. Working people make the sacrifices and the . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Does the member have a 

question? Order. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'll get right to the 

question. Mr. Premier, how can you possibly justify these 

actions? How can you call on the people of Saskatchewan to 

make sacrifices while your Deputy Premier, the minister 

responsible for the NDP election campaign, reaps all of the 

rewards? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make it 

clear to the member opposite, again, because obviously, Mr. 

Speaker, he was not listening because of the noise that his 

colleagues were making when I was responding last time. 

 

But the main role, one of the main functions of the Provincial 

Secretary and the Deputy Premier, is to 



518 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1993 

coordinate with the federal government and the federal 

ministers — whether it's Mr. Mazankowski or Bill McKnight 

or those ministers who deal with Saskatchewan — to try to 

force them and encourage them to do more of the procurement, 

that is the taxpayers' of Canada spending, in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I just want to say to you that under your administration . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Will the members please come 

to order. You're asking a question; you should allow the 

minister to at least answer the question. Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make it 

clear to the members opposite that under their administration, 

the 10 years they were in government, even though 

Saskatchewan had a population that represented 4 per cent of 

the Canadian population, that former member, the former 

premier from Estevan got only 2 per cent of the federal 

procurement in the province of Saskatchewan. That's what that 

great relationship between the member for Estevan and the 

Tory Prime Minister got for Saskatchewan. 

 

But we're going to change that. One of the main roles of the 

Deputy Premier is to coordinate with the federal government to 

improve that procurement in the province of Saskatchewan for 

Saskatchewan business people that will mean hundreds of more 

jobs when we convince the federal government to pay the fair 

share to our province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A supplemental 

question to the Acting Premier. Mr. Acting Premier, one story 

reported that up to a thousand people at SaskTel will be offered 

early retirement as a part of your budget choices. 

 

Here in the gallery we have employees with 21 years, 19 years, 

long years of service. One employee told the Star-Phoenix, and 

I'll quote, Mr. Speaker: four minutes later I'm out in the parking 

lot. Whoever took great pleasure in doing this, the man has ice 

water in his veins. It was quite a scene. End of quote. 

 

These employees have been treated like dirt. And it is 

despicable. Where is the compassion in this government? 

Where is the mercy? Where is the fairness, Mr. Premier? 

 

Mr. Premier, notwithstanding the actions you have shown, 

taken against, and should have taken against Paul Weber, the 

spandex man, why are these employees not given the same 

treatment as others have gotten and are promised? Why is there 

no real retirement offer in this budget for these people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is not at 

all obvious who the hon. member was putting 

his question to. It was so long and rambling notwithstanding it 

being punctuated by a punch on the desk. 

 

Let me however respond to the comments about SaskTel. I 

think it's fair to say, Mr. Speaker, that this is the way that we 

have handled these separations. The only separations at 

SaskTel so far have been voluntary. That's not been the case 

universally throughout the government, but these separations 

were done voluntarily. It was a voluntary retirement program. 

That is the way we attempt to deal with employees. At all times 

we attempt to deal with them in the most compassionate 

manner possible. 

 

That's what we're doing at SaskTel and that's what we're doing 

elsewhere. And your attempt to make an issue out of this, I 

think is false. We deal with them as compassionately as we 

can. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have to say that I 

am totally amazed at the manipulation that the minister would 

stand in this House and tell us is good. The manipulation of 

holding a gun to people's heads and saying to them that unless 

you voluntarily retire, you will not get a package for your 

retirement. Unless you voluntarily quit, you will get six weeks 

of severance. And if you voluntarily sign the paper, you will 

get a lump sum equivalent enough to maybe six months or 

more. That, my friend, is something that is explained by a word 

that we were told the other day we can't use in this Assembly, 

but everybody in this world knows what it is. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, will you turn this situation around? 

Will you come clean with the people of this province? Will you 

treat these people with fairness and dignity and respect that 

they deserve for the years that they've put in in this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the 

day when the government holds guns to people's heads ended 

on October 21, 1991. We are treating the public service 

differently these days. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I recall very well, Mr. Speaker, the 

way members opposite used to treat the public service. Prior to 

October 21, 1991, the public service were little better than 

cannon fodder for the members opposite who were in office. 

That day has come to an end, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Nobody at SaskTel was forced to retire. The program, the 

retirement program, was reasonable, reasonably generous, and 

the take-up rate was high. But it was because they were fairly 

treated in the retirement program, not because we have 

perpetuated the kind of behaviour that was so evident when the 

members opposite were in office. 



March 23, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 519 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Purchase of Video Lottery Terminals 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question to 

the minister responsible for gaming. Yesterday you refused to 

make public the details surrounding the government's awarding 

of $10 million contract to an American company with a 

questionable background. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, one would think that given the 

amount of the contract, the scepticism that the public has 

regarding the government's handling of gaming issues, you 

would think that the NDP opposite would be more than willing 

to be open and accountable. As it is, they refuse to open the 

tender or proposal call to public scrutiny. 

 

Mr. Minister, the question is very simple. Will you table the 

contracts which you have entered into with VLC (Video 

Lottery Consultants) and with GTECH? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, my 

answer to the member is quite simple. We are right now in the 

process of negotiating with two American companies who have 

undergone the closest scrutiny by one of the most reputable law 

enforcement officers that this province has seen. Further to 

that, Mr. Member, until the negotiations are complete, I don't 

believe it would be in the public interest to release the details. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, on Friday you announced that 

you were appointing these people to have 1,000 each plus 500 

more. That's what you said in your news release. 

 

We want to know what the contract . . . the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan want to know what that contract . . . 

and who they're with and what they're for and how much the 

money that you spent is for each one of the terminals that you 

purchased. We want to know that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, much of the 

information that the member is asking for has been all over the 

newspapers in Saskatchewan with respect to the two companies 

that we are negotiating with. If he cares to pick up the 

Leader-Post he can look at a column by Kevin O'Connor who 

indicates the two corporations who the Gaming Commission 

has been dealing with. 

 

With respect to the reason that we chose two companies, I 

would want to indicate to the member that we felt that we 

wanted two types of gaming machines because of diversity and 

customers' requirements and their desire to have more than one 

particular kind of machine. 

We know that we are going to be looking for 3,500 machines. 

And I again repeat to the member that I am not about to discuss 

the details before the negotiations have been completed by the 

Saskatchewan Gaming Commission. When those details have 

been completed, we will make the appropriate information 

available. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister. On Friday 

you announced that you were going to have these contracts and 

that they were made with two companies — GTECH and VLC. 

Now you are saying to the Assembly here that you haven't 

completed the contracts. Why did you make that announcement 

on Friday? 

 

Was it because I asked a question that you couldn't answer and 

you didn't want to answer? Is that the reason why you put the 

question aside in the returns debatable and didn't have the 

courage to answer and then had a news release saying only part 

of the information was available? Will you provide the 

proposals and the contracts and table them in the House here 

today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well let me say to the member, 

Mr. Speaker, that the Gaming Commission is meeting with 

these two corporations to hammer out the details of an 

agreement that will supply 3,500 VLTs (video lottery terminal) 

to the province of Saskatchewan. That all of the aspects, 

including the costs and their ability to supply, the financial 

stability of the companies — all of these things were under 

review by the Saskatchewan Gaming Commission. It came 

down to a short-list, from four to two. They are now 

negotiating with them, and I don't believe it's in the public 

interest to release details of those negotiations as they are 

ongoing in terms of finalizing the contracts. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Minister, you said it wasn't in the public 

interest. Twenty million dollars is being spent, of taxpayers' 

dollars, and you don't think it's in the public interest to reveal 

those contracts to the people of Saskatchewan. I think that 

that's wrong, Mr. Minister, and I think we should have the 

proposals tabled in this Assembly today, Mr. Minister. Why 

can't you do it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in answer to 

the member's question — and I guess I can answer it one more 

time — as the negotiations are being completed I don't believe 

it's in the interests of the people of Saskatchewan or the 

Government of Saskatchewan to be releasing details to the 

public. Clearly we are aware that we are going to be spending 

in the neighbourhood of $20 million to secure 3,500 



520 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1993 

machines. 

 

The Saskatchewan Gaming Commission are a group of very 

capable people. The people in the Gaming Commission I 

believe have all of the ability in the world to negotiate the 

finalization of what will be the most appropriate deal that we 

can reach, and that process continues. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 

question no. 89, I would request it be converted to motion for 

return (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: — Motion for return (debate). 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that the Assembly resolve 

itself into the Committee of Finance. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 

evening as I was speaking to this budget address I brought out 

a few points and I went back to the speech presented by the 

Minister of Finance, and there were four different points that 

the Minister of Finance brought out. 

 

One of them was a plan that is committed to compassion. I 

think as we saw this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, again we've seen a 

government where there really hasn't been or isn't that sincere 

commitment to compassion as the ministers would like us to 

believe. I also brought out the point, Mr. Speaker, that there 

were different directions that have been taken, directions by 

this government and directions by other governments. 

 

What we've seen . . . and I talked to a couple of people in the 

coffee shop this morning, Mr. Speaker, individuals who were 

talking about the budget as it was presented, and the different 

fiscal restraints we're facing, and the problems that taxpayers 

are facing with the reduction in their take-home, the bottom 

line that isn't there. 

 

I pointed out to Saskatchewan people yesterday that a number 

of provinces and a number of businesses and employers and 

corporations across this country have taken a route of trying to 

protect jobs by offering employees the opportunity of taking a 

reduction and protecting jobs and having more people working, 

rather than cutting jobs and eliminating departments and just 

having no respect for individuals who are out there presently 

working, even long-standing public 

employees. 

 

And what did we see again today? We see a government trying 

to cover its tracks, and just basically indicating to the people of 

Saskatchewan that they really do not have a plan, and if there 

was a plan of compassion one has to wonder really where that 

plan is. Mr. Speaker, also a number of members talked about 

the difficulties they had in trying to adhere to the budget as it 

was being presented and the problems they're facing in their 

ridings. 

 

There's no doubt in my mind that many government members 

are having a difficult time going home these days, going home 

on the weekend facing the electorate, facing the individuals 

who put their trust in them and basically said they believed 

them more than they believed the other two parties and sent 

them here only to find that they have been rejected, they 

haven't been listened to. 

 

And it's very obvious as I read a headline from the Regina 

Leader-Post, Friday, March 19. The headline reads: "Caucus 

falls in line." And I ask myself, exactly what caucus? What 

does this really mean? And what it says, Mr. Speaker, the 

bottom line in the editorial is the fact that many of the NDP 

members were having a hard time swallowing the budget. 

 

It says, and I'm going to quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 Finance Minister Janice MacKinnon called her budget "very 

difficult for an NDP caucus to swallow." 

 

It goes on: 

 

 But not only did the caucus swallow it, says MacKinnon, 

they became enthusiastic supporters. 

 

I wonder how many members, how many government 

members are really enthusiastic supporters. Yesterday in the 

budget speech debate by a number of members on the opposite 

side of the House there was a strong indication that indeed that 

enthusiasm wasn't as vibrant as maybe it was a few days ago. It 

seems to me that it was becoming somewhat soft. 

 

In fact I look at the member from Regina Albert North said he 

was relieved when he learned the tax increases weren't even 

higher. But I want to indicate to him and as I'll indicate in a few 

minutes, the tax increases that were announced the other day, 

and as I said last night, this is just the tip of the iceberg. We 

haven't seen the bottom line on the total tax increase that is 

going to face the taxpayers, the home-owners, and the property 

owners of this province. In fact when we talk about taxpayers 

and we talk about a government that's talking about its 

priorities, one has to wonder where the priorities really are. 

 

Another article in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix on March 19. 

While the Minister of Finance was talking about decreasing her 

spending and cutting 



March 23, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 521 

employment numbers and cutting people out of . . . and the 

Premier of the province was eliminating jobs in this province, 

taking jobs away from individuals, the Finance ministry was 

boosting its budget. My colleague just raised that a moment 

ago in question period. I'm going to quote from the Saskatoon 

Star-Phoenix: 

 

 In the midst of layoffs, reorganization, and program cuts, one 

government department, which didn't exist a year ago, will 

nearly double its staff component next year. 

 

 Provincial Secretary Ed Tchorzewski, who gave up the 

finance portfolio in January because of ill health, is getting a 

15-per-cent boost in his budget next year, according to 

government spending estimates tabled in the legislature . . . 

 

It says, going on further in the editorial: 

 

 In 1992-93; the budget for the department was $5.8 million, 

but it spent $5.9 million (they couldn't even live within their 

budget) and had 20.5 government positions. For 1993-94 the 

department's budget rises to $6.8 million and the number of 

positions rises to 36.5. 

 

I find that very interesting, Mr. Speaker, for a government that 

has talked about restraint, has talked about acting responsibly. I 

wonder why they even committed themselves to a new 

department. Why did they create this Provincial Secretary and 

give up this . . . create this department or this portfolio. Was it, 

Mr. Minister, just to give another member an opportunity to sit 

on the front benches. Was it an opportunity for the government 

to give the former Finance minister the ability to continue to sit 

on the front benches of this Assembly, while indeed one has to 

wonder where his real priorities are today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just take a look at the numbers — $6.8 million. 

That $6.8 million could have been used in a more careful and a 

wiser format, Mr. Speaker. In fact it could have guaranteed a 

number of jobs in this province. 

 

In fact the seven individuals who were here today — their cost 

to the government was only 400 . . . a little over $400,000. So 

how many people could that have employed — $6.8 million? 

One has to wonder about the priorities of this government. 

 

And as I indicated earlier, "Tough budget . . ." another 

headline, "Tough budget will keep on taking". 

 

It's a strong indication that many people are beginning to read 

between the lines. Even the editorialists are beginning to read 

between the lines and they realize that the taxes that were 

imposed by the minister the other day are just the tip, just the 

start. 

 

This article says: 

 

 Real impact will be felt next year 

 If you're tempted to say: "It could have been worse," about 

Thursday's provincial budget, think again. 

 

And I'm asking the people of Saskatchewan to take a moment 

and to think again. And I'm asking the people of Saskatchewan 

when their local governments, municipal or rural or urban, 

municipal governments are forced to increase the mill rates, 

don't go running to your councillors blaming them for 

increasing the mill rates on your property tax. Look a little 

further to the parent government that has just offloaded a fairly 

fair portion of their transfer funds and force the property owner 

to pick from the bottom up, or force the local governments to 

decide which programs will be there. 

 

The article goes on to say: 

 

 The people who feel they got off relatively easy this year will 

pay for the privilege either through higher property taxes or 

reduced services down the road. 

 

And when we look at reduced services, where are those 

reduced services going to come? As I've indicated, no doubt 

we're going to see, especially in rural Saskatchewan, a fair 

reduction in services in a lot of our educational facilities, in our 

hospitals. Nurses who were concerned two or three years ago 

about the jobs because they felt that possibly the former 

government wasn't giving the right directives, their jobs are on 

the line today. 

 

Teachers who are concerned and were running around the 

province creating a scenario of doom and gloom about the fact 

that there wouldn't be jobs and who would be out there to teach 

the students of this province in rural Saskatchewan, they have a 

right to be genuinely concerned today. 

 

As the article says: 

 

 Cuts are also on the way for school boards, universities, and 

hospitals. With announced plans to opt out of the GRIP farm 

support program in two years, without anything announced to 

replace it, the future of farming remains uncertain. 

 

There isn't a taxpayer in this province, Mr. Speaker, that has 

been left untouched. Not a one, not from the wage-earner at the 

bottom level right through to the corporate structure — not a 

one. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, don't get me wrong. People at the high end, 

and as I've been reading some of the articles, they're 

individuals with substantial salaries in this province who've 

indicated they have no problem in paying a little more as long 

as we reach and show some compassion to those who definitely 

need the help, those who can least afford a higher tax base. 

 

And as much as those individuals who choose to smoke or 

drink, Mr. Speaker . . . Jus the other day as well, the Finance 

minister indicated that the  



522 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1993 

government hasn't ruled out small tax increases in the sin taxes. 

Many people would say, well why didn't we add more to the 

sales tax on cigarettes and alcohol. And I suppose the argument 

can be, well we've just about reached the limit. And maybe 

that's true. 

 

But I find, Mr. Speaker, that even if people refused to smoke or 

cut back . . . And as well, I think we know many people are 

cutting back on the use of alcohol. The facts are it's a more 

healthy lifestyle, not only for the person who indulges in those 

. . . in smoking or drinking, Mr. Speaker, but it's a healthier 

lifestyle for everyone else which would create a benefit to 

society through fewer problems in our health system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many people are really wondering where they 

will be at the end of the day. They're wondering, Mr. Speaker, 

what the bottom line will be when they finally reach the end of 

the year and the reality of the overall tax expenditures and tax 

grabs become real, and what they're going to have and how 

much they're going to have to give up in order to approve of the 

expenditures and approve of the tax increases . . . or they 

accept the tax increases as we've seen then. 

 

Few will escape the tax collector's clutch as a result of 

Thursday's tough budget which hikes levies by 130 . . . 93 

million and chops 108 million out of programs including 

programs, it says, this articles says, the NDP once held dear. As 

provincial offloading to the municipalities kicks in this year 

and next, service cuts loom, municipal representatives say. 

 

And that's representatives from SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association) and representatives from SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) who 

realize the big bite is going to be put on their shoulders. And, 

Mr. Speaker, they really don't appreciate that. 

 

One has to wonder where this government is going with the 

decisions it's making by offloading all of the restructuring on 

local people. And they keep arguing, well the local people are 

asking for that opportunity; the local people want to have some 

say; they want to be involved. But they're not asking for all the 

decisions to be offloaded on them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in fact if we're going to offload all the decisions 

regarding taxation, regarding programs and administration of 

programs, one has to wonder if we need all the MLAs 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) in this Assembly. And 

no doubt when we get to the discussion on the electoral 

boundaries Act, we're probably going to find that there will be 

a substantial reduction. And I don't say that may not be the 

right move to make, Mr. Speaker. But I think governments are 

elected to make sound fiscal decisions and they shouldn't pass 

off that responsibility on someone else, trying to offload or 

back out of their responsibility. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe this government did have some 

options. I believe the Premier of this province and his cabinet 

had options. And I believe the options that the Premier could 

have taken . . . there were many options out there that indeed 

did show compassion, which showed more compassion than 

we've seen today. But the budget . . . and that in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, the budget could be balanced today if the government 

wouldn't have stubbornly held onto their own ideas. 

 

In fact if the government would have forgot about the fact that 

the former government, the former Conservative government 

acted in a number of areas which were good for the province, 

like Atomic Energy of Canada. And like the minister of 

Finance in his statement a year and a half ago indicated that the 

major economic spin-off and indicators in this province and job 

creators were going to be Saskferco and Weyerhaeuser and the 

upgrader. Yet, Mr. Speaker, what the government chose to do 

was to cancel a contract and then turn around and rewrite the 

contract. 

 

We look at yesterday, the announcement made by the Health 

minister in Moose Jaw. They made a big issue about 

Providence Place and about a commitment to a long-term 

facility in Moose Jaw. And yet, Mr. Speaker, that was in the 

1991 budget. The dollars were in place. It just seems the 

government has been operating under a smokescreen where it 

wants people to believe that everything they're doing today is 

being done better. And yet most of the programs they're doing 

today were programs that were already committed to by the 

government of the 1980s. 

 

When I talk about the options the government could have 

chosen, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to just bring forward a number 

of articles. But one of the main areas the government could 

have moved into, I'm going to show how it could have worked 

very well, Mr. Speaker. It could have been simple; it could 

have been very easy, less painful, and done more for the 

government and more for the people of Saskatchewan, and 

that's harmonization of the sales tax. To most people that's a 

no-no word. Harmonization, you don't want to talk about 

harmonization. But the reality is, what we see today, the 

government is engaging in selective harmonization which is a 

strong indication to me that indeed in the long run 

harmonization was the road to go. 

 

Let me just talk about some of the columns and their 

impressions of the budget just presented. 

 

One column in the Leader-Post, Saturday, March 20, the 

headline is: "Gov't missed the boat on harmonization". 

 

And I'm just going to quote a couple of paragraphs. Mr. 

Speaker, it says: 

 

 MacKinnon could have broadened the tax base to include 

more products and services. (This year, the province will 

exempt nearly $700 million worth of taxable goods and 

services, more than the sales tax will collect this fiscal 



March 23, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 523 

year.) 

 

And that's in parentheses. 

 

 An even more radical reform would be (and the editorialist 

says) — dare I say it? — harmonize the provincial sales tax 

with the GST. 

 

 Harmonization would enable the province to reduce the rate, 

eliminate tax discrimination, and reduce costly duplication 

and confusion in administering and collecting the tax. 

 

That's one person's impression. Here's another article, headline: 

"Budget leaves Sask. with three more years of gloom". There's 

a couple of different areas that this article works on . . . or talks 

about, Mr. Speaker. And I go back to the presentation made 

from Moose Jaw Palliser last night where he didn't . . . 

indicated he didn't like the fact that we were held at ransom by 

the credit agencies. 

 

This individual in writing this article, editorial, says: 

 

 . . . the sad reality is that the budget wasn't written for 

Saskatchewan residents, it was written for the lenders and 

rating agencies. 

 

And that is indeed a sad reality. 

 

But let me get back to the point I was bringing forward about 

the harmonization process, talking about where the government 

could have found their money. 

 

Well perhaps the best place to find the answer to that question 

lies in the mock budget delivered by a group of U of S 

(University of Saskatchewan) students this week — and we 

debated that last week when we presented it — where a group 

of university students sat down and went through a process 

where they laid out what they perceived as a fine and fair and 

equitable way of balancing this budget. 

 

For my money, their budget was better than the one delivered 

in the legislature on Thursday. It called for . . . and here again it 

called for harmonization of the PST (provincial sales tax) with 

the GST (goods and services tax). Not only would it net 60 

million more than the sales tax hike announced Thursday; it 

would allow the province to dump it's collection agency 

because Ottawa would handle that work. 

 

They also called for modest health care premiums that, 

according to their figures, would have produced 60 million in 

annual revenues. And, Mr. Speaker, indeed there are people 

right across this province, young and old alike, who have told 

me time and time again that premiums on health care, there's 

nothing wrong with them. 

 

In fact most people would prefer to pay premiums to ensure 

their health care services and also guarantee that those who 

have, beyond their control, have illnesses that require a higher 

use of drug costs and billed the higher drug costs, and they 

would prefer to be able to be part of a program that indeed 

looks after 

those who can least afford it. 

 

And then I want to just bring in the point of an economist's 

view. And this is written by a professor at the Faculty of 

Administration, University of Regina. He first of all asks . . . 

"Spending controls needed" is the headline, and he says: 

 

 What is the best way of reducing the deficit? Ideally, the 

government should cut spending rather than push up taxes, 

because taxes are already relatively high and higher taxes 

hurt incentives. 

 

Then he goes on further in his article and he says: 

 

 Therefore, balancing the budget in Saskatchewan should be 

sought through spending cuts rather than through raising 

taxes. Nevertheless, the 1993 budget raised taxes by $193 

million. 

 

 If revenue had to be raised, it should be done through taxes 

which interfere least with economic decision-making. This 

suggests that the tax base should be as broad as possible. 

 

He goes on to say: 

 

 The worst way to increase revenue is to lift marginal income 

tax rates. High rates of tax encourage tax evasion and 

avoidance, and discourage hard work and risk-taking. One of 

the least interfering taxes available for Saskatchewan is to 

harmonize its provincial sales tax with the federal GST. 

 

And this economist goes on and says: 

 

 According to my own estimation, piggybacking the 

Saskatchewan sales tax at eight per cent to the federal GST 

would raise an additional $200 million a year, about the same 

increase in the budget as through a variety of inefficient tax 

measures. 

 

And I think what we will find, Mr. Speaker, and what the 

Minister of Finance and this government will find, is that their 

tax increases in the long run are going to prove inefficient and 

that at the end of the day they will not have the revenue to 

indeed bring their budget in at their projected target without 

indeed turning around and making some adjustments in order 

to address the shortfall that they will find. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's just a number of leading economists and 

editorialists who have come to the realization that the simplest 

and most economical way of raising money in this province 

without hitting those who need it the most was harmonization. 

And the harmonization process also created a simpler program, 

Mr. Speaker, because of the fact that the feds then become the 

collectors, and we have already got a process in place to collect 

taxes. 

 

And what do businesses think of this budget? Many 



524 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1993 

businesses and consumers, and I think all the street talk that 

was on the street Friday morning, people were very uncertain. 

And if they were uncertain Friday morning, they're certainly 

more uncertain today as we get further and further into this 

budget year and into this budget process and as people finally 

come to the realization of what the total impact may be. 

 

One editorialist in the Star-Phoenix, March 19, '93, said: 

 

 "Budget didn't inspire confidence: consumers' rep." 

Thursday's provincial budget does little to inspire confidence 

or hope, says the vice-president of the Consumers 

Association of Canada, Saskatchewan branch . . . 

 

 With all the cuts, disposable income will drop and the 

average consumer with children at home will pay more. 

 

 "Now there's no dental plan. They'll have to pay more for 

drugs if children are sick. And then there's eye care." 

 

 "It costs more for a family." 

 

Mr. Speaker, we don't have to go too far just to find that there 

are businessmen and women all over who are beginning to 

realize the significance of the cuts. In fact, the budget is not 

only . . . didn't inspire confidence, it's a hindrance to 

businessmen and women — the economic generators of this 

province, the individuals who create the employment for our 

young people. 

 

And when I look at employment, the Minister of Finance talked 

about creating jobs. One headline said: MacKinnon says 2,000 

jobs will result from measures. But I'm wondering where all 

these jobs are coming from. I'm wondering what types of jobs 

are going to be coming. And I'm just going to quote from the 

budget statement released the other day, the minister's budget 

address, page 8 of the budget address: 

 

 Our Government is also doing its part to provide summer 

student employment. Through Partnerships '93, 2,000 new 

jobs will be created for students in regional parks, 

municipalities and small businesses. And nearly $3 million is 

being provided for summer student employment in 

government departments. This has the potential to create 450 

more summer jobs . . . 

 

 The New Careers Corporation will implement a cost sharing 

arrangement with southern municipalities and regional parks 

to create over 1,600 jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the jobs that are talked about here are strictly 

summer employment. People are looking for something long 

term. And yes, we need to address the needs of the students out 

there and the employment. 

But this isn't very significant when you think about the fact the 

long-term implications of the jobs that are needed and the 

students that are in school today who are looking forward to 

finishing their education and becoming part of the workforce. 

 

In fact if I could add a word, I would suggest to students that 

they not only look at who can provide the jobs for them or 

where the jobs will be that they can enter into when they finish 

their education. Maybe it's time that our young people realize 

that they don't always have to look at contractors, corporations 

or government or businesses to give them a job; maybe we 

need to inspire our young people to look at ways and means in 

which they can be the employer employing individuals. 

Encourage them to look at ways and develop some of their 

ideas and maybe go out and create their own job, build their 

own job, or create their own business. And instead of looking 

for a job, indeed they'd be looking for people to come and work 

for them — maybe one, two, three, or maybe a hundred 

individuals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that's one of the areas that we could 

certainly look at in building this province and inspiring people 

to become involved in this province because this province 

really does have a lot to offer. 

 

As I've indicated, one has to wonder how many businesses will 

really want to look at coming to Saskatchewan or will really be 

impressed by the budget. I guess time will tell. And in the 

mean time a lot of people are going to have to look at how 

they're going to tighten their belts in order to meet the 

immediate needs of the tax grab that has been placed upon 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

When I talk about the tax grab I just think about clothing, and 

I'm just going to quote from the Leader-Post, March 19 

headline: "Clothing, shoestores expect tax to hurt." What really 

upsets is the government went back on its word. This is what 

one businessman said, what really upsets is the government 

went back on its word. 

 

 The thing that's really going to bother me the most is they got 

elected by taking it (the tax) off," he said. 

 

Remember that slogan? Don't pay any more PST as of 

midnight October 21 because we're going to eliminate the PST. 

And how many people fell for that? How many people literally 

believed that the government was going to eliminate actually 

not the provincial sales tax, or the PST as the government 

labelled it, but the education and health tax? Most people 

couldn't associate the difference. And at the end of the day all 

they found was that they eliminated it on food and clothing and 

restaurant meals and hotels. That's a broken promise, this 

businessman said, a very blatant broken promise. 

 

So now as a businessman in the retail business, he now finds 

that the sales tax is not 7 per cent, not an expanded or 

harmonized provincial sales tax with the GST of 7 per cent; he 

finds it's a 9 per cent education 



March 23, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 525 

and health sales tax on clothing products. 

 

The fortunate part, and I'll give the minister some marks, the 

fact that they realize that young children who are growing very 

quickly, parents with young children, certainly it's appreciated 

that they gave them at least the tax break on that clothing, 

because we know what it's like trying to clothe young people. 

And I'm not sure, I think many of the ministers might be aware 

of that, but maybe the Speaker is aware of the fact that his 

children are buying their own clothes now and he doesn't have 

to worry about it. But in fact most men and women, young 

working people, are very thankful that at least for children the 

tax isn't there. 

 

But the reality is it's going to hurt people. Mr. Speaker, there 

are so many other areas that I can get into, so many other areas 

that I can talk about in this budget, of what this budget has 

done to hurt people in Saskatchewan. I could get into people on 

drugs. 

 

(1500) 

 

And I've already had calls, a number of calls into my office. I 

talked to my secretary again today. People in a lot of cases, 

they're elderly widows who are on very expensive medication 

in some cases. In some cases it's problems, asthmatic problems 

they have, and even young people with asthmatic problems. I 

know of one individual who prior to this budget was paying 

$600 a month just for the oxygen so he could live a decent life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, once this . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And the 

member from Saskatoon says, they've got coverage. But when 

you look at the type of coverage, the coverage for most people, 

indeed they're going to end up spending more money than they 

were under the old program. It doesn't address the real needs of 

individuals. 

 

I could get into the program cuts in the drug plan. I could talk 

about the dental plan and how it's going to hurt individuals. 

And the government talks about the fact that maybe bringing 

back the school-based dental program. Well if they want to 

save money, I would say, Mr. Speaker, they best look at job 

creation and the jobs that are already out there rather than 

instituting another program that becomes a major cost to the 

taxpayers of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I wrap up my comments today I want to make 

a few comments on the fact of this . . . talking about a 

government of betrayal. This government, Mr. Speaker, as I've 

pointed out through a number of the articles, has certainly 

betrayed the people of Saskatchewan. And as I just read . . . in 

fact it broke a number of its promises to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Quoting the Star-Phoenix, September 21, 1991, we heard the 

Premier today, while he was in opposition, saying he would 

cut, not increase taxes. End quote. Quote: The NDP Party 

promised to abolish the provincial flat tax. Quote: We're not 

going back to taxing people. 

And yet every time we turn around, all these quotes obviously 

fell on deaf ears. Once the election was over they forgot all 

about everything that was said — a strong indication that the 

only reason those comments were made was to end up on that 

side of the House, rather than being truthful and open and 

honest with the people of Saskatchewan so the people of 

Saskatchewan knew exactly what they were voting for. 

 

They said this to get elected, and unfortunately it worked; they 

were elected. We see the NDP have been in power for almost 

two years now and Saskatchewan people are nearly taxed to 

death. And most economists will indicate we've probably 

reached the limit of taxation. 

 

No one is rolling in the dough out in small town Saskatchewan. 

Businesses are squeaking by on what consumers are able to 

spend. And we find they're spending less and less and less. And 

I'm afraid it isn't going to get any better with a 16 per cent sales 

tax in this province. Each and every time the NDP government 

increases taxes, each and every time that they increase utility 

rates, the consumer's take-home pay, disposable income of 

Saskatchewan residents, decreases. 

 

We ask how many people are receiving increases to keep up 

with government grabs. How many? I don't really know. I don't 

know if there are any. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would be the first to support the government if 

they made the right choices; if the Premier kept his word, like 

4.5 billion is enough to run a government. But I'm wondering, 

and one has to wonder why he is not keeping his word, why he 

is not keeping his promise of limiting government expenditures 

to 4.5 billion. 

 

Instead he's increasing expenditures, and a number of 

economists have pointed out the fact and most people believed 

when the Minister of Finance was presenting or getting ready 

to present her budget the most appropriate way of addressing 

the deficit was to cut expenditures across the board and hold 

taxes down, cut expenditures 2:1 to tax increases. But we saw 

when the budget came down at the end of the day, it was 

almost two times the tax grab versus expenditures. 

 

If this government was truly working toward the revitalization 

of Saskatchewan's economy, Mr. Speaker, they would hold the 

line on tax increases. They would get the unemployed working, 

and I believe it was one of the members opposite who indicated 

that one day we're going to have full employment. Well I'm not 

exactly sure if full employment is achievable, but certainly it 

would be an excellent thing to work for. But it's not always 

easy to get everybody . . . or find everybody willing to work. 

 

They would attract businesses to Saskatchewan. They would 

promote building. They would try to get the economy rolling. 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, I believe if the 



526 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1993 

Premier and his colleagues in this government had indeed made 

the right choices, that at the end of the day people of 

Saskatchewan would have been more than willing to work with 

them, but as the reality of the tax grabs come over the next year 

and a half Saskatchewan people are going to become more and 

more fed up. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, what people are looking for today is a 

government that would be more open, be more honest, would 

indeed live up to the promises, and not make promises that they 

can't keep. I think, Mr. Speaker, as my colleagues and I have 

indicated, and as we get into further debate on the budget, and 

as we get into estimates, we will point out to Saskatchewan 

people that yes, and point out to the government yes, 

Saskatchewan people are people . . . are resilient people. 

They're willing to work. They're willing to give men and 

women who they've elected into positions of authority the 

ability to try and work out a plan. But they want to know that 

the men and women they've elected to represent them are going 

to let them know what the real truth is; they're not going to hide 

behind facades and at the end of the day turn around and do 

totally opposite of what they said they would. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I cannot support this budget and I will be voting 

against the budget. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm pleased 

to lend my support to the budget for the 1993-94 fiscal year. 

More than anything else, the budget for this fiscal year makes 

clear what this government is all about. 

 

Sometimes governments at all levels lose sight of their 

objectives because they become preoccupied with processes 

and procedures. Bertrand Russell once said: democracy is the 

process by which people choose the man who will get the 

blame. 

 

I'd like to think that our purpose goes much deeper than that. 

We're not here for the sole purpose of scoring points on each 

other. We're not here to squabble over things like jurisdiction 

and procedure. That would amount to putting our own interests 

as legislators before those of the people we serve, and that's 

wrong. 

 

Governments exist to serve their people. They exist to improve 

the quality of life for the people they serve, to provide a sense 

of security and a feeling of hope for all their citizens. As soon 

as we stray from that, we're no longer doing what we were put 

here to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget is all about securing Saskatchewan's 

future. It spells out a plan that allows us to face the future with 

confidence, with renewed optimism that Saskatchewan can 

once again be a good place to live and to work. 

 

Not that long ago there was a premier who talked long and loud 

about bringing home the children. If you want some idea of 

how successful he was, go stand on the Alberta-Saskatchewan 

border at the start of a long weekend. Mr. Speaker, this 

government wants to 

bring the children home to stay, not just for the long weekends. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — This government wants people all 

across Canada to think of Saskatchewan as a good place to be 

rather than a good place to be from. 

 

How do we do this? By giving them reasons to stay and 

reasons to return. By working to give them economic security 

and renewed hope that a decent living can be made here once 

again. By showing them that the Government of Saskatchewan 

is their government — a government whose main objective is 

meeting the needs of its people rather than its own, by getting 

our own financial house in order before we ask for sacrifices 

from the households of the people that we work for. 

 

Lastly, by demonstrating that the road to responsible budget 

management doesn't have to be paved with abandoned 

programs, particularly for the less fortunate. A commitment to 

living within one's means doesn't have to mean that we stop 

caring about one another or stop helping one another. 

 

Economic security and renewed hope; better government rather 

than more government; living within our means; caring for 

those in need — that's what this budget is all about, Mr. 

Speaker, and that's why I'm proud to support it. This year's 

Education allocation reflects those four objectives. 

 

A total of $871 million is being provided to meet the needs of 

our 300,000 students of all ages in 1993-94. Education remains 

a top priority with this government. It continues to be the 

second-largest item in the provincial budget, behind only 

Health. 

 

Moreover the needs of students still come first. Most of this 

department's budget for '93-94 is money that we turn over to 

third parties at all levels of the school system so that they can 

do their job. Roughly 96 per cent of the total department 

spending goes to K to 12 schools, post-secondary institutions, 

and individuals in the form of third-party grants. Only 4 per 

cent is used to meet our own internal needs. 

 

Let me put it another way. As was the case last year, 96 out of 

every education tax dollar will go to meet the needs of 

Saskatchewan students and their instructors. Only 4 cents will 

be used to meet the cost of running the department. 

 

Major third-party grants for the 1993-94 fiscal year include 358 

million in operating grants to K to 12 schools; $169 million in 

operating grants to the universities; and 69 million to the 

Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology. 

 

Other grants include a combined total of 5.8 million for the 

federated and affiliated colleges, and 6.1 million for 

Saskatchewan's regional colleges. 

 

In addition, 44.3 million has been allocated for capital 



March 23, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 527 

spending this year. This consists of $20 million for new K to 12 

facilities; 6.1 million for post-secondary facilities; and 18.2 

million for interest payments on previous K to 12 projects. 

 

Capital spending is up significantly from 7.5 million on K to 12 

projects last year and 3.1 million on post secondary. 

 

More than 10.7 million has been allocated for various distance 

education initiatives in 1993-94. This is one way of making 

learning opportunities more readily available to students in 

rural and northern areas, something that's tailor 

_made for Saskatchewan's needs. We will continue to support 

programs that make K to 12, university, technical, and other 

courses available to students outside of major urban centres. 

 

Funding for this year includes 4.7 million for the Saskatchewan 

Communications Network and 3.9 million for the 

Saskatchewan skills extension program. In addition, 1.5 million 

is going to the regional colleges for their distance education 

programs, 351,000 to subsidize the correspondence school 

enrolment, and 200,000 to the university's library outreach 

program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will also be providing more than $12 million 

to meet the learning needs of Saskatchewan's Indian and Metis 

students this fiscal year. Saskatchewan's school population 

reflects provincial population trends. The Indian and Metis 

population now makes up 12 per cent of the provincial total 

and this is expected to rise to 18 per cent within 15 years. 

 

More importantly, roughly 18 per cent of Saskatchewan's 

school-age children now are of Indian and Metis ancestry, and 

this is expected to grow a great deal in the future. Students of 

aboriginal ancestry will make up a steadily growing proportion 

of our total student population and we must be ready to meet 

their needs. 

 

In response to these needs, we've allocated $4.8 million for 

non-status Indian and Metis training programs and 2.6 million 

for northern training programs. There is also 1.3 million for the 

Saskatchewan urban native teacher education program or 

SUNTEP, and 1.3 million for the northern teacher education 

program. 

 

In addition, a core grant of $751,000 has been provided to the 

Gabriel Dumont Institute; $334,000 to the Dumont Technical 

Institute; and $660,000 to the Saskatchewan Indian Federated 

College. 

 

K to 12 initiatives include integrating Indian and Metis content 

into existing courses of instruction, developing new courses 

specifically for these students, and increasing community 

participation in the affairs of our schools. 

 

(1515) 

 

Our schools are now providing education and training to our 

labour force of the 21st century. 

They're educating our citizens and decision makers of the 21st 

century. 

 

We want to ensure that today's Indian and Metis students have 

every opportunity to prepare themselves for the occupation or 

career of their choice. We want to make sure that they have 

every opportunity to be leaders in our communities, and work 

with us in shaping our future. 

 

Other items of note include an increase for the equalization 

factor of 1.4 points for 1993-94. At a time when money is very 

tight, it is essential that our commitment to equalization 

remains strong. This is the factor in the distribution of the 

money to the K to 12 system that takes into account the 

assessment and the ability of school divisions at the local level 

to raise money. 

 

In addition, there will be no significant changes to the 

foundation grant formula this year. This year's operating grant 

pool will be smaller, but we did not want to put too much 

pressure on local boards by addressing the formula at the same 

time. In addition, we want to coordinate any changes that might 

be made with the outcome of the task force of the 

Saskatchewan School Trustees Association on governance, 

which is not yet complete. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we recognize the fact that education funding is 

the single best investment for the future that we can make. 

Most of our K to 12 students will work at jobs that don't even 

exist today. Current estimates show that by the turn of the 

century 75 per cent of all jobs will be new. Within 10 years, 

three-quarters of all jobs will require skills and abilities that 

have yet to be defined. Long-established occupations are 

changing or disappearing completely. We know that this 

province can no longer rely on its primary resources for 

economic security. 

 

Today's growth industries are in the service sector — a broad 

range of activities that covers everything from transportation to 

communications, from insurance to real estate. What they have 

in common, what defines them as service industries, is that 

they produce a service of some kind rather than a good. 

 

The growth industries then are those where you work with your 

mind rather than with your muscles. Also, even the primary 

resource sector is becoming more knowledge intensive. The 

things we grow and harvest, or mine and process, are 

influenced more and more by what goes on in classrooms and 

laboratories. 

 

Our support for education will therefore play a key role as we 

work towards the goal of economic security for the people of 

Saskatchewan. Over the long term our education investment 

will help to see us through our current financial straits, and 

believe me, Mr. Speaker, there is still some tricky navigating to 

do before we reach open water. 

 

Eleven years ago, in the final year of the Blakeney 

administration, the Education budget was more than $500 

million. Debt servicing charges were zero, nil, 



528 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1993 

nothing. Members opposite should be able to grasp that the 

Education budget therefore exceeded interest on the debt by 

more than $500 million. Now after years of Devine rule, 

interest on the debt is the third-largest item in the entire budget. 

We will be spending . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member is not to refer to people by their 

surname or their first name but by their constituency. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Sorry, Mr. Speaker. We will be 

spending $847 million to service the debt in 1993-94. That's 

only $24 million less than we're able to give to education. 

 

Just think about that for a minute. With that $847 million, we 

could more than triple the operating grants for the K to 12 

schools. We could provide five times as much money to our 

universities in the form of operating grants. We could build 

nine new College of Agriculture buildings. We could fund 

SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology) for 12 years and the regional colleges well into 

the 22nd century. 

 

I'm sure members opposite are thinking — if they're thinking 

— if wishes were horses, beggars could ride. My reply to that 

would be, if Tories could add, there'd be horses for everyone. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Nevertheless the fact remains that the 

difference between education spending and debt servicing 

charges has gone from 500 million to 24 million in just one 

decade. For that very simple reason, we were not able to be as 

generous with our education partners as we would have 

wished. 

 

Last year at this time we announced education funding for both 

1992-93 and for the coming fiscal year. The just-announced 

grants for 1993-94 are consistent with what we told school 

officials last year. 

 

I met with our stakeholders again prior to this year's budget to 

confirm their funding for 1993-94 and also let them know what 

they can expect in '94-95. This allows local school boards and 

post-secondary institutions to again plan two years ahead in 

terms of program, staff, and facilities. 

 

I informed them that operating grants for K to 12 schools, 

universities, federated colleges, and SIAST will be reduced by 

2 per cent in '93-94. The regional colleges will see a 1 per cent 

decrease. This will be followed by an across 

_the-board 4 per cent decrease in their grant levels for '94-95. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wasn't expecting a standing ovation for the 

message I brought them and I can report that I certainly didn't 

get one. But I did sense that there was a good understanding of 

why we're proceeding as we are. I know that our education 

partners understand that fiscal responsibility, living within our 

means, is no longer a matter of choice. And they expressed 

their 

appreciation for the longer-term plan and said that they would 

much rather have a more severe reduction and know that it is 

part of a long-term plan, than have a lesser cut and keep having 

the tail of the dog cut off an inch at a time. So they were very, 

very understanding. 

 

And we know that there are over 10,000 dedicated classroom 

teachers out there in the K to 12 system, and others in the 

post-secondary that are supportive of our long-term plans to 

make education stronger. 

 

Jonathan Swift once said: 'tis pleasant to observe how free the 

present age is in laying taxes on the next. We had 10 years of 

that, 10 years of mortgaging the future for present convenience. 

It got us where we are today, awash in red ink, with the lending 

institutions of the world watching what we do very carefully. 

 

So the Government of Saskatchewan must make hard decisions 

now. If we don't, then bankers in Toronto, London, and New 

York will make decisions for us, and they will not be sensitive 

to our needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are working to restore simple common sense 

to fiscal policy by dusting off the principle that you don't spend 

more than you can afford; you live within your means. I 

believe the people of Saskatchewan understand this. They 

expect their government to be no different than any individual 

household, small business, or farm in terms of tailoring 

expenditures to income. 

 

We aren't proceeding as we are because we think it will be 

popular. We're doing it because it's the right thing to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — In fact we're now at the point where 

it's the only thing to do. 

 

I fully recognize that our school boards and post-secondary 

institutions will be challenged by these measures. I've asked 

them only to understand why we're acting as we are, and I very 

much appreciate their patience in this regard. 

 

Education and Health, combined, account for roughly half the 

entire provincial budget. These areas must contribute to getting 

Saskatchewan back on its financial feet. When this is done, the 

$847 million per year that we now spend servicing the debt, 

will once again be available to Saskatchewan schools, 

hospitals, small businesses, and farms. In addition, I firmly 

believe that we can accomplish a great deal by making better 

use of what we have. 

 

The recently announced Children First initiative is one such 

example of an integrated approach to public policy. This 

approach allows government and non-government agencies to 

work together to meet locally identified needs. 

 

Our challenge is to come up with new approaches and new 

partnerships in designing and delivering all 



March 23, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 529 

public services, including education. The various K to 12 and 

post-secondary reviews are coming up with many interesting 

suggestions in this regard. They're identifying new possibilities 

in terms of how we might avoid duplication and deliver joint 

programing. They're also putting forward suggestions on how 

we can better develop the unique strengths of individual levels 

of the school system. We look forward to working on 

translating these ideas into action in the days ahead. 

 

We also need to look at this in terms of how we, government, 

can better organize what we do. For example, our Premier 

recently announced that the labour market planning branch and 

the summer employment program would be transferred to 

Saskatchewan Education from the Department of Labour. We 

also assumed responsibility for the New Careers Corporation. 

This has given us a brand-new Department of Education, 

Training and Employment. The objective here is to better 

coordinate our efforts and to improve the efficiency with which 

we deliver our services. A related objective is to build stronger 

links between all levels of education, training, and 

employment. Learning is for life no matter what your 

occupation. 

 

We need to focus the programs we offer more effectively on 

this objective. I also hope we can do more, not just in terms of 

partnerships between institutions, but also with the community 

at large. Everyone in this province has a stake in our schools. 

Hopefully we can get everyone more involved in understanding 

what we're doing and in working with us toward our goals. 

 

These goals were clearly spelled out in this year's budget — 

economic security and renewed hope, better government rather 

than more government, living within our means, and caring for 

those in need. Within this framework the overriding goal from 

our department will be to work with our stakeholders and the 

public at large in providing quality education at a cost the 

people of Saskatchewan can afford. By quality education, I 

mean learning opportunities that give our students a reasonable 

chance at economic security and fulfilment of their personal 

goals. 

 

Individuals with a sense of security and hope build 

communities with the same optimistic outlook, Mr. Speaker. 

Strong communities build strong provinces. Ours can once 

again be such a province. Saskatchewan can once again be a 

place where people want to be, rather than be from. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be proud to support this budget. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. It took a 

moment, but I knew there'd be an enthusiastic audience, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I want to begin by congratulating the member from 

Milestone-Bengough for her comments in seconding . . . 

for being chosen to second the motion and in seconding the 

motion. I also want to congratulate the current Minister of 

Finance for what I think was a remarkable achievement. 

 

Before doing so, however, I want to make mention, Mr. 

Speaker, of her predecessor, the Deputy Premier. It appears, 

Mr. Speaker, now to be almost self-evident that this 

government should be dealing with this province's debt. To put 

it mildly, however, it was not self-evident when the member 

from Regina Dewdney took the reins of the Finance department 

in November 1, 1991. 

 

We're coming out of an era, Mr. Speaker, in which 

Conservative governments federally, provincially, and 

internationally had spent enormous sums, run up enormous 

debts, and in which no one had really dared tackle the problem 

of debt. On November 1, 1991, the notion that a government 

should deal with debt as one of its priorities was something 

new in the North American landscape. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Dewdney provided that 

leadership, was a forceful advocate of fiscal reform, and 

indeed, I think persuaded many of his colleagues that this 

government should begin by putting its financial house in 

order. 

 

I recall, Mr. Speaker, meeting with a banker from out of the 

province, who had known the member from Regina Dewdney 

in the '70s. He met him again; said there was a difference; said 

now he was a man with a mission. Indeed he did have a 

mission. His mission was straightening out the finances of this 

government. And, Mr. Speaker, I think he may well be very 

proud today of the course he has charted and the success to 

which it eventually led this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to congratulate the current Minister of 

Finance for the deft handling of a very difficult budget. When 

the basic decisions about this budget were made by the 

Minister of Finance, the members of Treasury Board, cabinet, 

and caucus in December and January, it was anything but 

obvious that this basic approach would receive fairly 

widespread support. Indeed it looked in midwinter to be a very 

dangerous thing to be doing. 

 

(1530) 

 

It appeared, however, Mr. Speaker, to be the only responsible 

thing to do. And so under the leadership of the member from 

Saskatoon Westmount, we took that course. And I may say, it 

appears to be remarkably successful. 

 

I think members of the opposition reflect the general public 

acceptance of the budget in question period when they . . . I'm 

not suggesting they avoid the subject, but neither have 

questions about the budget been anywhere near as prominent as 

I would have expected. Their failure to raise the issue in 

question period suggests that this government is on course, and 

it's on a course, Mr. Speaker, which virtually no one would 

have predicted 16 months ago would have  



530 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1993 

received popular support. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I think we could characterize 

this government's mandate by saying it's a mandate for change. 

In an unprecedented number of areas across the spectrum of 

government, we're undergoing rapid change. We're undergoing 

rapid change in the field of health care. And once again, I want 

to congratulate all those who have been involved — the 

minister, the health and social services committee of caucus 

who have worked so well and so closely with her. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have an uncle in Vancouver. He has not . . . it is 

one of his proud boasts that he has not voted NDP and 

probably never will. Often during the summer, Mr. Speaker, we 

get together for a family get-together and I usually expect 

something from him which will remind us of our political 

differences. Last summer I didn't actually make the family 

reunion, but my wife who did brought back a poster which he 

had carefully saved for me. Came out of a doctor's office in 

Vancouver and was a take-off on the no-smoking ad, with the 

picture of a person smoking and then a stop sign across . . . a 

circle and a cross through the centre. Underneath was not: this 

could be dangerous for your health, but this man could be 

dangerous for your health — it was a picture of Mike Harcourt. 

It was in a doctor's office, and that was the style of their 

campaign against the Harcourt government. 

 

This government, Mr. Speaker, has gone further along the road 

to wellness, and we have done so with the general acceptance 

of the public and the medical profession. 

 

And that is a truly remarkable achievement. It's a remarkable 

achievement, Mr. Speaker, when one thinks of what's going on 

in other provinces, à la the Harcourt government. It's a 

remarkable achievement when you think of our history. It has 

been obvious for a long time that to those who are close to the 

situation, that we have a health structure which is in need of 

reform. 

 

Ross Thatcher tried to tackle the problem of rural hospital 

reform and wound up beating a hasty retreat. We didn't tackle it 

in the '70s; there was frankly no financial need to. The Devine 

government toyed with the problem in the Schwartz report, but 

also fled in terror. We're well on the way to solving this old 

problem. We are doing so to the general approval of all 

concerned. And that is a truly remarkable achievement, one of 

which members of this government can be very proud. 

 

Change, Mr. Speaker, is also under way in the area of 

economic development — another area where I think this 

government can claim some success.  For a lengthy period of 

time economic trade and development consisted of attempting 

to induce outsiders to come to Saskatchewan and do the job for 

us. And thus we have Saskferco — Saferco, and Weyerhaeuser, 

and the Bi-Provincial upgrader. The list goes on and on and on. 

When the Devine government coined the phrase "open for 

business," it was nothing more than a call to outsiders to come 

and do the job for us. That day is past, Mr. Speaker, and we 

have a different approach. Our approach now is not to call on 

outsiders to come in and take over and do the job for us. The 

approach in economic trade and development, Mr. Speaker, is 

now to work with local Saskatchewan business people and 

build from within to develop, foster within this province, an 

entrepreneurial class, something in many ways we have not 

done in the past. 

 

In those three areas, Mr. Speaker — finance, health, and 

economic trade and development — I think we've some very 

real achievements. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the throne speech and the budget speech outlined 

the beginning of what I think will be seen as an historic change 

for the province of Saskatchewan. This session offers a 

program for renewal and a way to deal with our current 

economic adversity. It provides a framework for rebuilding the 

province. 

 

The throne speech in many ways, Mr. Speaker, marked the end 

of an historical period in Saskatchewan dominated by certain 

ideas and the beginning of a new period of ideas. The defeat of 

the Progressive Conservative government in Saskatchewan, the 

election of President Clinton in the United States, and the 

inevitable defeat of Brian Mulroney, had he chose to run in the 

next election, marks the end of an era. It is useful to pause for a 

moment, Mr. Speaker, to determine whether or not any 

conclusions can be drawn from this era. 

 

I refer now, Mr. Speaker, to a German philosopher who has a 

name which sounds similar to the member from Moose Jaw 

Carlton. Georg Wilhelm Hegel was a philosopher who lived 

approximately a couple hundred years ago in Germany. He 

formulated what is described as the dialectic theory of history, 

provided a way of looking at historical events. 

 

He saw history as if it were a huge pendulum which swung 

back and forth through time. And he divided most events into 

three stages. The first, he called the thesis, often a period of 

reform and rapid change. The second, Mr. Speaker, was often a 

period of reaction, which he called the antithesis. The third 

period was the synthesis. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, is a useful way of looking at the period of 

time since the mid-'60s. The period from the '60s to the 

mid-'70s might be roughly described as the thesis. It was a 

period of enormous idealism. While there were undoubtedly 

some excesses, there was much that was good. The just society 

— a phrase used equally by Prime Minister Trudeau, 

Presidents Johnson and Kennedy — did much to re-establish 

North American society as humanitarian and egalitarian. 

 

It was a period in which public discussion focused on the state 

and the good the people could accomplish collectively. 

Individual greed was eschewed and condemned. Idealism, 

acting through government, 



March 23, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 531 

was thought to be the way to improve society. 

 

About the time of Watergate, Mr. Speaker, the public became 

disenchanted with collectivism and turned instead to more 

conservative regimes. And this probably marks the beginning 

of the antithesis. The reaction was led by Reagan and Bush in 

the U.S. (United States), Mulroney in Canada, Devine in 

Saskatchewan. All took a radically different approach to public 

affairs. Private enterprise was advocated as superior to public 

enterprise. 

 

Idealism and altruism were replaced with self-interest. The 

collectivism of the '60s became what Tommy Douglas called 

the me-ism of the '70s. I heard him discuss this at a picnic in 

Regina in July of 1978. He gave, Mr. Speaker, the prayer of the 

modern man: God bless me, my wife, my son John, his wife, us 

four and no more. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are no examples of great or even successful 

societies being founded upon individual greed. The me-ism and 

the greed of the '80s are no exception to that. One is hard put to 

name a single beneficial legacy from the '80s. Anyone can 

name the litany of problems that resulted from this decade. The 

fall of people such as Donald Trump, Robert Campeau, Mr. 

Speaker, are manifestations of the same phenomena as the Tory 

government in Saskatchewan. It was the sacrifice of public 

goals on the altar of private greed. 

 

An eastern newspaper, Mr. Speaker, about a month ago noted 

in an editorial that President Clinton's challenge is not the 

deficit. The deficit is but an outward manifestation of a much 

greater malaise in North American society. And that malaise is 

the public . . . is the loss of the public sense of their collective 

goals. The editors of that newspaper pointed out that Clinton's 

real challenge is to convince the American people of the need 

for an interventionist government. He campaigned on that and 

he has started his term of office by focusing on the deficit. Mr. 

Speaker, the '80s left the U.S. government as it left this 

government, under the tutelage of members such as the 

member opposite, so enfeebled as to be unable, Mr. Speaker, to 

act in the collective good. 

 

The era of me-ism, privatization, and trickle down is thankfully 

drawing to a close. Bush, President Bush joins . . . Mr. Speaker, 

I wouldn't expect the member from Wilkie to have a very clear 

understanding of the problems of the '80s. He played some 

small role in creating them. I wouldn't expect him to 

understand them very well. Mr. Speaker, Bush was defeated by 

a fellow southerner, but one who espouses a new liberalism. 

And in spite of a rocky beginning, Clinton will probably 

succeed simply because the excesses of the '80s are obvious to 

all but the wilfully obtuse, of which one doesn't have to look 

far to see examples. 

 

The perverted conservatism of Thatcher and Reagan probably 

reached its pinnacle in Saskatchewan when the Devine Tories 

took a government from a state of excellent health to a state of 

near collapse in less than 

10 years. 

 

I heard my colleague from Regina Lake Centre aptly 

summarize it by saying that when Devine took office in 1982 

he announced Saskatchewan was open for business. By 1991 

he was saying that the whole world had declared economic war 

on Saskatchewan. It may well be, Mr. Speaker, our burden to 

suffer the worst excesses of the '80s. 

 

It ended in Saskatchewan in the summer of 1991 when the PC 

government had to prorogue this legislature because they 

couldn't confidently face a non-confidence vote. What 

continued until October 21, 1991, was simply the death throes 

of a terminally ill government. We've now entered, Mr. 

Speaker, the period of the synthesis. We're no longer able to 

command the money or I think the optimism of the '70s 

regarding future growth. In that respect we're not returning to 

the '70s. However, we are prepared courageously and 

realistically to face the economic realities of the '90s and the 

debris left from 10 years of me-ism. 

 

We are redirecting people's attention to the collective goals and 

opportunities. We're providing precisely that focus when we 

focus upon the government deficit. Mr. Speaker, we are 

restoring to good health the central instrument through which 

collectivism that we espouse and believe in will be effective. It 

is only right and sensible that we begin by restoring the central 

instrument of our will. 

 

(1545) 

 

Those who claim we are betraying the Douglas government 

simply have no understanding of the history of this province. 

Because the Douglas government took over in a period which 

was very similar — a period in which a Conservative . . . a 

Liberal government had been in office, which had left the 

province virtually bankrupt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that government began its term of office by 

restoring the province's finances. And like that group, we have 

also begun by restoring the health of the central instrument 

through which our collective will is going to be felt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, continuing the profligate spending patterns of the 

PC government has the capacity, if left unchecked, to place this 

government in danger of collapse. Even if this were not the 

case, restoring integrity to government finances is a logical 

starting point on a goal to returning government to its historical 

role as a central instrument through which our collective will is 

to be effected. And our challenge, like Clinton's, is to restore to 

the public their sense of their collective goals. 

 

If this government is to be more interventionist in the '90s, as I 

think it almost certainly will be, it makes sense that the central 

instrument government should be well financed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the same process is at work in the area of 



532 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1993 

labour law, which I want to touch on for a moment. In the '70s, 

in an age of idealism, a fair amount of new labour legislation 

was introduced. Then during the 1980s the pendulum swung 

wildly in the other direction. The net result, Mr. Speaker, has 

been to leave working people far worse off than they were 

before 1982. 

 

For example, in real terms the minimum wage is now lower 

than it was in 1982. In fact, over the last two decades, 

minimum wage-earners have suffered a 16 per cent decrease in 

purchasing power while average wage-earners have suffered a 

3 per cent decrease in purchasing power. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that speaks volumes about the priorities of 

members opposite when they were in office. Minimum 

wage-earners have suffered a 16 per cent decrease in 

purchasing power when they were in office versus a 3 per cent 

decrease for other wage-earners. 

 

Unemployment rates went from below 4 per cent to the 6 to 10 

per cent rate today. Job security was not an issue at all; it is 

now an issue of vital concern. As Mr. Blakeney, who used to 

sit in this House, once said, this is the first generation to say . . . 

the young are the first generation to say, not when I get a job 

I'm going to, but the generation perhaps represented by the 

pages here are more likely to say, if I get a job, then I'm going 

to. The language has changed and it speaks volume about the 

change in security. 

 

Part-time workers is another area in which issues are now 

pressing. Part-time workers constituted only 11 per cent of the 

labour force in 1982; now they make up 18 per cent. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, we need to take into account the economic 

conditions we face. The other night, Mr. Speaker, I was 

listening to a late night newscast on a U.S. channel. The 

economic report began with the Japanese Nikkei stock report. 

It struck me, Mr. Speaker, that the New York Stock Exchange 

is no longer the only important world exchange. We live in a 

global economy, and if we are going to be successful in this 

province, we must compete in a global economy. 

 

We cannot compete in the global economy with workers and 

the employers confronting each other. We are only going to 

succeed in competing with Europe and Asia if they're able to 

cooperate. And that is what we seek to do as a central goal of 

labour legislation, is to induce a mood of cooperation. We want 

to get that pendulum stopped in the centre. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this process begins with the recognition that 

at the moment that pendulum is away up on the right-hand side 

of the arc. Nobody is talking about stopping the pendulum 

where it is — that's inherently unstable — stop it on the 

right-hand side of the arc. We want to get the pendulum 

centred and then get it stopped. Get it balanced. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my colleague, the former minister of 

Labour, introduced two important pieces of legislation last year 

which began this process. One was The Construction Industry 

Labour Relations Act which introduced and brought some 

measure of peace to a troubled industry, the construction 

industry. 

 

He also introduced and this Assembly passed, The Pension 

Benefits Act. Mr. Speaker, this province now has the most 

progressive pension legislation in Canada, bar none, and that's 

a fair accomplishment. It means a great deal, Mr. Speaker, to 

people who, unlike members of this Assembly, have cause to 

be concerned about the security in their so-called golden years. 

We have the most progressive pension benefit legislation in 

Canada; that's something of which we can be quite proud. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope in six months time we can say the same 

about The Occupational Health and Safety Act and the workers' 

compensation legislation, which I hope is introduced in this 

session. It would be premature to get into any sort of a 

discussion about it. Suffice it to say there've been extensive 

discussions with employees, unions, employers, and I hope, 

Mr. Speaker, soon to be able to introduce that legislation. 

 

It is also a personal goal, Mr. Speaker, for the 1994 session, to 

complete the legislative reform in labour and introduce new 

and reformed trade union Bill and labour standards Bill which, 

in these areas as in the previous areas, will put us into a 

position of leadership in the Canadian mosaic. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a word about these. The Trade Union Act review 

continues. We had once hoped it might be introduced in this 

session. That now appears unlikely. There is however a 

commitment to the government to change this Act and we hope 

this will happen during the 1994 session at the latest. A review 

of The Labour Standards Act, which protects those who aren't 

subject to a collective agreement, will begin later this spring. 

We also hope to introduce a new Bill in 1994. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, we're looking at the workplace of the '90s, 

and how legislation can improve the workplace for working 

people and make our labour force competitive and productive. 

A new Labour Standards Act, Mr. Speaker, will complete the 

reform of every major piece of this province's labour 

legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these reforms to our labour law are an essential 

part of this government's strategy in its mandate for change and 

in its mandate for reform. They're aimed at developing a 

cooperative approach between labour, business, and the 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these initiatives are an integral part of the Speech 

from the Throne and the budget speech. And the mandate, Mr. 

Speaker, outlined by these two speeches, will go a good 

distance towards resolving this province's difficulties and 

restoring this province, Mr. Speaker, to a position of leadership 

in the Canadian mosaic that I'm convinced we will soon have. 



March 23, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 533 

It must be obvious, Mr. Speaker, that I will be supporting the 

budget speech. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm very pleased to rise 

today in support of the budget presented by my colleague last 

Thursday, the Minister of Finance, the member for Saskatoon 

Westmount. And I'm very pleased to be speaking in this debate 

on behalf of the people of Saskatoon Idylwyld. 

 

The people I represent, Mr. Speaker, look to this government 

for leadership in very difficult times. I don't think they're 

particularly interested in laying blame for our province's 

difficult financial situation. I believe that they have a fair idea 

how we came to be in the place where we are today. What they 

want is some action from us that will lead Saskatchewan and its 

people to a better day. This takes long-term planning and a 

measure of vision for the future. 

 

Vision, Mr. Speaker, requires a plan and a sense of direction 

and hope for the future. So I looked to the budget to see if it 

contains a plan, whether the plan is a good one, and whether it 

offers hope to our people. 

 

The speech deals with sound financial management. And it is 

trite to say, but nevertheless true, that you cannot build on an 

unsound foundation. You can only build from strength. That is 

true in our households, it's true in our businesses, it's true on 

our farms. And what it means to me, Mr. Speaker, is that in the 

context of the provincial government we have to live within 

our means, and that means that we have to get the current 

financial situation under control. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan has inherited a $15 billion 

debt. Approximately $10 billion of this debt is debt on the 

operating side of government, that is our line of credit. 

Approximately $5 billion is debt of the Crown corporations. 

 

And what does this mean, Mr. Deputy Speaker? In simple 

terms, it means that the Government of Saskatchewan has a 

mortgage of $5 billion on its Crown corporations and it has a 

line of credit of $10 billion. With respect to the $5 billion debt 

that the Crown corporations have, Mr. Speaker, they'd — Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I'm sorry — they do not cause me a great deal 

of concern for this reason: that the Crown corporation debt is 

secured by assets of the Crown corporations which far exceed 

the amount of its debt. And to my way of thinking, it's not 

much different than having a mortgage on your home. 

 

But I am very concerned and I think the public is concerned 

about the $10 billion we owe on our operating line of credit. To 

put it in simple terms, understandable terms, a $10 billion 

operating line of credit for a government which has an annual 

income of $4.5 billion approximately, would be the equivalent 

of a family with an income of $45,000 having a VISA bill of 

$100,000, or a family with an annual income of $25,000 having 

a VISA bill of 

$50,000. 

 

Now most of us would be concerned if we had a VISA bill of 

one-tenth or even less of those amounts. If we had a VISA bill 

of $2,000 we would be concerned. And it seems to me that if 

we would be concerned about that level of debt in a household 

or a business, that we cannot be unconcerned about that level 

of debt in government. The government debt is nothing more 

than the accumulated debt of all of the people of the province. 

It is not anyone else's debt. There is not someone out there that 

is going to solve the problem for us. We have to solve the 

problem. And as representatives of the public in this Chamber, 

it's our responsibility to deal with the situation. 

 

If we do not, it affects many things. It affects the level of 

services we receive. It affects the level of taxes we will pay and 

that future generations will pay. And it affects the degree to 

which we have financial freedom to do those things that we 

really would like to do and that we should be doing. 

 

We cannot escape this reality. We need a plan to deal with this 

reality. We can't run away from it. We have to deal with the 

problem. I believe that the budget provides sound direction and 

it provides hope. It says that we will restore financial stability 

and gain our freedom to choose a better future for ourselves 

and our children. 

 

(1600) 

 

And I support that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because I do not want 

to be part of an irresponsible government that will pass on the 

mess that we have inherited to the next generation. I would like 

to see that mess cleaned up. And I'm quite prepared to look the 

voters of my constituency in the eye and say that we have taken 

measures to clean the mess up. 

 

And that is the plan of this government. The plan does not just 

look at the short term. It doesn't look at how people feel about 

us next week or next month or even over the next year. It looks 

quite far ahead and it takes us down a road that is somewhat 

bumpy. But the hope that we have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that 

if we stick to the plan and deal with the situation, we will have 

some financial freedom. 

 

Because if the Douglas and Lloyd governments of 1960 to 

1964 did not have Saskatchewan's financial house in order, 

which they had worked on between 1944 and 1960, 

Saskatchewan would not have pioneered the ambitious 

medicare program that was pioneered by Tommy Douglas and 

Woodrow Lloyd in 1962, when in the rest of Canada no such 

initiative was taking place. 

 

The government would not have done so because it would not 

have had the financial flexibility to do so. And we in 

Saskatchewan and people all over the country would be much 

worse off if previous governments had not put the financial 

house of Saskatchewan in order. 



534 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1993 

That is why we need financial freedom. We need it for health 

care reform, we need it for social services, for better tax rates, 

and for economic development. We need it, and I believe that 

with the leadership shown by the budget, we're going to have it. 

I do not believe that the Government of Saskatchewan can 

resolve Saskatchewan's problems by itself. We can't act alone 

or in a vacuum. We need a partnership for economic renewal in 

the province. We need more jobs. 

 

The Minister of Economic Development has released an 

economic development plan, the Partnership for Renewal, 

which I've read carefully. And I have to say that I think it's a 

very good plan. And it was arrived at in a very appropriate 

manner, because instead of writing the partnership for 

economic renewal and sending it out to the stakeholders, the 

businesses and the chambers of commerce, the minister 

involved hundreds if not thousands of people all over the 

province in meetings to discuss what economic development 

opportunities there were in Saskatchewan, and to come to some 

consensus on the steps that were necessary from the point of 

view of the government in partnership with business to 

improve our economy. 

 

And sometimes we're very negative — I think too negative — 

in terms of what Saskatchewan has going for it. I believe that 

we have a lot going for us in Saskatchewan. Not to mention the 

good people we have and the educated workforce, we have a 

lot of resources. And there are a lot of things, a lot of good 

things happening in Saskatchewan because of the innovation 

and hard work of people in our communities. 

 

In my own community of Saskatoon, we have a biotechnology 

industry that is developing that is going to be a very important 

industry to Saskatchewan. We are going to be leaders in North 

America in terms of agricultural and biotechnological research, 

and many people are going to be employed in research and 

development, something that is very positively addressed by 

the budget. 

 

Also in Saskatoon we have an agricultural chemical storage 

industry starting, and that is a very important industry. It's 

important from the point of view of public safety, safe storage 

of agricultural chemicals. It's important from the point of view 

of environmentalists. And I believe that that industry is going 

to provide hundreds of jobs in Saskatoon. 

 

And we ought to keep that in mind, that there are new 

industries developing in Saskatchewan, not just in Saskatoon 

but all over. And gradually the economy is going to rebound 

and improve and we're going to have good times again in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I also would refer to the energy development and conservation 

institute that has been started and supported in this budget. That 

institute, which will also provide research dollars and jobs in 

Saskatoon, will ensure that rather than prejudging the issue of 

energy needs and how we should be producing our energy and 

putting all our eggs in one basket, we will 

have a look at all of the options that are available to us and 

proceed accordingly. And it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that 

that's a very logical and rational way to proceed, and I 

commend the government for its leadership in that regard. 

 

One of the first things the government did on election was to 

open the books and reveal to all Saskatchewan people the 

financial position our province was in as of October 1991. The 

Gass Commission was appointed in November of 1991 and it 

reported to us in February of 1992. Its report was 189 pages 

long and is available from the Finance department to anyone 

who wishes to read it. 

 

The findings of the commission included the statements that 

government spending was out of control, that the level of 

public debt was a serious problem, and that public funds were 

being spent without proper documentation and without full and 

clearly understood business and public policy objectives. 

 

The Gass Commission also pointed out that the province was in 

danger of losing the ability to borrow money if the public debt 

was not brought under control. Now some people are of the 

belief, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we can simply ignore the debt, 

continue to add $1.2 billion in additional debt each year, and 

that that really isn't a problem because somehow this is 

somebody else's problem and it will go away. 

 

The reality is that if the government adopted that irresponsible 

approach, we would find that our credit would be brought to an 

end, we wouldn't be able to borrow any money, and the 

government simply would not have money throughout the year 

to pay people to run our hospitals and schools and universities. 

And that simply would not be acceptable. And there's no point, 

in my opinion, in pretending otherwise. 

 

We already are paying, last year, $760 million in interest 

payments on the debt. And this coming year we will pay $847 

million in interest. And I think all of us try to imagine what we 

could do if we had that money — if only we had that money. 

 

If the interest charges of 847 next year will not be enough . . . I 

should refer to the fact also that for the last five years federal 

transfer payments from Ottawa to Saskatchewan have been cut 

by $500 million per year. The combined effect of federal 

Conservative policies and provincial Conservative policies, in 

terms of the cut-backs from Ottawa and the interest on the 

provincial debt, amount to around $1.3 billion per year. 

 

And if it were not for those two factors, we really would be in 

good shape in Saskatchewan despite the fact that we have had 

some difficult economic times. But that's the past and we have 

to deal with the situation as we find it. We have to have a plan 

to handle the present situation, eliminate the deficit, and at the 

same time provide help to those most in need. 



March 23, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 535 

When I was campaigning in the election I would go door to 

door, and people would say to me that they didn't know why I 

would want to be involved in government and become elected 

because they said, it's such a mess in Regina that you'll never 

get it straightened out. You will never straighten it out in 20 

years, so why bother? 

 

And others said that the previous government had adopted a 

scorched-earth policy, that they were deliberately leaving a 

mess to make it difficult for successive governments to govern. 

But whether deliberate or not, there is a situation and we have 

to deal with it. 

 

I think that many positive steps have been taken to address the 

situation. Last year, for example, we had cancellation of Fair 

Share which saved $15 million. Travel by cabinet ministers 

was cut by 81 per cent for the first seven months of the last 

fiscal year for a savings of $400,000 in seven months. I'm sure, 

Mr. Speaker, that neither the Premier nor cabinet ministers are 

any longer staying in hotel rooms that cost a thousand dollars a 

night. 

 

Cancellation of severance packages saved us $12 million a year 

including 1.2 million that had been set aside for George Hill. 

MLA's salaries were frozen and continue to be frozen. Cabinet 

ministers' salaries and MLA expenses were reduced for a 

savings of $7 million per year. 

 

And very significantly, the government obtained a $150 million 

payback from Weyerhaeuser and a reduction of debt guarantees 

in the amount of $45 million which was a reduction of our 

debt, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of almost $200 million — a fairly 

significant move under difficult circumstances created by the 

members opposite. 

 

We closed trade offices in Hong Kong and Minneapolis that 

the sceptical among us would say had been created for Tory 

patronage appointees, to save $2 million a year. And we 

recovered $33 million by refusing to pay for cost overruns on 

the Husky upgrader. 

 

Many, many other steps have been taken to improve 

government efficiency and cut waste and mismanagement. A 

small example is the mailing of the SaskPower and SaskEnergy 

cheques in one envelope, a simple step which saves $725,000 

per year. Overall we've seen expenditure reductions of over 

300 million last year — the only province in Canada to reduce 

its expenditures. And this is significant because it represents 

action, not just talk. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: — The Conservative Party is very good at talking. 

They will talk about fiscal responsibility; they will talk about 

cutting waste and mismanagement. The problem is they never 

actually deliver. They never do it. All they've done federally 

and provincially is to create a mess that others have to clean up. 

And I believe that this budget delivers. It doesn't just talk; it 

delivers. The government has cut annual borrowing 

requirements by $800 million a year. It has reduced 

expenditure. A plan has been presented to this legislature and 

to the public, and that plan has been presented in an honest, 

straightforward manner that I believe is welcomed by the 

people of our province. That plan will eliminate the deficit 

during the first term of this government. 

 

(1615) 

 

The protection of those in need is important as well. The 

budget is consistent this year with what was done last year. For 

example, in the last fiscal year, despite the fact that government 

expenditures were reduced, the government increased social 

assistance payments. That was also done in this budget. It 

increased funding for child hunger programs by 35 per cent. 

 

There are additional funds for children and children living in 

poverty in this budget. It increased the child tax credit by 25 

per cent, and it increased the . . . or introduced the community 

employment program, allowing people . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I'll ask all members of 

the House to come to order. The proceedings will allow the 

opportunity for all members to get into debate, and I'll ask you 

to save your comments until it's on the record. 

 

Mr. Cline: — The community employment program was 

introduced last year, which allows people to do what they 

really want to do, which is to work and to upgrade their skills 

and help their communities. It increased the Saskatchewan 

income plan payments for seniors. That is also being increased 

this year by 5 per cent. It increased home care funding by 20 

per cent last year. That enhances independent living through 

nursing, meals, and home maintenance. Home care is also 

being increased this year, which is part of the wellness 

objectives of the government which I strongly support. 

 

And I guess what I'm trying to say is that the responsible fiscal 

management that this government is showing does not mean an 

end to concern for the least fortunate in society. Rather, 

concern continues to be shown. And even though we have to 

make some decisions which are regrettable, such as reductions 

to the drug plan and the children's dental plan, those decisions 

are made in the context of new plans which protect those most 

in need. 

 

And it is unfortunate that as a result of the actions of the 

members opposite we have to take some of the measures we 

have to take, but nevertheless they're being taken in the most 

fair manner possible. 

 

I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we must not fall into the 

trap of feeling defeated by the magnitude of our fiscal problem. 

One reason is that we have got a plan to deal with the situation, 

and I believe that has inspired confidence in our communities. 



536 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1993 

The other reason is that despite difficulties, not just in 

Saskatchewan but across the country, if not across the world 

really, there are many, many positive economic indicators 

which when you examine them, demonstrate that the people of 

Saskatchewan have the resources and ingenuity to emerge from 

present difficult times. 

 

The investment dealers of Canada in their May 1982 economic 

outlook had this to say. This was in respect to the last budget 

but I'm sure that it would apply equally to the budget just 

introduced last week. They said: after a decade of set-backs, 

prospects for Saskatchewan are now brightening. Ongoing 

deficit reduction will ensure greater prosperity in the longer 

term. 

 

And in fact there are many positive things going on which give 

all of us hope for the present and for the future. There's much 

impressive economic activity going on. Our population 

increased in 1992. I believe in the last quarter it went up 1,200 

people. This is significantly different from the record of the last 

five years of the previous government when people were 

leaving by the thousands each year. 

 

Our domestic exports from Saskatchewan increased by 15.5 per 

cent January to November last year, a very significant 

improvement in manufacturing. 

 

The value of manufactured goods in the beverage industry was 

up 4.9 per cent January to November; wood was up 27.9 per 

cent; machines up 12 per cent; electrical products up 5.5 per 

cent; non-metallic mineral products up 7.8 per cent; chemical 

products up 4.8 per cent; and total refinery production was up 

18.1 per cent. Those are impressive statistics. They are very 

positive. 

 

There are many other positive things happening. Oil sales are 

up, coal sales are up, potash sales are up, uranium sales are up, 

personal bankruptcies and business bankruptcies . . . personal 

bankruptcies are down, business bankruptcies are up 

somewhat, farm bankruptcies are down, overall other 

bankruptcies were down 22.4 per cent. The total figure is a 

reduction of 8.1 per cent. Housing starts last year in 

Saskatchewan were up 87.3 per cent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: — There are many factors that enter into this. I 

believe it's fair to say that some changes at the federal level 

contribute to this, such as the RRSP (registered retirement 

savings plan), the ability to use the RRSP in the 5 per cent 

down payment. But the fact is that those factors are true across 

the country but Saskatchewan has led the way in terms of 

housing starts. We are at 87.3 per cent compared to Alberta at 

65.2 or Manitoba at 16.2. 

 

So my point is, Mr. Speaker, that there are good things 

happening. I mean I could talk about the Plant Genetic Systems 

Incorporated of Belgium which has moved its head office for 

North America to Saskatoon; the IPSCO expansion; I 

mentioned the Saskatchewan 

energy and conservation development institute. Develcon 

Electronics, the employees have completed a buy-out and they 

are optimistic that they will adapt to changing markets and 

survive and thrive in the present economy. 

 

The farm chemical industry which is being constructed in 

Saskatoon, Total Minatco Ltd. moved its head office from 

Calgary to Saskatoon; the Saskatoon Aero Centre opened. I 

have a list of projects that are going on in Saskatchewan: the 

SPAR Group, 60 to 80 new jobs in Swift Current; Hitachi in 

Saskatoon, $9 million investment; Norquay Alfalfa Processors, 

45 new jobs; Babcock and Wilcox in Melville, 3.5 million 

investment; Sears Canada, 900 jobs coming to Regina; AECL 

(Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.) coming to Saskatoon, 140 

jobs; Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting, rebuilding their 

smelter at Craven, 375 jobs; Goldenhill Cattle at Viscount, 24 

jobs; and a new contract between TCCCS/IRIS (Tactical 

Command and Control Communication System) which is a 

national defence project, 50 new jobs; and the list goes on and 

on. And I won't recite it all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but the point 

is that there are many, many positive things happening in 

Saskatchewan under the leadership of this government. 

 

I want to say that despite the fact that the budget is tough and 

we all have to pay a bit more we are still, in terms of taxes and 

overall charges of the government, Saskatchewan is still the 

third-best place to live in terms of taxes and personal charges 

the government imposes on the people. It seems to me that 

when you consider the fact that we have wide-open spaces, 

clean air, clean water, and friendly people, very low-cost 

housing, Saskatchewan is one of the finest places to live and 

will continue to be so. 

 

In the short run it's a difficult situation, but in the long run I 

believe it will not be so. We will ensure that every tax dollar is 

used as wisely as possible and we will be doing more with less. 

And that gives the people of the province considerable 

optimism and considerable hope. 

 

That hope and optimism is being reflected in the media. I have 

an editorial from the Moosomin World Spectator of January 

20, where they are commenting on the Conservative criticism 

of our Finance minister. And I think this really says it all. It 

says: it was a little amusing to read of the Tories' criticism of 

new Finance Minister Janice MacKinnon, who replaced Ed 

Tchorzewski in a recent cabinet shuffle. MacKinnon, the 

Conservative Finance critic said, was not experienced enough 

to handle the tough Finance portfolio. 

 

And I might add parenthetically, look who's talking, Mr. 

Speaker. Then the Moosomin World Spectator goes on to say: 

here we have criticism from a government that so badly 

managed the financial affairs of this province that they've 

almost been guaranteed a Guinness Book of Records entry. 

And they're knocking the incoming minister because she may 

be too inexperienced. Even if the Tories are 



March 23, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 537 

correct and MacKinnon is horrible at her job (something I'm 

sure won't happen and isn't happening) she can certainly be no 

worse than the various Finance ministers in the Devine 

government. 

 

And I want the members opposite to listen very carefully to the 

last two sentences, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They are: the woman 

deserves a chance. The Tory critics deserve a spanking. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: — The Star-Phoenix of January 2, 1993 had this to 

say in an editorial about the new year, entitled: "New year cast 

in bright light." They said: 

 

 Finally, all this (that is, economic development in the 

province) is taking place against a backdrop of relatively 

stable and moderate government leadership at both the 

municipal and provincial level. Compared to the turmoil that 

provinces such as Ontario are experiencing, the realistic 

approach to government and the economy taken by Premier 

Roy Romanow becomes a positive and reassuring factor. 

 

And I believe that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I believe that people 

are reassured by the approach taken by our government 

because the people know that the government has a plan. And 

the people have been asking for a plan. 

 

Murray Mandryk wrote in the Leader-Post on March 19 about 

the Finance minister. He said: 

 

 Not only was she unflappable Thursday, but her calm, 

pleasant demeanour was the dominating force in the weeks 

preceding the announcement. 

 

 She has been incredibly focused. As a result, an incredibly 

focused message has come out. 

 

 It is a sense of control that we haven't seen in the 

Saskatchewan government in a long time. 

 

And the point is that despite what people may think of 

particular measures in the budget, despite what people may 

think of particular government policies, they know that the 

Government of Saskatchewan is honest with the people, is 

straightforward about the situation we're in, and has a plan to 

deal with the situation we're in. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: — And I could go on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to . . . I 

don't want to disappoint my colleagues here, but I'll skip over 

some of the editorial comment. 

 

However, I would refer to The Melfort Journal which writes: it 

is only through resolve that this government or any government 

will be successful in bringing provincial government spending, 

and thus the deficit, under control. This government claims to 

have the 

 resolve that is necessary to do just that. That's the good news 

they brought to Melfort Friday. 

 

And The Globe and Mail also have commended the 

government for its very realistic assessment of our situation 

and plan to deal with it. 

 

I just want to say a word about jobs, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 

budget is difficult, but one thing I'm quite encouraged by is that 

more money is being put into construction of capital projects; 

considerably more money this year than last. 

 

(1630) 

 

In the education field, the K to 12 schools, the budget is being 

increased from 7.5 million to 20 million. Post-secondary 

capital funding is increasing from 3 million to 6.1 million. An 

additional 11 million is going to be spent on highways 

construction, and an additional 26.7 million, or a total of that 

amount at least, for health facilities. And I think that that's a 

very positive note, that we're going to be putting some people 

who very badly need employment to work. I sincerely hope 

that that has the effect of generating more jobs in our economy. 

 

So in conclusion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to say that the 

road that we have taken is not the easiest road. The easiest road 

is to run away from your problems and ignore them. But as we 

look ahead down that road, we can all look forward to the day 

when we can say to those who come after us that we built a 

foundation and laid a path to financial stability and freedom for 

the people of this province, that we rebuilt the fiscal 

foundations of Saskatchewan and put the province back on the 

road to prosperity. 

 

And I look forward to that day and I look forward to the next 

few years and the remainder of this government's first term 

with a great deal of confidence. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Deputy 

Speaker. I think that's your correct official title, and I hope that 

your sojourn as presiding officer here will be as uneventful as 

possible during the course of my remarks which I am going to 

attempt to have . . . make fairly succinct this afternoon because 

to a large degree I have already voiced many of my concerns, 

particularly with the portfolio that I am the shadow critic of 

which is in Health. And during the adjourned debates of . . . or 

second readings of The Health Districts Bill, I spent a 

considerable amount of time outlining to the citizens of the 

province some of the concerns that we had in the direction that 

this government was going. 

 

And it did not take too much of a genius to figure out the 

impact that this budget would have upon the Department of 

Health even before the budget was brought down by the 

minister from Saskatoon. And unfortunately many of the 

predictions — most of the predictions — have come to fruition 

for the 



538 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1993 

unfortunate people of Saskatchewan. 

 

We find for example, Mr. Speaker, that while there were dire 

warnings of what was going to happen to Whitespruce, I 

believe they have come to fruition. We're hearing now what is 

going to be happening to SADAC (Saskatchewan Alcohol and 

Drug Abuse Commission) — causes us a lot of concern. We 

had a lot of concern at the time about the dismantling, the total 

dismantling of the drug program. That has come to fruition as 

well, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker. 

 

And so as the health district boards are being set up and the 

inevitable 3 per cent cut in the slashing of the Health budget as 

it is going to take effect, again I remind the people of 

Saskatchewan and predict some of the consequences that we're 

going to have in the deliverance of our health . . . quality health 

that we're so used to in this province. 

 

And we will find, Mr — if you don't mind I'll shorten that to 

Mr. Speaker — the people of this province are going to feel the 

brunt of that as the programs are being implemented by the 

Minister of Health. We know, for example, that the total budget 

for Health has been cut, has been slashed down to 1.49 billions 

of dollars. That's a cut of $45 million in the Health budget 

alone. 

 

Now I don't think that this side has any particular problems 

with the cutting of the health budget, the rationalization of the 

health. But again, as many of my colleagues over the course of 

the last few days have indicated, it is the choices that this 

government is making that causes us pain and that causes us 

concern. 

 

And as we have witnessed today again in the gallery, the way 

in which many of these choices are being implemented are a 

great deal of concern to the people of Saskatchewan. Because 

the motivating factor, Mr. Speaker, the motivating factor for all 

of this is the almighty deficit. Everything is being done in the 

name of the deficit, and the choices that are being made are 

very often the wrong choices. But perhaps even more 

importantly, the mannerisms in which those choices are being 

implemented are also unnecessarily devastating. 

 

And I want to spend some time on that this afternoon. We 

know that what is going to happen is in the name of the deficit 

we are going to have two things occurring as a result of this 

budget, as a result of the cutting of funding, particularly in 

health. We're going to see offloading, two forms of offloading, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The offloading of responsibility where the Minister of Health 

can stand up in this House and in a painful expression say: 

well, boy, those are not very good choices but I didn't make 

those choices; it was the boards out there that were making 

those choices. It was the Wascana Health Board, it was the 

Regina Health Board that made the choice to do it. It wasn't I. 

So there is an offloading of responsibility, a buffer between 

irate citizens of this province and the 

Minister of Health, the Minister of Finance, and indeed the 

Premier of this province. And that is unfortunate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The second concern that we have as far as the offloading 

process is concerned, is the offloading of financing or 

downloading of the financing in the support of health care 

services. We know for a fact that they're going to be cut. 

 

And so we will find now that the property tax base in the 

province is going to feel the full brunt of this offloading, where 

the property owner will be forced now to supplement, to 

supplement the delivery of the health care services. Either that, 

or the other option, Mr. Speaker, will be to forgo those 

services, to have an inferior quality of services in the health 

field. 

 

These are not only my concerns. I believe what I am doing and 

members on this side of the House are doing is expressing the 

concerns as they are being presented to us by the people that 

we meet and the people that we talk to in this province. It's 

certainly the case in my constituency, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I want to take the opportunity over the next few moments to 

show the government that there are errors in their pattern. 

There are errors in the presentation of this budget. And those 

errors, Mr. Speaker, are numerous and they are profound. But I 

will try to focus on but a few of the most grievous of these 

injuries that are being perpetrated on the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I'd like to place, Mr. Speaker, into the historical record the 

advice and options set out by people who are not involved in 

politics. I think the people of this province are very sceptical. 

And if they receive advice or if they receive options from 

politicians they probably say, well in that case, if that's what 

you say, I'm heading in the other direction, and chances are 

60:40 that I'll be right in doing the opposite. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what I want to do is to draw attention to 

people who do not have partisan aspirations, who have no 

particular bone to pick with any particular group of people or 

any particular concern in this province. 

 

And it's important, Mr. Speaker, because the record is now 

thick with the assertion of NDP member after NDP member 

standing in this House and invoking the new chant that is being 

developed by the member for Riversdale, the mantra of: we 

have no choice, we have no choice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to you that the crescendo of the 

incantations are rising in direct proportion to the amount of 

heat that members of the government are feeling as they go 

back into their own constituencies and the people of their 

constituencies are telling these folks exactly what they think 

about the plan. 

 

So all over the province, Mr. Speaker, including some very 

significant professional people, are stating very seriously that 

this government does have some choices — choices other than 

the ones that they have 



March 23, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 539 

chosen. So it boils down to the fact, Mr. Speaker, that it's just a 

plain matter of the NDP government making bad choices. 

 

And let me start, Mr. Speaker, with some advice from a fairly 

well-known columnist, financial columnist from the 

Star-Phoenix, and he has advised the government to go to 

harmonization. And he's been doing this since well before the 

last election. 

 

And he also urges some significant privatization initiatives. But 

he wrote one column, Mr. Speaker, that I want to refer to that 

highlights the potential for $360 million in revenues with one 

simple policy. The headline is instructive, and it comes from 

the March 20 Star-Phoenix, and I quote: "No mention in the 

budget of gov't money in stock market" is what the headline 

reads. 

 

What Mr. Martin the columnist did, Mr. Speaker, was to take a 

close look at the budget and what he found was that the 

government holds $360 million worth of stock in the 

multinational uranium mining corporation of Cameco. The 

government is holding $360 million of stock. And I quote from 

this particular individual, Mr. Speaker, where he says: 

 

 It's tantamount to the finance minister rising in the assembly 

and announcing she would take $360 million of our money 

and invest it in a single stock play. Obviously we would have 

howled in outrage had she made such a statement. Strangely 

we don't complain that she has done what amounts to the 

same thing. 

 

So the first piece of advice for the government from the people 

totally outside of politics, I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, 

is simple: Get out of the stock market, Mr. NDP Leader, and 

use that $360 million to help balance the budget. It is there, Mr. 

NDP Leader. 

 

The second piece of advice that I would bring forward is one 

shared by Mr. Martin and that is tax harmonization. Tax 

harmonization — where have we heard that before? And that is 

also, Mr. Speaker, at the same time, being recommended by the 

commerce students at the University of Saskatchewan, who 

were thoroughly laughed at by members opposite when this 

was brought up a few days ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, harmonization is also recommended by the 

Canadian Federation of Independent Business. Harmonization 

is recommended by the chambers of commerce, the consumers' 

association, and most responsible farm organizations, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So there is a very solid piece of advice on the choices available 

to this government, Mr. Speaker. And again, it is advice from 

people who are not particularly interested about political 

parties and political agendas. They just want the government to 

get on with the business of building this province and sincerely 

trying to balance the budget. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, to continue on in that vein for a little bit, 

what about academics, Mr. Speaker? I know 

the government has a few allies left over from the days when 

Berkeley shipped up their leftovers in the '70s. But what I'm 

talking about is credible academics, those people who work not 

in political science or sociology but rather spend their time and 

their expertise and knowledge in economics. 

 

Now what advice, Mr. Speaker, do they have for this 

government? Well I'd like to put the advice of Professor Yul 

Kwon on the record, Mr. Speaker. And I would like the record 

to also reflect that Professor Kwon has been directly critical of 

my own party and of this party when we were in government a 

short few 18 months ago. This professor also served on 

Consensus Saskatchewan, and even then he urged the former 

government — us folks — to ignore the demands for more 

money on health and to make the cuts that were necessary. 

 

And we had a disagreement with Professor Kwon about the 

savings available by taking that course without making the 

concomitant other side of the ratio of undue suffering at the 

same time. But I note that because it is clear evidence that this 

professor is not some closet Tory who is simply interested in 

condemning the NDP; far from it, I would suggest. 

 

But Mr. Kwon, Professor Kwon has some advice for the 

Premier. And in March 19 in the Leader-Post he strongly 

makes the case with factual studies and hard information that 

balancing the budget must be done with spending cuts and 

cannot succeed by focusing on revenue raising because we 

know how the government can raise revenue, Mr. Speaker. It's 

a very limited process as to how to raise revenue. 

 

(1645) 

 

So as I said, Professor Kwon believed the former government 

was too much on the revenue side as well. And the proof of the 

pudding is in the eating I guess, Mr. Speaker, because he 

writes, and I quote: "On the tax side, it should be noted that 

high taxes slow down economic growth." High taxes slow 

down economic growth. And he continues and I quote further: 

". . . the extent of economic slowdown by taxes is alarming." 

 

And then he provides information from studies that show the 

fall-back in economic growth from raising taxes that have held 

up the growth rate by as many as 12 points, Mr. Speaker, and 

that is dramatic — the effect that raising of taxes can have on 

the economic growth, the very engine of economic activity that 

we depend on to get us out of this kind of a slump. 

 

So he points out, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan has the 

highest burden of taxes of any jurisdiction in Canada. And then 

he compares that to our growth possibilities. And as I 

mentioned, Mr. Speaker, he writes that the extent of economic 

slowdown through taxation is alarming. 

 

Professor Kwon goes on, and he states that if the government 

insists on acting on the revenue side, then at the very least it 

should follow the lead of the 



540 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1993 

previous government and go the route of harmonization. Mr. 

Speaker, he writes finally that the government should bring 

forward legislation that puts into law a cap on government 

spending. 

 

So there are three bits of professional advice from a professor 

of economics on choices that this government had before it, 

Mr. Speaker. Choices advanced by certainly a non-political 

individual who was very knowledgeable about economics — 

these were the choices that he said were available to this 

government. 

 

And another professor of economics that members opposite 

like to laugh at is Professor Isabel Anderson who also has some 

advice, Mr. Speaker, on this government and its choices. 

Professor Anderson in various fora has said the government is 

wrong to be obsessed about the absolute size of the debt. The 

government is wrong to be obsessed with the absolute size of 

the debt. 

 

She says the government should be a little wiser and 

understand that as important the actual size of the debt is to 

credit rating agencies, more important is the ability to pay 

which is measured by economic development. There we come 

again, Mr. Speaker, to that all important issue. 

 

So Professor Anderson says, the government if it wishes to 

recover its credit rating, then it must provide a foundation for 

economic development. 

 

And I think all members from the opposition side of this House 

have been stressing that, time after time after time. I know 

certainly, I cannot repeat often enough to the folks opposite, 

that too many of the things that they are doing in the name of 

the deficit, the things that they are doing to cut down the 

interest rates, are counter-productive. You try to save money, 

in the end it costs you more. Whether it be loss of economic 

activity through taxation or whether it is in the medical field of 

taking away a low-cost, low-technology service to the people, 

and instead substituting a higher cost. 

 

That is what is wrong and that is what we object to, and that is 

why we continually remind people that it's a tough budget, but 

it's a tough budget by choice of members opposite. They are 

making these choices. 

 

Now when the Premier gets up and says, give me a break, I 

have no choice, what we're trying to do here now is show the 

public that indeed, Mr. Speaker, there are choices. There are 

choices that this government could take that are not going to be 

as strenuous, that are not going to be as devastating as they 

need be. And we cannot allow in times like this to have 

political ideology be the governing factor in determining what 

we do and what we do not do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Isabel Anderson continues, and I'd like to bring 

forth another quote: 

 

 The most extensive prospects (she says) for the growth of this 

economy lies with the 

development of non-fossil fuel energy sources, from the 

manufacturing design through to the disposal of waste 

management of the primary fuel source, with world 

leadership in the technology of environmental protection and 

the technology of safe, responsible waste disposal facilities. 

 

Now I'm going to suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, and to those 

people who are listening and take some liberties and to suggest 

that all of that economic talk — academic talk, pardon me — 

that I was just reading about boils down to Professor Anderson 

advising the government to pursue a full nuclear industry from 

building reactors to dealing with fuel recycling and waste 

management. That is what they're saying . . . that's what she is 

saying, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think we cannot have our hands in the sand — and I've 

said this before in this session — we cannot have our hands in 

the sand. We must explore all opportunities. We must look into 

the future and perhaps, as she is indicating here, explore all of 

these possibilities. 

 

So for a Premier, Mr. Speaker, to say that he's bankrupt of 

choices, well there's another choice offered you by Isabel 

Anderson — build the economy and go for nuclear leadership. 

The point is, Mr. Speaker, there are plenty of people out there 

with all kinds of choices for this government to make. 

 

So if the Premier is not capable of coming up with some 

choices himself and he does not want to bring in a deficit of 

$265 million using the former government's budget plan, then 

he can use the advice and the choices that are being provided 

by private citizens in this province. That is an option that he 

has. It's free advice, it's good advice, it's expert advice. 

 

The choices that this government is making on the backs of the 

people, burdening them down, are not the choices that these 

people want or deserve. So this budget, Mr. Speaker, this 

budget makes choices. Of course it makes choices, but it just 

happens to make nasty choices and cruel choices. 

 

We witnessed that today, Mr. Speaker. We witnessed that 

today in how the cut-backs were brought about in the liquor 

board store. We saw the employees here, how they were 

handled. And you call that compassion — the callousness with 

which they were dismissed in a four-minute firing squad. 

 

I was in Rosthern over the weekend. Two years ago Neal 

Hardy and I, Mr. Speaker, opened up the rural service centre in 

Rosthern. And during that time we created jobs in Rosthern at a 

much valued and needed service. The people of Rosthern have 

told me that. What happened on Thursday? At 3 o'clock on 

Thursday, two folks from the department came in and said, this 

office is closed, and put a sign on the outside of the door 

saying: effective immediately this office is closed. No 

forewarning, no idea what was happening. The secretary 

wanted to quickly at least take out the day's mail. No you don't. 

No you don't; this office is 



March 23, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 541 

closed. That's compassion; that's understanding. 

 

But again I pose the question: is that saving money? Is that 

saving money or is that another example of doing exactly what 

you shouldn't be doing? Is that another example of being totally 

counter-productive? And I suggest to you that that's exactly 

what it is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget does put forward what is considered 

or could be considered a plan. But the plan for the . . . as a 

balanced budget, the plan that outlines how to come about in a 

balanced budget, Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you and the 

members opposite and the people of this province, is a phoney 

plan. It's simply a phoney plan. It concedes that the debt will be 

pushed to 16 billion by 1996, Mr. Speaker. But I suggest to you 

it's going to be at 16 billion before the end of 1995. 

 

And you know why, Mr. Speaker, why it's a phoney plan? 

Because this budget sits on a soft base of phoney predictions — 

phoney predictions in the marketable commodities that this 

province has. It's unfounded in its unrealistic assumptions of 

the prices for our commodities. 

 

And this is what the assumption of this budget is, that there are 

going to be certain kinds of prices paid for commodities. It 

predicts growth in government revenues as a result, and are 

totally unrealistic. And it fails to understand the relationship 

between the destruction to the economy and higher taxes. 

 

And I listened with amusement as the member from Humboldt 

was engaging in his ill-informed contribution — to put it 

kindly — to this debate, Mr. Speaker. And that member stood 

up and firstly got into the personal attacks. And I'm going to 

refrain from succumbing to the temptation to do the same. But 

regardless of all of that, Mr. Speaker, after the crude innuendo 

and inflammatory rhetoric emanating from that member, he 

made his case for the budget. And he said that the budget rests 

on the expectation of the increased retail sales. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, no disrespect to the member from 

Humboldt, but it would be useful for him to obtain some 

assistance, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest, in understanding the 

relationship between increasing sales taxes and retail sales. 

Because believe it or not, members opposite, there is a very 

distinct relationship between those two factors. 

 

And I'll tell him now — but he can check with any 

businessperson or any economics professor is going to give 

him the same kind of information — increasing sales tax 

decreases retail sales, Mr. Speaker. There's no doubt about it. 

You take money out of people's pockets, they don't have as 

much to spend. So already we can see one of the assumptions 

of this budget beginning to crumble. 

 

All members of the government seem to have bought into the 

idea that simply talking about the balancing of the budget is all 

that it takes. But the fact is, Mr. Speaker, increasing taxes, 

increasing the burden on 

the people in businesses, these things will make balancing the 

budget nearly impossible. 

 

The government should understand that you cannot solve a 

spending problem on the revenue side. That's fundamental in 

economics. You cannot solve a spending problem on the 

revenue side. You cannot simply go to the people and say, well 

if we take more out of your family, we can balance it out. 

History has proven, Mr. Speaker, that type of strategy simply 

will not work. Instead you must make carefully targeted but 

deep cuts in your spending, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Incidentally, the government in Newfoundland chose to cut, 

not to tax, in its budget. They cut government salaries. The 

Government of Manitoba is choosing cuts, Mr. Speaker, not 

taxes. That government is actually shutting down non-essential 

services on Fridays to save money. Governments across the 

country are eliminating grants, Mr. Speaker, to interest groups 

rather than raising taxes. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what it seems to be doing here is this 

government is doing nothing of these things, so when they 

stand up and when they start talking about the hard choices, 

when they start talking about the courage that it takes, well 

then I ask them, where is it? Where is this courage that it takes 

to make, Mr. Speaker, these wrong choices? 

 

And that is fundamentally what we oppose and that's 

fundamentally what the people and the citizens, particularly the 

taxpayers of this province, oppose is the hard choices that the 

Premier says that he has to make, these hard choices. I have no 

choice; give me a break. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I tell you the citizens of this province are saying 

and they are begging this government, give us a break. Give us 

a break. Not our legs, because if our legs are broken we're not 

sure about what type of medical services will be available. But 

give us a break. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what I'm seeing in this government so far is 

that it takes courage — they talk about courage and they say it 

takes courage — I say to you, it takes courage to tax because 

that's your fundamental approach in solving the deficit of this 

budget here, is to tax the people, to make up the shortfall by 

combating the deficit by increasing your revenue. And the only 

way a government can, Mr. Speaker, increase its revenue is 

through taxation — taxation. 

 

And at the same time, they're proud to say that we're going to 

increase jobs; jobs are a priority with our government. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. It now being 5 o'clock, this House 

stands recessed until 7 p.m. this evening. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 


