




















































Hansard: February 25, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3283 

 February 25, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

PROROGATION 

 

At 10:02 a.m. Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber and took her seat upon the Throne. 

 

Her Honour was then pleased to deliver the following speech: 

 

Mr. Speaker, 

 

Members of the Legislative Assembly: 

 

It is my duty to relieve you of further attendance at this 

Legislative Assembly.  In so doing, I wish to thank you for and 

congratulate you on the work you have done. 

 

As we embarked upon this session my government did not 

falter at the massive task ahead.  My government has set a new 

direction for Saskatchewan in time of unprecedented economic 

challenge. 

 

With the confidence and the cooperation of Saskatchewan 

people, we have embarked together on the voyage of rebuilding 

the Saskatchewan economy, returning common sense and 

competence to the management of the public treasury, restoring 

public faith in the political process and renewing the hope of 

our people for the future of this great province. 

 

Recognizing that long-term stability is central to our farm 

economy, you have passed amendments to The Saskatchewan 

Farm Security Act to provide for the six-year leaseback 

program to enable farmers who have lost their farms to banks 

and lenders to remain on the land. 

 

You have approved amendments to The Community Bonds Act 

and The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Act.  

These program changes will encourage further investment in 

communities throughout this province. 

 

In accordance with the recommendations of the Financial 

Management Review Commission you have approved changes 

to The Financial Administration Act which set a new standard 

for the timely release of government financial information.  In 

accordance with the spirit of this legislation the Public 

Accounts for the year ending March 1992 were publicly 

released on October 30. 

 

You have approved legislation which establishes SaskEnergy 

as a new and free-standing Crown corporation with reporting 

obligations to this Assembly.  In accordance with this 

legislation and the recommendations of the Financial 

Management Review Commission, SaskEnergy has for the first 

time tabled its annual report in this legislature. 

 

Accessibility of government has been further enhanced by 

amendments to The Ombudsman Act which increase the scope 

of the Ombudsman's review of government 

actions and decisions. 

 

Further, you have demonstrated a strong commitment to public 

participation and consultation with the introduction for first 

reading of The Personal Property Security Act, 1992, The 

Planning and Development Amendment Act, 1992, The Local 

Improvements Act, 1992, and The Occupational Health and 

Safety Amendment Act. 

 

Additionally, The Charter of Environmental Rights and 

Responsibilities has been the subject of a public hearing 

process by your recently established Standing Committee on 

the Environment.  This public review process will ensure that 

future legislative initiatives appropriately reflect the needs and 

aspirations of our people and their communities. 

 

You have approved amendments to The Clean Air Act, The 

Environmental Management and Protection Act, and The 

Ozone-depleting Substances Control Act to ensure that 

potentially harmful activities are carefully monitored and that 

infractions are dealt with effectively. 

 

To enhance our stewardship and enjoyment of our natural 

resources and wildlife, you have passed amendments to The 

Parks Act and The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 

 

You have demonstrated your determination to pioneer the next 

phase of health care.  You have repealed The Health Research 

Act in order to facilitate the creation of the Health Services 

Utilization and Research Commission. 

 

You have implemented several initiatives designed to create a 

more responsive and sensitive justice system, including 

amendments to The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act, 

The Victims of Crime Act, and The Criminal Injuries 

Compensation Act. 

 

Consumer protection in real estate transactions has been 

significantly enhanced by amendments to The Real Estate 

Brokers Act. 

 

In accordance with the recommendations of the Pension 

Benefits Review Panel, you have approved legislation 

improving pension plan standards, enhancing portability 

provisions and extending eligibility for part-time workers. 

 

You have acted on the recommendations of the Construction 

Industry Advisory Committee and approved a new 

Construction Industry Labour Relations Act which establishes 

a special framework for province-wide collective bargaining in 

the construction industry and encourages the resolution of 

disputes by means other than strikes and lock-outs. 

 

I thank you for the provision you have made to meet the further 

requirements of the public service and I assure you that this 

sum of money will be used economically, prudently and in the 

public interest. 

 

So in taking leave of you, I congratulate you for the manner in 

which you have devoted your energies to the 



3284 Saskatchewan Hansard February 25, 1993 

activities for the session and wish you the full blessing of 

Providence. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, and members of the 

Legislative Assembly, it is the will and pleasure of Her Honour 

the Lieutenant Governor that this Legislative Assembly be 

prorogued until later this day, the 25th of February, 1993 at 3 

p.m., and this Legislative Assembly is prorogued accordingly 

at this time. 

 

Her Honour then retired from the Chamber at 10:09 a.m. 

 

 


