




















































Hansard: March 22, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 459 

 March 22, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the 

opportunity to introduce to you and through you to members of 

the Assembly 21 grade 12 students from Martin Collegiate here 

in Regina.  They're with us here today to observe question 

period.  And I know that all members will want to join with me 

in welcoming them here to the House along with their teacher, 

Doug Bolander. 

 

I will be meeting with these students after question period for 

photographs and for drinks in the members' lounge downstairs.  

So I would ask all members to join with me in welcoming them 

here and wishing them the best. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce 

to you and through you to members of the House, in the west 

gallery on his very first visit to a session of the legislature, a 

person who's very important to me, my life partner for the last 

36 years, my husband, Dan. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Ministerial Letter to SUMA 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Premier, and it has to do with ethics and the 

appropriate behaviour of ministers of the Crown. 

 

Mr. Premier, I believe that members on both sides of the House 

would agree that individuals and organizations in 

Saskatchewan should be able to comment freely and openly on 

matters of public policy without fear of retribution from the 

government. 

 

Mr. Premier, your government has created an atmosphere of 

fear in this province that could potentially make government 

threats and coercion very effective.  Individuals and 

organizations may be afraid to speak publicly against the 

government for fear of losing their school, their hospital, their 

government funding or even their jobs. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you make the commitment today that this 

type of activity will not be tolerated amongst members of your 

cabinet, that your ministers will not threaten or attempt to 

blackmail those who disagree with government policy, and 

those who breach this standard of ethics and do engage in 

threats and coercion will be removed from cabinet? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. member 

for that question, which of course he has not provided any 

detail to me on.  But I can say as a matter of general policy and 

principle that this government welcomes genuine dissent and 

contrary opinions. 

 

We don't know whether all the solutions that we, as a 

government, advance are the correct ones, and we need the 

input -- the productive, constructive input -- of everybody 

involved.  And therefore that is the policy of the government 

including the cabinet and the MLAs (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly).  And I can assure the member that we 

will support that policy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, I thank 

you for that answer.  I just want to make sure of the firmness of 

your commitment on this matter. 

 

As Leader of the Government, it is incumbent upon you to 

ensure that none of your ministers use threats or coercion as a 

weapon against those who take exception with the policies of 

your government. 

 

Can you assure this House that it has never happened in the 

past nor will it happen in the future?  Or if it has happened, that 

you will take swift and appropriate action to discipline the 

minister who has breached the public trust by using their office 

to threaten or intimidate others? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, first of all, I reject the -- 

if I may so with the greatest of respect to the hon. member 

opposite -- what can only be described as inflammatory 

language, such as threats and intimidation and goodness knows 

what else he uses.  I realize that it's question period and he's 

trying to get some publicity. 

 

I can tell the member again what I said in response to his first 

question. Threats and intimidation, if they occur -- I can hardly 

believe that they have -- are not a policy of this government 

and we don't accept that.  We welcome differing and contrary 

opinions.  And if an hon. member has something specific 

which he wants to raise, I wish he would raise it in his next 

question and we'll try to deal with it at that point. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Premier.  Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Premier, on March 4, 1993, shortly after the introduction of 

your government's new health legislation, the Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association issued a news release calling 

on your government to remove health funding from the 

property tax base by repealing The Hospital Revenue Act. 



460 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1993 

This seems like a reasonable enough request.  SUMA 

(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) was simply 

acting on the position of its membership.  Mr. Premier, your 

Minister of Community Services responded by writing a letter 

to the president of SUMA which states, and I quote: 

 

 Your remarks display an apparent lack of good faith on your 

part to continue this partnership and discussion.  One can 

only assume this was done for political purposes. 

 

 In order to achieve any (and the minister has underlined any) 

further (discussions) on the (process for) alternate financing 

methods, I strongly urge that you issue a clear, unequivocal 

retraction immediately. 

 

Mr. Premier, simply stated, your minister has threatened 

SUMA.  In light of your commitment you just gave, will you 

take the only appropriate measure, prove your commitment to 

political ethics in this province, and ask for the resignation of 

the Minister of Municipal Affairs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I will answer the 

question directly by saying no, I definitely will not, and 

certainly not based on that exchange of correspondence. 

 

The fact of the matter is that Mr. Cholod misrepresented what I 

said to SUMA and his subsequent letter confirmed that.  And 

the Minister of Urban Affairs, now Municipal Government, did 

the proper thing by pointing that out and asking Mr. Cholod to 

do the proper thing too, and that is to explain exactly what I did 

say to the SUMA delegates. 

 

It's all down there in writing.  I gave it from a delivered text.  

There were no questions or answers which deviated from the 

text, or press comments which deviated from it at all.  

Everybody knows it.  And the responsibility is on us. 

 

Look, we're in a tough enough jackpot, thanks to the Tories, 

now in Saskatchewan, that we ought not to get into a 

disagreement on words or facts as we seek to get out of this 

problem mutually. 

 

Quite frankly the letter that was written by the minister to Mr. 

Cholod, while I don't have it in front of me, I assume was a 

letter which was written from her to him, and a good 

relationship.  Clearly he or somebody has seen fit to deliver it 

to you.  And I regret that because you're trying to politicize 

something and overstate an unnecessary issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, the commitment you 

made to this House just a few seconds ago is beginning to ring 

hollow.  Your minister threatened SUMA.  That's what she did.  

She threatened SUMA.  She said that they had to give an 

immediate retraction or she would not even discuss financing 

arrangements with them with respect to the hospital Act, Mr. 

Premier.  Your government, your minister, threatened SUMA 

and she should be thrown out of office, relieved of her duties as 

Minister of Municipal Government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we again ask you for that commitment to the 

House today.  Will you ask that minister for her resignation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, first of all, may I 

say that the budget which my colleague has presented on behalf 

of the government must be playing pretty well out there if this 

is the order of the question period that the opposition chooses 

to take.  One would have thought, given all of the issues which 

the budget raises, that this member and this opposition chooses 

this as a lead-off.  Well that's their choice. 

 

I do not think that it is improper and it for sure is not a threat 

for a minister to say that it's incumbent to clarify the remarks 

and that in order to achieve any further progress on alternate 

financing methods . . . she was referring to the alternate 

financing methods of The Hospital Revenue Act which is 

subject to negotiations.  How anybody in the wildest of 

imagination -- of course in the absence of anything to attack the 

budget substantially I guess anything is possible -- how 

anybody in the wildest imagination could come up with that 

concoction or interpretation is beyond me. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I repeat again, the situation simply is as follows.  

We believe SUMA is an important organization.  We want to 

work out our problems with them.  We want to solve them in a 

cooperative way.  We will.  If there's a dispute between Mr. 

Cholod and the Minister of Municipal Government, believe 

me, Mr. Cholod doesn't need your intervention or help.  We'll 

straighten it out with SUMA ourselves. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, you can 

make all the jokes about this you want, but the fact of the 

matter is, is SUMA takes this very seriously -- very seriously 

indeed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, your minister in her letter to SUMA 

said -- and I'll go back to it again if you didn't hear it the first 

time: 

 

 Your remarks display an apparent lack of good faith on your 

part to continue this partnership and discussion.  One can 

only assume that this was done for political purposes. 

 

 In order to achieve any (and the minister has underlined any) 

further progress on alternate financing methods, I strongly 

urge that you issue a clear, unequivocal retraction 

immediately. 



March 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 461 

That's what your minister said, Mr. Premier.  That is a threat.  

If you ask SUMA to address this misunderstanding, fine.  But 

the fact of the matter is, your minister threatened them and she 

threatened not to look at alternate financing for them. 

 

Mr. Premier, do the honourable thing now and ask that minister 

for her resignation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the member can keep 

asking me all afternoon.  I've given him his answer.  And I 

won't be able to convince the hon. member.  I think any 

fair-minded person in this legislature or outside knows exactly 

what the correspondence says.  In fact Mr. Cholod, in writing 

back, in writing back to the minister, said, quote: 

 

 While our press release alludes to the consultative process 

leading up to the introduction of Bill 3 . . . 

 

I might add parenthetically they had had two meetings before 

that time.  He said: 

 

 . . . it did not make specific reference to the transitional steps 

in consultations referred to in your speech and the Premier's 

message to SUMA convention delegates.  This is an 

unfortunate oversight (Mr. Cholod writes).  We regret any 

difficulties this may have caused . . . 

 

His exact words.  So we acknowledge the correctness of the 

minister's correspondence.  We accept this.  The issue's a 

finished issue.  The relationship is a good one.  And I want to 

tell you the Minister of Municipal Affairs has worked with Mr. 

Cholod and SUMA longer than you've been in this Legislative 

Assembly, sir.  She knows how to deal with them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Purchase of VLTs 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the minister responsible for the Gaming 

Commission.  Mr. Minister, I am sure you will agree that the 

gaming industry that you are responsible for must not only be 

totally legitimate, but must be perceived to be above-board. 

 

Unfortunately, recent events have given many people the 

impression that you do not have the situation under control.  

Mr. Minister, there have been resignations from the board of 

directors of the Gaming Commission, several different 

executive directors and numerous presidents have come and 

gone.  Criminal charges have been laid in some cases, and 

investigations are under way.  This, coupled with the 

controversy at the Bear Claw Casino, makes for a very 

concerned and suspicious public, Mr. Minister. 

 

Now we hear in the media that you have awarded contracts for 

2,000 video lottery machines to two 

American companies worth 20 million bucks.  Mr. Minister, 

Saskatchewan people will want to be assured that you have 

done your homework and that you have done due diligence to 

ensure that these contracts have been awarded fairly. 

 

Will you give the assurance today, Mr. Minister; will you table 

the documentation; will you make public any review or study 

that your government has done in awarding of this $20 million 

contract. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In 

response to the member's question, I want to indicate to him 

that the Gaming Commission did a very in-depth study with 

respect to the people who had put forward proposals with 

respect to the VLTs (video lottery terminal).  I believe, based 

on the information that they looked through, they made the best 

decision on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, and I concur 

with their decision -- I think they've made the right decision. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A question to the 

same minister.  Mr. Minister, you won't mind answering a few 

questions about those contracts then.  Mr. Minister, one of the 

American firms which was awarded a contract was Video 

Lottery Consultants of Bozeman, Montana.  Information, I 

might add, that you refused to provide to the opposition in 

written questions late last week. 

 

Mr. Minister, were you aware that this company is wholly 

owned by Video Lottery Technology?  And were you aware 

that last summer the Australian state of Victoria refused to 

honour its lottery terminal contract with VLTS and ordered a 

police investigation into this company because of the 

reputation of the CEO (chief executive officer), a Mr. Barry 

Lippon?  Were you aware of that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, I am 

aware of a couple of things surrounding this.  First of all, the 

decision to select this company as one of the suppliers was a 

unanimous decision made by the Gaming Commission.  I am 

also aware of the fact that the province of Alberta, after doing 

their review, found no problem with this company.  We have 

gone through, as I said, a very in-depth process to determine 

that this would be a reliable supplier, and as I said, again, I 

concur with the decision of the Gaming Commission. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- A question to the same minister, Mr. Speaker.  

Mr. Minister, were you aware that the Victoria Gaming 

Commission discovered that the one-time CEO of VLTS, Mr. 

Lippon, had made a false statement to the Montana Department 

of Revenue concerning a VLT contract, and that Mr. Lippon 

had extensive business contacts with two men who had been 

convicted of fraud and illegal gambling?  Did your review 

uncover and consider this information, Mr. Minister? 



462 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1993 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm aware 

of the fact that Mr. Egan, who did the investigation on behalf 

of the Gaming Commission, was aware of the circumstances 

surrounding the company.  I would want to indicate to the 

member that Mr. Lippon is no longer associated with that 

corporation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Question to the same minister, Mr. Speaker.  

Mr. Minister, Mr. Lippon was removed as CEO.  But were you 

aware that the replacement for Mr. Lippon, a Mr. Jim Davey, 

former head of the Oregon State Lottery, was also the focus of 

an ethics probe by the Oregon State Ethics Commission to see 

if there were any conflict of interest guidelines breached? 

 

And were you aware that Mr. Lippon was subsequently given a 

$500 per hour -- $500 per hour -- consultant fee with VLTS? 

 

Were you aware of those facts, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, in response to the 

member's question, I can say that Mr. Egan, who was 

responsible for the investigation, has indicated that there are no 

problems concerning this corporation. 

 

And I believe that the amount of study and the amount of time 

put into making this decision was adequate.  I believe the 

decision was appropriate.  And I support the recommendation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Question to the same minister, Mr. Speaker.  

Mr. Minister, were you aware that VLTS's recent bid to supply 

machines to West Virginia was suspended by Governor 

Caperton early this year, and that the FBI (Federal Bureau of 

Investigation) subsequently started probing the political 

contributions and video lotteries' role in influencing West 

Virginia's Gaming Commission?  Did your due diligence 

uncover that fact, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, in response again to 

the member's question, I can indicate to you that VLTs have 

been provided to the jurisdiction of Alberta, Atlantic Canada, 

Oregon, South Dakota, Rhode Island, and Australia. 

 

I will reaffirm that there has been an in-depth study with 

respect to this corporation.  I believe that the reputation of Mr. 

Egan is beyond reproach and I stand by their decision to 

recommend this corporation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- A question to the same minister, Mr. 

Speaker.  Mr. Minister, it would appear that this company 

doesn't have a particularly good track record when it comes to 

things that arouse suspicion in various law enforcement 

agencies around the world, and that's evident just from reading 

newspaper clippings, Mr. Minister. 

 

Now you say you've done your homework.  And you knew all 

of this information was there but that it was totally irrelevant to 

Saskatchewan.  Well, Mr. Minister, I'm wondering if it is 

totally irrelevant.  As I said, perception of legitimacy is very 

relevant to people in this province. 

 

Mr. Minister, could you tell this Assembly . . . could you table 

a list of all those people involved with the negotiations on the 

$10 million contract with VLTS.  And I ask you to include 

individuals hired or contracted by the Saskatchewan 

government or any of its agencies, as well as individuals hired 

or contracted by VLTS or any of its agencies or subsidiaries.  

Would you supply that information, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, what I will say to the 

member opposite, that for him to stand here and question the 

integrity of Mr. Egan, a former RCMP (Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police) superintendent who has done an in-depth 

study with respect to this issue, I think is unacceptable. 

 

I will indicate to you that there was in fact an in-depth study on 

all of the companies who had applied to supply these VLTs to 

the Government of Saskatchewan.  The criteria was analysed in 

depth, and as I've indicated to you, sir, I believe that the right 

choices were made and I will stand by the word of Mr. Egan 

who did the study.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

nobody is questioning the individual's competence or integrity.  

What we are asking questions about is your partner who is 

under investigation in various areas of the world by various 

police agencies, by a governor of a state.  And there is, I would 

suggest to you, Mr. Minister, a reason why Saskatchewan 

people would want to feel totally, totally at ease in the fact that 

you have had three different gaming commissions in place over 

the last 16 months. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, will you supply a contract with VLTS, any 

and all correspondence between the Government of 

Saskatchewan, the Gaming Commission, and/or the minister's 

office with respect to the negotiations in awarding of this 

contract?  Would you do that in this Assembly, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you.  What I will do is begin 

by correcting the member opposite, Mr. Speaker.  We have 

entered into negotiations for a 



March 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 463 

company . . . two companies to supply VLTs to the province of 

Saskatchewan.  It is a purchase arrangement.  It is an 

arrangement by which people who have the technology to 

supply these VLTs will supply them to the Government of 

Saskatchewan under a contract, so clearly it is not a partnership 

arrangement. 

 

I will repeat, Mr. Speaker, to the member opposite: we have 

received a report from the Gaming Commission who has 

studied this issue in great detail.  I believe the criteria used to 

select these two companies is above reproach.  I think that they 

have made the right decision and we will continue negotiations 

with the two companies. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A question to the 

same minister.  Well, Mr. Minister, Saskatchewan people who 

would have liked to have been involved in this business are 

asking questions about your partners in the gaming industry.  

You know very well, Mr. Minister, that a Saskatchewan partner 

of ISM-WESTBRIDGE (Information Systems Management 

Corporation) called Thunderbird Gaming, under the leadership 

of one Bob Sim, has made a proposal of equal cost to your 

American partners. 

 

The Thunderbird proposal involves Saskatchewan people, with 

no allegations of criminality, with no outstanding charges in 

relation to illegal gambling activities, and offered the potential, 

we are told, the potential of 400 jobs for Saskatchewan people.  

Now given the apparently unsavoury background of your 

American business partners, Mr. Minister, why would you 

refuse the Thunderbird offer, a made-in-Saskatchewan 

solution, to your gaming proposal?  Why wouldn't you do that, 

Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In 

response to the member's question let me say this.  We will be 

trying to achieve a maximum degree of Saskatchewan content 

with respect to these VLTs.  I would want to say to you that I 

don't intend to discuss the negotiations or the criteria in public.  

We have gone through a process that I believe established quite 

clearly which would be the superior bids.  We have selected 

two and I stand by that decision.  I think we have made the 

appropriate decision and I do believe it will result in 

Saskatchewan jobs for Saskatchewan people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, those were all very 

legitimate questions.  You refused to answer any of them in the 

House.  I hope at some point you're prepared to answer them 

because there's a lot of people in Saskatchewan that are very 

concerned about your American business partners. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the Premier.  Mr. Premier, 

why would the revenues generated by these machines not be a 

budgetary item?  You have stated 

that you're going to move into all lottery funds generated in this 

province.  You're going to move them into the Consolidate 

Fund for accountability reasons.  So why wouldn't this hold 

true from the revenues generated from VLTs?  Why would you 

not have those revenues subjected to the scrutiny of this 

legislature? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I would say to the hon. 

member specifically with respect to his question, that in the 

detailed consideration of the Estimates there can be a more full 

explanation of the circumstances.  There are accountings that 

are listed throughout the book, as one sees it -- I can't put my 

finger on it immediately -- but there is . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- They're not there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well there is.  I have, for example, the 

borrowing requirements by the Saskatchewan Gaming 

Commission are listed on page 82, as an example.  You'll be 

able to find them for the detail. 

 

So I would really say to the hon. member, Mr. Speaker, that in 

estimates we'll be pleased to answer all of that in detail, and the 

Minister of Finance might have some further information to 

add later. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Question to the Premier again, Mr. Speaker.  

Mr. Premier, your minister has just entered into contracts worth 

$20 million to purchase these machines.  Your government is 

obviously counting on large amounts of revenue coming back 

to the province of Saskatchewan or you wouldn't have invested 

the $20 million. 

 

Now how can these revenues be non-budgetary, as you've 

announced?  How can they not fall under the legislative 

scrutiny of this Assembly?  I mean after all, Mr. Premier, you 

were the one that was out talking about accountability and all 

of a sudden this principle seems to be abandoned totally.  

Nowhere in your budget is it mentioned about the revenues 

from the video lottery terminals.  Now, Mr. Premier, once 

again, will you give the commitment today that there's been a 

mistake made and your government is going to report in this 

legislature about the revenue derived from these machines? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the commitment that I 

give to the hon. member is, he will know at the appropriate 

time in estimates or later this . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

No, the hon. member talks about this is the appropriate time, in 

question period.  I always felt, with the greatest respect, Mr. 

Speaker, question period was matters of policy as opposed to 

questions of detail. 

 

The question that the hon. member asks -- if the member from 

Rosthern would just hang onto his hat 



464 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1993 

here a little bit, I'll give him the answer -- those will be 

answered to the member.  The days of secret corporations or 

non-accounting of funds died on October 21, 1991. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- And when I say the SDC, the 

Saskatchewan Diversification Corporation, which spent money 

(a) no one knew it existed -- I'm not even sure the Leader of the 

Opposition knew it existed -- spent money like a drunken 

sailor, and nobody had any account for it.  Well the former 

premier says answer the question because he doesn't like the 

answer I'm giving because he was part of that SDC operation. 

 

And my answer to the former premier is I have said those 

detailed questions will be provided for you in the estimates.  I 

can't put my finger on it right now but it's available and it's 

nothing that's being hidden in this regard. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1430) 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Moose Jaw-Thunder Creek Health District 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise this 

afternoon to inform this Assembly of a significant event in the 

province's efforts towards health reform. 

 

This morning I had the pleasure, along with the Minister of 

Health and the member from Moose Jaw Palliser, and the 

mayor of Moose Jaw, and numerous representatives of the 

health care community in Moose Jaw, of being present for the 

signing of the agreement establishing the Moose Jaw-Thunder 

Creek Health District. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, this new health district, the 

fifth to be established in our province, will assume 

responsibility for providing the citizens of Moose Jaw and 

surrounding area with integrated acute care, home care, special 

care, and ambulance services. 

 

The health care providers and community leaders of Moose 

Jaw and area have worked together to create a health board 

structure that takes into account rural and urban health needs, 

religious and cultural sensitivities, and which recognizes the 

need for community involvement in planning and delivering 

health services. 

 

This is a critical first step in health reform for Moose Jaw and 

area, a step that empowers the roughly 44,000 people within 

the new district to take responsibility and control over their 

health services.  As the new board develops ways to meet the 

health needs of the district, people will have opportunity to 

join together to help themselves, their families, neighbours, and 

communities to establish a health system with wellness as its 

objective. 

 

I would like to thank the people of Moose Jaw and district for 

their commitment and willingness to work with each other and 

with the Department of Health to bring us to this important 

point in health care reform. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today's announcement reflects this government's 

commitment to improving and maintaining quality health care 

and community-based services.  We can look forward to the 

formation of the Moose Jaw-Thunder Creek Health District as 

an example of the Saskatchewan way of doing things in a spirit 

of cooperation. 

 

That spirit, Mr. Speaker, that spirit has forged and strengthened 

partnerships between health care trustees, community leaders, 

government and health providers.  We have all pulled together 

to share the responsibility for achieving our common goal of a 

better health system for Saskatchewan. 

 

Together, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are finding 

unique and creative ways to improve our health system.  

Today's formation of the Moose Jaw-Thunder Creek Health 

District is a tangible example of creativity and resourcefulness. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the members of this Assembly to join with 

me in thanking the people of Moose Jaw and area for the hard 

work and dedication which led up to today's agreement and in 

congratulating them on the formation of the Moose 

Jaw-Thunder Creek health care district. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  And I 

thank the Hon. Associate Minister of Health for giving me a 

copy of his statement so that I could follow along with him in 

his comments. 

 

And the first thing I would like to do , Mr. Speaker, is to 

compliment and to congratulate the Sisters of Providence, the 

board members, and the people of Moose Jaw for persevering 

as my colleague says and for pushing this government to 

complete the steps that George McLeod initiated back in 1991. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, the money was in the budget . . . 

They laugh and they hoot in derision, Mr. Speaker, every time 

that they are exposed for the weaknesses in their programs, Mr. 

Speaker.  It's the citizens of Moose Jaw in conjunction with the 

former minister of Health who had the money in the budget for 

this particular initiative, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I would compliment the Minister of Health, the Associate 

Minister of Health, for bowing to the wishes of the area of 

Moose Jaw.  But I want to hand out as few words of caution, 

Mr. Speaker, in the comments that the minister just made.  And 

I would want to make sure 



March 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 465 

that the citizens of Saskatchewan are aware of some of the 

pitfalls that are involved. 

 

There are some buzz-words, Mr. Speaker, used in this release -- 

buzz-words such as "empowering the people."  Empowering 

the people.  Well whoop-de-do, Mr. Speaker.  That's exactly 

the concerns that the people of this province are expressing to 

me when they talk about the wellness as an objective, Mr. 

Speaker.  They conveniently forget that the wellness model can 

only be fully implemented once we have taken care of the 

sickness model. 

 

The sickness model is going to be thrown out as the baby in the 

washtub.  Mr. Speaker, that does not compute.  We must take 

care of the sickness model in rural Saskatchewan in particular 

as we make this important transition over to the wellness 

model.  We have no problem with that. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, another item that the minister said is that the 

spirit has forged and strengthened partnership.  Mr. Speaker, 

that is where our concern, along with the people of rural 

Saskatchewan, is; that, Mr. Minister, that spirit of partnership is 

sadly lacking in rural Saskatchewan in particular.  It's sadly 

lacking because what you are doing is dividing up community 

against community.  It used to be when we talked about the 

urban/rural split.  That's no longer so.  We have the rural split 

of community looking over its shoulder as a larger community 

is preparing to gobble it up. 

 

And there's a lot of concern out there, Mr. Minister.  And I can 

only hope, and I think that this will be the case in the Thunder 

Creek-Moose Jaw Health District, that indeed there's going to 

be enough homogenized situation where there will be the 

unanimity that is required for something like this to work. 

 

And when you talk about 44,000 people being affected by this 

health district, Mr. Minister, I surely hope you know what 

you're doing, because the message that we're getting back from 

the people of the province is that -- particularly rural 

Saskatchewan -- you don't, you don't.  And that's the concern 

that they're expressing. 

 

So once again, Mr. Speaker, I'm glad for the opportunity to be 

able to react to the minister's announcement.  And once again I 

would like to pass on my congratulations to the citizens of 

Moose Jaw that were able to persevere and make sure that this 

government listens to them.  I only hope you listen to the other 

citizens of Saskatchewan as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Draper: -- I care to introduce a guest, Mr. Speaker, sir. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I 

will determine that.  Why is the 

member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg on his feet? 

 

Mr. Draper: -- I'd like to introduce a guest, Mr. Speaker, sir. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Draper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, sir.  I'd like to 

introduce to you and through you to all the members of the 

Assembly, sitting in the west gallery over there, a neighbour, 

friend, and supporter of mine, Mr. Maurice Lafreniere from 

Gravelbourg who's coming to Regina during the week of La 

Semaine de la Francophonie.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that the Assembly resolve 

itself into the Committee of Finance. 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the opportunity to 

continue my remarks from Friday in support of the budget. 

 

As I said on Friday, this is a budget, although difficult, that will 

lead us on the journey of renewal, a budget that will give us 

financial freedom, a budget, Mr. Speaker, that secures our 

future -- a future that the residents of our great province 

deserve, a future our children and our grandchildren deserve. 

 

I again want to congratulate the Minister of Finance for her 

leadership and strength in preparing this budget.  I also want to 

congratulate all the members of our caucus for their hard work, 

determination, courage, and compassion in helping to prepare 

and in supporting this budget. 

 

It's a budget that each member of our caucus struggled with, 

and at time found heart-wrenching in making difficult choices.  

But we all had a say and we all brought our constituents' 

concerns to this budget.  But through this struggle, we are 

presenting to Saskatchewan a budget based on reality, fairness, 

community, cooperation, and compassion. 

 

Sacrifice is not easy, but it is necessary.  When we know our 

sacrifice is for a just cause, I believe the people of 

Saskatchewan are prepared to accept it.  I have faith in the 

people of this province that they will support this budget too.  

Not because they want to pay higher taxes and not because they 

want less programs, but because they want a plan to rebuild 

this province to secure their future.  Without such a plan we 



466 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1993 

jeopardize all that we do have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I say this budget is based on reality, it is.  

And the reality of the financial situation in this province is 

serious but not insurmountable.  Some would say this is a 

doom-and-gloom message.  I argue, this is reality.  And when 

we know what reality is, we can face it, challenge it, and move 

on. 

 

The reality is, Mr. Speaker, that each year, as we continue to 

run deficit budgets, more money will go to serving the debt 

rather than serving the people of this province. 

 

And I am confident, Mr. Speaker, with this budget we are 

facing reality and we have set out a long-term plan to secure 

the future of this province -- a plan that creates jobs and 

strengthens our economy; a plan that balances within four 

years; a plan that rationalizes and improves the delivery of 

services; a plan that is committed to compassion.  It is a plan of 

hope and partnership with our communities.  And I do have 

faith in the ability of Saskatchewan people to meet the 

challenge. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- And as I said on Friday, there are many 

examples of Saskatchewan people meeting the challenge, as I 

congratulated the Milestone Prairie Players in their many 

successes and in representing Canada in Ireland at an 

international drama festival -- a true accomplishment done 

through cooperation and community, the Saskatchewan way. 

 

Between last year's session and this session, I held over 17 

public meetings in my constituency.  These meetings were an 

opportunity for me to tell my constituents about government 

programs and initiatives and also, and possibly more 

importantly, for me to hear their concerns. 

 

In my constituency, farming and small business are an integral 

part of the economy.  My constituents raised concerns about 

agriculture, jobs, and services.  They have been facing difficult 

times.  But I am proud to say that I represent people who are 

hard working, creative, adaptable, and resilient, people who 

want to cooperate and work with us to meet the challenges 

head-on. 

 

To tackle the budget, they realize there are no easy answers.  

We could ignore the situation, which would only jeopardize all 

our programs with massive devastation.  We can cut back on 

expenditures or raise revenue or stimulate the economy.  No 

one answer will work, but through a combination of cuts to 

government expenditures, some raises in revenue, and by 

stimulating our economy, we can begin to live within our 

means.  And, Mr. Speaker, our budget addressed all these areas 

and addressed it with compassion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, agriculture of course plays a central role in my 

constituency as it does in Saskatchewan's economy.  Some may 

be heard to say that this budget 

doesn't have a vision for agriculture in this province.  I beg to 

differ, Mr. Speaker.  We do have vision.  We have a long-term 

vision and long-term commitment to achieve that vision, 

something the opposition members wouldn't understand. 

 

Our farmers in this province would have been better off if the 

former leader of the Tories had left agriculture programs alone.  

We saw programs signed into, that continued to allow the 

federal government to reduce its percentage of support while 

the provincial government gained a larger percentage of 

carrying the costs of support programs. 

 

Saskatchewan sits in the most vulnerable situation in Canada 

because of this.  With over 40 per cent of the agriculture base 

in Canada and less than 4 per cent of the tax base, how can 

Saskatchewan be expected to support the very industry its 

economy is based on when times are difficult.  It's exactly what 

we have been saying over and over again.  It is like asking the 

person who is bleeding to death to give themselves a blood 

transfusion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from 1988 on, the federal government offloaded 

second line of defence support programs onto the province.  

Before 1988 the federal government funded these programs a 

hundred per cent.  We now fund over 40 per cent of our 

programs from our producers and our provincial taxpayers.  

Our GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) program in 

Saskatchewan costs us over $150 per taxpayer, while in 

Ontario and Quebec it is less than $5 per person. 

 

(1445) 

 

Every Canadian benefits from a low-cost food policy in this 

country.  Agriculture is a federal responsibility.  But what is 

more difficult to understand is when our farmers are in 

competition with other countries whose national treasuries 

support their farmers, our federal government is offloading to 

the producers and the limited treasury of our province. 

 

Even more recently, Ottawa has the nerve to make even more 

cuts to transportation subsidies and announced a further cut to 

equalization payments.  And not content to leave it at that, they 

want the $100 million they gave us last year back.  Add this on 

to the other $540 million we are short this year due to federal 

program cuts, it makes you wonder who is the federal 

government interested in. 

 

It is time that there is renewed national commitment to our 

farmers and new national programs that meet the needs of the 

21st century.  Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to support our 

intention to withdraw from GRIP in two years time.  I heard 

over and over from farmers that this was a short-term program 

headed for termination.  It was based on a 15-year rolling 

average destined for less support with only premiums to pay; a 

program where 40 per cent of the payments were paid to 20 per 

cent of the farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I stand here today I'm here to tell you that this 

budget is the best thing for our farmers 



March 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 467 

because we are striving to make things better for our farmers, 

farm communities, and rural communities.  We are working 

directly with a farmer-appointed committee, the farm income 

support review committee, to design in partnership with the 

people of Saskatchewan a safety net program that works for 

and with farmers. 

 

We are actively seeking ways to make access to rural programs 

easier for the farming industry.  We need new, more effective 

federal-provincial farm safety net programs geared towards 

recognizing costs of production, possibly capping, but above 

all designed to provide farm families with long-term income 

security.  Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan farmers realize this and 

they want us to lead the way. 

 

We are seeking to ensure our rural communities' survival by 

involving them in the process of rebuilding this province.  We 

have introduced an outline for discussion entitled "Forging 

Partnerships in Agriculture."  We are consulting with farmers, 

communities, business, labour, and cooperatives to secure our 

future through a self-reliant, sustainable agriculture industry. 

 

We are proactively making sure that those who want to be 

heard, that those who have ideas for the future of this province 

have a voice.  Because, Mr. Speaker, we know that the survival 

of our province is dependent on agriculture.  If only the federal 

government recognized what is so obvious to us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- If they did, we wouldn't be placed in the 

humiliating position of having to beg for what is rightfully 

ours, for what was promised to us, for what was held out to our 

farmers as a carrot for participation in a GRIP program.  We 

wouldn't have to be begging for our third line of defence.  And 

we wouldn't have to be begging for the federal government to 

fix the quality factor for grading wheat.  We wouldn't have to 

be begging the federal government not to take barley out of the 

purview of the Canadian Wheat Board.  We wouldn't have to 

be begging the federal government to not change the method of 

payment. 

 

In the mean time, I support our government's urgent message to 

press Ottawa for the third line of defence.  Mr. Speaker, our 

farmers need cash now.  I call upon the farmers of 

Saskatchewan to work with us in partnership as we take 

leadership in preparing a federal-provincial plan for sustainable 

agriculture, a plan that will secure the future for our farm 

families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just as the member from Prince Albert Carlton 

reported about his dam project, I also have my own dam 

project to report upon -- Rafferty-Alameda.  On the south-east 

corner of my constituency, rests one of the biggest fiascos in 

Saskatchewan's history -- the tail-end of the Rafferty-Alameda 

project.  This project moved more dirt, rearranged more rocks 

and chopped down more trees and wasted more money than 

any project ever, all of course with no lasting effect unless we 

can count the negative environmental impact on 

the area. 

 

Rafferty-Alameda will be in perpetuity a monument, or rather a 

tombstone, to the previous administration's economic vision.  

Their motto was: spend big, get nothing, no jobs, no 

infrastructure, no lasting economic benefits, just a mud puddle, 

twenty-one hole golf course, a park without trees -- some 

legacy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget is not about megaprojects, 

megaprojects and puffery; it's about jobs.  It presents a plan to 

create jobs and strengthen the economy.  And the plan is quite 

sensibly built around the real engine of our economy -- our 

co-ops and small businesses.  As the Associate Minister of 

Health said in this House some time ago, the best social 

program is a job. 

 

Over the past 10 years two-thirds of all new jobs in 

Saskatchewan were created by small business and co-ops. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we need to remind ourselves that if 

businesses flourish and provide jobs, those jobs will go to 

people in the community, which will in turn serve to stabilize 

the community.  Like many others, my constituency depends 

on agriculture and on small business for its survival.  So I am 

more than pleased to see the support for business offered in this 

budget. 

 

There are a number of items to note.  The further decrease in 

the small business corporation income tax rate.  The addition of 

$1 million to establish community-based, regional economic 

development authorities to promote development at the 

community level; improvements to the Saskatchewan labour 

sponsored venture capital program.  And there are tax credits 

and reductions which allow small businesses to create new 

jobs. 

 

Another good-news item -- especially for constituencies along 

the United States border like Bengough-Milestone -- is that we 

recognize the pressure that cross-border shopping is having on 

our small businesses, in particularly our hospitality industry.  

It's good news for Bengough-Milestone that we have an 

agreement with the federal government to collect tax on 

cigarettes and liquor commencing July 1, 1993.  And we will 

continue to negotiate an expansion of collection of taxes on 

other products as well. 

 

There is more good news in this budget for our economy for 

now and for the future.  Even though we are faced with limited 

revenues, the government will provide $162 million for 

improvement of our infrastructure.  That too means jobs.  

When you add the $520 million to be invested by Crown 

corporations on capital projects, that's nearly $700 million.  

Seven hundred million dollars invested in maintaining our 

quality of life through improvement of services.  Most 

importantly, these infrastructure improvements will provide 

jobs and attract new investment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the great scientists of the 19th century, 

Thomas Henry Huxley, once said: logical consequences are the 

scarecrows of fools and the 



468 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1993 

beacons of wise men.  One of the logical consequences of the 

fiscal nightmare we inherited from the members opposite is the 

need to make do with less, far less, and we are doing that. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I suppose there are two responses to this 

fact of life.  We could act like the members of the opposition 

and wave old clothes and straw at the deficit and hope it goes 

away by itself.  We could be scarecrows or we can do the 

sensible thing: we can look at the programs government offers, 

we can look at the resources we have to deliver those 

programs, and we can then decide how best to marry those 

programs and those resources.  We can use the beacon of 

common sense and necessity.  And if we approach this process 

with a completely open mind and a firm grasp on reality, then 

we can arrive at a consensus of what programs are absolutely 

vital and in what form. 

 

This is a tough exercise brought about by 10 years of economic 

foolishness.  But in the long run it's going to be a very valuable 

exercise for the government and for the people of 

Saskatchewan.  Out of necessity will come programs and 

delivery systems that are more efficient, more responsive to 

local needs, and more directly related to their financial 

capability. 

 

The government reorganization announced as part of this 

budget is an ongoing process begun in November of 1991, and 

it will continue through the first term of this government.  It 

will work because it relies on the good sense and the talent of 

the people it is designed to serve. 

 

Mr. Speaker, government bureaucracies are like any other 

organization; in a way, like any other organism.  They exist for 

a certain purpose.  And as that purpose becomes more 

complex, they grow, become more complicated, become larger.  

With my background in biology, I understand something of the 

way organisms develop over time for their own preservation.  

Sometimes they get too big for their own good, sometimes too 

cumbersome for their own survival; in organizational terms, 

too large and unresponsive to be affordable. 

 

To a great extent, that is what has happened to government 

over the past few years.  And it has to be cut back, pruned for 

its own good and for the good of those who depend on it.  This 

reorganization includes bringing all agriculture programing 

into one department, coordinating programs for municipal 

governments, both urban and rural, working together; 

consolidating education and employment programs and uniting 

environmental programs and natural resource programs to 

promote sustainable development.  It sounds good because it 

makes sense. 

 

This government reorganization is sometimes painful in some 

ways.  No one enjoys the necessary loss of jobs involved and 

we are all somewhat uncertain about how new systems will 

work.  But we do know for sure that the old systems would 

soon fail to work.  Change is necessary and it is happening.  

The changes brought about by this reorganization in Health, in 

Education, in Community Services, in Rural 

Development, in government bureaucracy, will be for the good 

of the people of Saskatchewan because they are being made for 

and in the spirit of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The logical consequences of these changes will benefit the 

people.  I am proud to be part of a government with this 

courage to make them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Mr. Speaker, this reorganization cannot be 

done by government alone.  We must call on all of the 

Saskatchewan community -- health, school boards, universities, 

colleges, municipalities -- to help with the decision making. 

 

I firmly believe in the community development model.  I 

believe the model will make for the best decisions.  It may be 

argued by some that this is offloading our responsibilities..  I 

do not believe letting communities help with the decision 

making is offloading.  But rather, it's the act of a responsible 

government working in partnership with those communities. 

 

I am not denying, faced with the fiscal reality, that these 

decisions will not be easy for our local communities.  Of 

course they will not be easy.  But I have the confidence in the 

ability of our communities to respond to these difficult fiscal 

restraints with better solutions than decisions made only at the 

top. 

 

Possibly our opposition members have difficulty believing that 

with cooperation and community development we can build 

Saskatchewan together.  They possibly cannot believe this 

because they are still set in their old ways -- a course of 

divisiveness, pitting one community against another, rural 

against urban, and people against people. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I must just give some added reflection to 

this for just a moment.  Just a few days ago, a Progressive 

Conservative newsletter sponsored by the member of 

Souris-Cannington appeared in my constituents' mailboxes.  It 

again reminded me of the divisiveness and the fearmongering I 

fought against in the last election.  And maybe I should remind 

members opposite that these tactics, the people of this province 

were and are sick of.  The people of this province clearly spoke 

out and rejected these tactics in the last election. 

 

(1500) 

 

I hate to lecture the opposition, but when I taught elementary 

students, I told them a mistake is not all that bad if you realize 

a mistake is an opportunity to learn -- an opportunity to learn.  I 

do not think the Progressive Conservative opposition have 

learned this fundamental lesson.  It's obvious they have not 

learned from their mistakes as they continue to try to divide our 

communities. 

 

So what did this letter tell my constituents?  It had untrue 

guesses on what the budget might do.  It left 



March 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 469 

innuendoes and fears.  It tried to pit farmers against unions, 

because I happened to listen to SGEU (Saskatchewan 

Government Employees' Union) workers' concerns.  It speaks 

of the removal of the fuel tax rebate, which did not happen.  It 

speaks of a new hospitalization tax, which did not happen. 

 

Let me remind the members opposite, and in particular the 

member from Souris-Cannington, even though you may not 

believe in community and cooperation, I feel it is 

unconscionable to try to instil fear, divisiveness, amongst 

people in Saskatchewan for your own political gain. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- It makes me wonder who paid for this 

misinformation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I do believe that the challenges our schools, 

our health districts will face will not be easy, but I have 

confidence in the ability . . . of their ability not to back away 

but to meet change with creativity and by working together to 

rebuild this province. 

 

My constituents are not afraid of change, but they are afraid of 

drift, of letting desperate situations get worse again.  My 

constituents recognize when there is a problem, they must act 

to solve it.  They want their government to have the same 

fortitude and common sense.  They want their government to 

be a beacon, not a scarecrow once again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the town of Radville in my constituency there 

is a perfect example of people coming together out of necessity 

to solve a problem.  They worked together last year and put 

their public and private school systems together on a trial basis.  

This was not easy and I'm sure they have encountered many 

difficulties.  But by working together they faced the challenges 

and have come together in the best interests of their students 

and their community. 

 

Change is not easy, but I firmly believe we cannot ignore it, but 

be part of it to make it positive for our community.  I commend 

the people of Radville for their responsible actions. 

 

I feel this is the same spirit of community and cooperation that 

will prevail in creating our health districts in our province.  

Again, it will not be easy; and yes, we know everything will 

not be the same.  But if we meet the challenge at a community 

level, I have confidence that the best decisions will be made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there has been a great deal of debate in this 

Assembly over the wellness plan, and there will be a great deal 

more before The Health Districts Act is passed, as it most 

certainly will be.  So I won't say a great deal about the wisdom 

and the appropriateness of this plan now, but I will say that it is 

the perfect example of reorganization for effectiveness, of 

securing our future through planning, contrary to what the 

member from Rosthern so plaintively argues, and so 

hopelessly. 

The wellness plan improves our health system.  It streamlines 

it.  It brings it closer to the people because the people are in 

charge of it; eliminated duplication of services, and it will give 

the stakeholders responsibility for their own plan. 

 

And the same argument applies to programs aimed at rural 

development.  There will be better coordination of programs 

which will save millions of taxpayers' dollars while preserving 

vital public services. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as a government I feel we are helping our 

community partners in their decision making by presenting a 

long-term vision to them.  This is a budget which is more than 

a chapter, but a complete outline for this term.  It announces 

third-party funding for two years and makes a commitment to 

no more major cuts to grants after '94-95 and no more major 

tax increases. 

 

School boards and local governments, although preferring no 

cuts, respect us for letting them know in advance, which 

enables them to plan better for these reductions.  And we will 

not be like the Alberta government who gave out a two-year 

plan, only to change it in the second year with more decreases. 

 

I am proud to be part of a government which sticks by its 

commitment.  What we say is what we mean.  This type of 

long-term vision gives us and our communities the hope we 

need for planning for our future. 

 

This budget puts our fiscal house in order, giving us the 

freedom to protect and maintain quality public services for 

Saskatchewan families.  This government began that task last 

year with our first budget.  In that budget we reduced operating 

expenditures by almost 4 per cent.  And, Mr. Speaker, it is 

important to remember that we were the only government in 

Canada able to reduce our expenditures. 

 

Government spending is under control.  However, revenue 

shortfalls common to all governments in Canada have put 

pressure on the '92-93 deficit.  But we have not been deterred.  

The '92-93 deficit of $592 million is 30 per cent less than in 

'91-92.  In '93-94 our deficit will drop by 50 per cent to 296 

million.  And by '96-97 our plan will lead to a balanced budget.  

A balanced budget.  This will be a great day for the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan.  And, Mr. Speaker, we are 

committed to meeting this target.  Mr. Speaker, I also believe 

that people of this province are committed to reaching this 

target. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I commend our government for leading by 

example in these difficult choices.  Since coming into office we 

have continued the freeze on MLA salaries; cut the salaries of 

cabinet ministers by 5 per cent; reducing allowances for 

government members with extra duties; freezing out-of-scope 

ranges in the public service; cutting communication allowances 

by 25 per cent; no appointment of legislative secretaries. 

 

This year we continue to cut costs.  Communication 

expenditures have been further reduced by 17 per cent -- a 

two-year reduction of 41 per cent.  Staff 



470 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1993 

development costs have been reduced, saving $300,000.  

Leasing costs for office space have been reduced, saving 1.5 

million.  The reorganization of government departments I have 

already mentioned.  We will also reduce the size of government 

operations by eliminating more than one-quarter of government 

agencies, boards, and commissions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government knows full well that every dollar 

counts.  There are hundreds of more ways, big and small, in 

which we have acted to cut waste and reduce inefficiency. 

 

Social assistance cheques were redesigned, saving $18,000 a 

year in postage costs.  Telephone listings for the Department of 

Education were consolidated for savings of $20,000.  

Computer contracts in the Department of Energy and Mines 

were renegotiated for savings of $30,000.  Internal operations 

in the Agricultural Credit Corporation were reorganized for 

savings of over $1 million annually. 

 

Our Crown corporations are also doing their part to cut costs.  

SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) negotiated a 

volume discount postage contract, saving $138,000 a year.  

SaskEnergy consolidated office functions, saving $252,000.  

The Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation reduced 

spending on consultants, saving $123,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is to mention just a few of the cuts that we 

have done.  We have acted on many fronts to meet the demands 

of Saskatchewan people for a more responsive, more effective, 

and more efficient government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have also had to make difficult choices with 

respect to programs that we provide directly as a government. 

 

The question we had to ask: can we afford this program not 

only this year but in future years?  One such program was the 

Saskatchewan prescription drug plan.  A constituent of mine 

said: if we cannot afford it, we can't have it.  He was right.  We 

can't afford the drug plan if it remained unchanged.  With the 

increase in costs of drugs due to our loss of ability to bulk 

purchase at a discount price, the extended patent protection, 

and increasing use of drugs, the drug plan costs would have 

risen to $110 million within two years. 

 

But we did not just decide to get rid of the drug plan.  We 

realized we needed to change it.  It was changed and with 

compassion.  It was changed so it will be affordable today and 

tomorrow. 

 

It is with compassion that I support this budget.  It is the 

compassion and direction I feel that is key to our budget.  The 

dental program is being terminated on June 30, 1993.  But we 

are starting a targeted education, screening and referral 

program, including full treatment coverage for low income 

families. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what I am most encouraged by is that we are 

funding two projects involving 

school-based services, one that will be in a rural area and one 

in an urban area.  These services will be delivered by district 

health boards.  If successful, they will be expanded in the 

future. 

 

With compassion we have made choices.  I commend the 

government for adding protection for those most vulnerable in 

our society:  by increasing payments under the Family Income 

Plan to help working poor families; $18 million to benefit 

children, including hunger programs, child care, and dental 

coverage for low income families; increased funding for 

in-home therapy and support services to families in crisis; 

increased funding for home care services by $43 million.  This 

truly is deficit reduction with a difference.  It shows 

compassion. 

 

In summation, this budget is tough.  It is filled with difficult 

choices.  It is a budget that should not be judged on individual 

decisions but as a collective plan to secure our future. 

 

We must remember, there is no joy in cutting grants of school 

boards or health boards.  There is no joy in increasing the E&H 

(education and health) tax by 1 per cent.  There is no joy in 

cutting programs or services.  But there is hope -- hope that we 

have presented a plan to create jobs, strengthen our economy, 

protect public services, and balance the budget.  A plan to 

secure our future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like to remind the opposition, this was our 

campaign promise to the province of Saskatchewan.  I 

campaigned, as did my colleagues, on first things first -- 

common-sense financial management.  And that is what the 

electorate wanted and that is what we are presenting. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- As I drove home the night of the budget, I 

could not help recall, as I said earlier in my speech on Friday, 

how in 1982 I worried about the future for my children.  Well, 

Mr. Speaker, as I drove home in 1993, I know we have not put 

our heads in the sand. 

 

I know the budget is difficult and we are facing many 

challenges in the journey ahead.  But I know with the support 

of the people of this province, we can see the light at the end of 

the journey.  We are uniting to rebuild this province.  And yes, 

Mr. Speaker, we are on our way to guaranteeing that all that we 

enjoy today is passed on to our children and our grandchildren. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Mr. Speaker, a tough budget, yes; a sacrifice, 

yes.  But this is also a budget of hope and promise.  It's not 

only about getting out of a hole, it's also about hitting the 

ground running once we're out.  In other words, for the first 

time in years, there is cause for optimism in Saskatchewan -- 

cautious optimism, careful, measured, small-step optimism; but 

optimism nevertheless. 



March 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 471 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- There is a plan presented here and it is a 

workable plan.  It's a plan that will create work.  It is a plan that 

will finally allow the fruits of our labours to stay here in 

Saskatchewan.  It is a plan to eliminate debt and restore hope.  I 

am happy to support this budget because, Mr. Speaker, it 

moves towards securing our future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Draper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Sir, it is with 

considerable trepidation that I rise to speak in support of this 

budget. 

 

I have to repeat what I said at this time last year: this is not the 

kind of budget that a New Democratic government likes to 

bring down.  It flies in the face of all the principles that we 

stand for except for one -- competence. 

 

And for that virtue, I have to congratulate our new Finance 

minister.  This is a very competent and a very fair budget 

considering what material she had to deal with.  She has plied 

her tools very successfully and very skillfully. 

 

Now over the past couple of months, I've heard the Premier 

refer the . . . use the term "amputation."  Now, as to one trained 

in surgery, that really strikes a chord and brings back 

memories.  I've had to amputate limbs on more than one 

occasion, sir, and I've never found it easy.  Not because it is 

technically difficult; it isn't.  But it is never easy to make the 

decision, the decision which precedes the incision.  It is never 

done except after a great deal of thought and weighing of all 

the possible alternatives.  Even then, it is always done with 

regret.  Unfortunately, it is sometimes essential to sacrifice a 

finger in order to save an arm, or to sacrifice a leg to save a 

life. 

 

The advantage of surgery over politics is that one never faces 

an incompetent and envious fool across the table, someone 

who's prepared to do everything in their power to prevent the 

saving of that life, as we do here, sir. 

 

The satisfaction of a job well done does not come in surgery 

for several weeks when one sees the resulting healed and 

healthy body, sir.  In politics, as now, that satisfaction is 

delayed for several years.  Nevertheless, sir, that time will 

inevitably come. 

 

In 1996, sir, when the provincial body politic is out of bed, out 

of hospital, and marching forward to a healthy and prosperous 

future, sir, we shall be vindicated.  In the mean time, sir, we 

shall need our wounds carefully tended.  We shall need all the 

financial medicines and nursing care at our disposal. 

 

On Tuesday, March 16, sir, just two days before the budget, the 

previous premier told us in no uncertain terms that we don't 

need to raise taxes to balance the 

budget.  Perhaps that, sir, is the reason he had nine deficits in a 

row while he was in power. 

 

I do seem to remember a promise to get rid of the 5 per cent 

health and education tax, and I know that somewhere along the 

way it seemed to go up from 5 per cent to 7 per cent overnight.  

Two per cent in one shot, or 40 per cent when you compare it 

to the 5 per cent it previously was. 

 

But perhaps that was not designed to balance the budget, sir.  

Perhaps that was designed as a gift to his rich friends or maybe 

even to finance the trips slumming around over Belgium in 

mid-air while other countries were communicating with each 

other. 

 

Somewhere in the back of my mind, sir, there's a vague 

memory of a 1 per cent flat tax on income which again 

overnight doubled to 2 per cent.  Perhaps the member for 

Estevan was distracted at the time and it slipped by without 

him noticing it.  Memory can certainly play strange tricks, even 

to those who do have a mind. 

 

I see in the press of late that the federal Finance minister is 

going to introduce another budget.  Apparently his minibudget 

in December did not work.  He claims that expenditures are on 

track but that income did not come up to expectations.  The 

logical answer to that seems to suggest that he is contemplating 

raising taxes.  But I may be wrong.  It may be worth the air fare 

for this House to send the hon. member down to Ottawa to 

show Mr. Mazankowski how to balance the budget without 

raising taxes.  I'm sure we would all appreciate that. 

 

And I'm sure that the member for Saskatoon Greystone is going 

to get on her high horse and shout about tax increases.  Maybe 

she will smugly point out that Newfoundland didn't raise taxes 

last week.  But before she gets too apoplectic, I would like to 

point out to her that Clyde Wells jumped the gun in December 

and raised income taxes and levies on gasoline and tobacco 

then and there.  A good Liberal economic policy. 

 

And before she dumps on us for not being more generous with 

the SGEU and the civil service here, I'd like to remind her that 

Newfoundland's equally Liberal Finance minister is cutting $70 

million from his civil servant's compensation package of 

wages, pensions, and other benefits in his budget given just an 

hour or two before ours -- not to mention the Newfoundland 

teachers or the Newfoundland and Labrador association of 

nurses. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What happened there? 

 

Mr. Draper: -- Don't know.  But I suggest that if the lady 

wishes to give advice, sir, I'm told that St. John's is at its best at 

this time of year. 

 

Mr. Baker, the Newfoundland Minister of Finance, made a 

good point, which I would like to pass on to the hon. member 

from Estevan when he makes his historic dash to Ottawa to 

show how budgets can be 



472 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1993 

balanced without raising taxes.  And I quote, sir: 

 

 "The decline in transfer payments has placed a heavy burden 

on the province's finances and added pressure to our credit 

rating . . . 

 

That, sir, applies not only to Newfoundland or only to 

Saskatchewan, but most of our provinces. 

 

A headline in Saturday's Leader-Post right across the top of the 

page, sir, page A6 as a matter of fact: "N.B. premier applauds 

tough budgets."  I quote Premier Frank McKenna: 

 

 "We as Canadians should all applaud the courage and 

commitment that Premier (of Saskatchewan) . . . and Premier 

Clyde Wells of Newfoundland demonstrated in taking firm 

control of their financial situations . . . 

 

That was said in the legislature so it should be in their 

Hansard.  Laissez-faire, or perhaps laissez ne pas faire is struck 

another blow by another Liberal premier. 

 

I'm told today, sir, that the Conservative MP (Member of 

Parliament) for my federal riding, Swift Current-Maple 

Creek-Assiniboia, stood up in the Commons today and 

congratulated Saskatchewan on the new budget.  You know, if 

we're not careful, we're going to get into bad company this 

way, sir. 

 

Sir, we're getting howls of protest from the opposition over this 

budget -- as always.  Hypocrisy from first to last, and I can 

prove it. 

 

In The Globe and Mail last week, Alberta Treasurer James 

Dinning was reported as saying that Alberta could not go on in 

the same way.  In the heart of rural Alberta, he says, taxpayers 

are getting angry.  There is discontent with government 

financial management, with Alberta's mounting deficit, and 

with hefty losses from ill-fated investments such as the $600 

million lost on NovAtel Communications, which is even worse 

than Gigatext, sir -- in fact, worse than Gigatext, Canapharm, 

and plastic shopping carts all rolled into one and multiplied by 

ten. 

 

Not in NDP (New Democratic Party) Saskatchewan, sir, or 

even NDP British Columbia, but in the Tory heart of the West, 

sir, that paragon of all virtues, Progressive Conservative 

Alberta. 

 

I quote again:  We are on the road to becoming a fiscal basket 

case like Saskatchewan, says the executive director of the 

Association of Alberta Taxpayers -- not the Association of 

Saskatchewan Taxpayers, but the Association of Alberta 

Taxpayers. 

 

And who turned Saskatchewan into a fiscal basket case?  I'll 

tell you, sir.  They did, over there, those basket cases on the 

other side of the House.  But maybe the Liberals could do it all 

better.  Oh yes, sir. 

 

But how about a few quotes from that bastion of Liberal 

government on the east coast, the Premier of Newfoundland 

and Labrador, from a speech from 

Clyde Wells who took 30 minutes on TV to tell his population 

the mess that he had got the province into, to explain why he 

could not give the Newfoundland teachers a raise in salary.  

And later he told us why he had to reduce them in actual fact. 

 

Now he didn't take over from a corrupt Tory regime, sir.  He 

and his government got themselves into that mess.  And now 

they've got to get themselves out again. 

 

And now no less a person than Finance minister Donald 

Mazankowski in Ottawa tells us that his December minibudget 

has failed.  I quote:  ". . . revenue figures have not improved as 

we had hoped."  Again: "What we have to do is present a plan 

for dealing with the deficit . . ."  Oh dear, oh dear.  This from 

The Globe and Mail of March 9th. 

 

But they're speculating that he won't introduce a new budget 

until they select a new leader to succeed you know who, sir.  

They're scared that the cuts required to undo the damage 

they've done for the country will interfere with the leadership 

campaign and hurt the federal government's already low 

popularity.  Oh the pity of it all, sir.  My heart really bleeds for 

them. 

 

It shows you where their priorities lie.  The country can 

continue suffering; that doesn't matter as long as the Tories in 

Ottawa can continue to live in their little fool's paradise, their 

little make-believe world.  And who caused the pig's mess that 

required a second budget in three months?  The same primrose 

league as who sit opposite over there. 

 

Mazankowski and his cronies weren't dropped into that mess 

either, sir, in the way we were.  They have spent nine years 

creating it.  And they clanked around the country like so many 

Marley's ghosts, shaking the chains they forged link by link 

over the past nine years crying, woe is me.  Unfortunately his 

woe is ours, sir.  And after the next election, without too long 

delay, they'll be grovelling like that ill-begotten crew over there 

saying it really wasn't their fault. 

 

At the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities early 

this month, Don Black, the president of the Investments 

Corporation, said government bonds across North America are 

approaching junk bond quality.  Not Saskatchewan bonds, sir.  

Not even Canadian bonds, but North American government 

bonds.  That's a pretty strong statement and a pretty broad 

brush. 

 

And this government has started to do something about it.  We 

started in October 1991.  This government saw the writing on 

the wall.  We read, and we understood the "MENE, MENE, 

TEKEL, and PARSIN."  We took note and we acted.  The 

reference is to Daniel; you'll find it there in your Bibles. 

 

We have cut programs, sir, and we've increased taxes.  Both 

will hurt, but both were necessary.  That's life. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 473 

Mr. Draper: -- But I do have some reassuring words for our 

Minister of Finance and our Premier.  They have told us how 

the number of firms prepared to lend money to us has fallen 

from 136 to 25 or so.  Well a correspondent of mine has written 

to me with an anecdote about Robert Walpole. 

 

Now Robert Walpole was the first Prime Minister of England, 

around about the 1730s, and he inherited a debt built up since 

the civil war in England in 1642 to '45, and then after the active 

union with Scotland, when Scotland came in, they had a lot of 

bills which they dumped at Robert Walpole's front door, and he 

had to deal with them. 

 

And he boasted, sir, that he had found three companies that 

would lend the Crown money.  He was delighted.  Instead of 

one, sir, he had found three.  If he'd found 20 backers like we 

have, he'd have been in seventh heaven, sir.  And I'm sure this 

will cheer everybody up. 

 

And another bit of good news, sir, while we're on the subject.  I 

understand from those who can do their sums better than I that 

our debt is 2.4 times our income.  Now I'm not sure if this 

holds true in Canada, but in Britain a person is able to finance a 

mortgage on a house or anything else if it does not exceed 2.5 

times his or her gross income.  If ours is only 2.4 times our 

gross income, sir, it looks like we're just going to make it under 

the wire. 

 

I'd like to quote for you again, sir, an editorial from that famous 

New Democratic newspaper, the Regina Leader-Post: The 

Darlington Power Plant, for one, has become a boondoggle.  Its 

initial price tag of 2.3 billion now a staggering 14 billion. 

 

Obviously, sir, the writer has been listening to my speeches.  

This party recognized this before the election of 1991, and it's 

for that reason that we killed that deal -- the original AECL 

(Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.) agreement - 

_ that the Tories made in such a hurry. 

 

Not only that.  We've been able to open up the package and 

renegotiate it; not only have we been able to pick out the 

cherries from that packet, we've been able to spit out the pits 

and sell them. 

 

This party has a long history of good financial management, 

right from Douglas, Lloyd, and Blakeney.  We have kept costs 

down while increasing and improving services.  Had we not 

inherited the disaster left behind by the previous incompetents 

-- or incumbents, as they prefer to call themselves -- we should 

be doing so under our present Premier. 

 

(1530) 

 

To quote once more from the same editorial in the same paper: 

failure to deal with change can carry a large cost that 

eventually has to be repaid. 

 

Sir, not only are we in this government dealing with change, 

we and our predecessors have created 

change.  We have directed change.  This province has been the 

bell-wether of health care, education, social policy for all over 

Canada and now, sir, we are the bell-ringer, or in more 

contemporary parlance, we are acting as the whistle blower. 

 

It was our leaders that told the world that the emperor's clothes 

closet was bare.  It was us that admitted that the provincial 

treasury was in big trouble.  Now every other government has 

taken courage and confessed. 

 

According to Moody's bond rating agency, reported in that 

other socialist newspaper, The Globe and Mail, sir: In 

1992-93, Alberta and Prince Edward Island -- for the sake of 

the member from Saskatoon Greystone -- are expected to 

experience the biggest increases in their deficits as a percentage 

of gross domestic product.  P.E.I.'s deficit is expected to be the 

largest ratio of any province in Canada, thanks to the 

depredations under Joe Ghiz, that famous Liberal, sir, if your 

memory needed jogging. 

 

In the same NDP paper, sir, the C.D. Howe Institute, that 

bastion of Marxist economics, is quoted as saying that the 

federal government is fighting its deficit on the backs of the 

provinces. 

 

Further, sir, another quote: despite federal rhetoric, medicare 

has been one of the main targets of federal deficit cutting.  

Again, they're cutting cash transfers to provinces more than 

they are cutting their own programs.  Last year offloading cost 

the provinces $1.7 billion in health care alone.  And if MDS 

and other private labs are sore, let them look for the cause of 

that pain in the proper place -- Ottawa. 

 

An economist at the University of Alberta accuses Ottawa of 

convenient accounting.  He says Ottawa has violated, violated 

its contractual obligations by unilaterally cutting back.  I think 

the chap must be a Bolshevik, don't you, sir? 

 

Here again in The Globe and Mail:  

Manitoba is battling a record annual deficit of almost $700 

million.  Another cry of mea culpa.  They created it themselves 

with all the benefits of Tory incompetence.  Mr. Filmon says 

Manitoba already has one of the highest tax rates in the 

country.  Maybe it's time for an NDP government in Winnipeg 

to sort those guys out, sir. 

 

It would help, sir, if the governments of Manitoba and Alberta, 

especially Alberta, those great friends of Ottawa, got together 

with the so-called opposition here, sir, and leaned on Ottawa a 

bit to lift that particular straw called the GST (goods and 

services tax) from the back of our already exhausted camel.  

Maybe that would help.  Perhaps that could be the one 

redeeming thing they do in their death row, sir. 

 

Now the difference between our government and those 

latter-day reformists in Manitoba and Alberta, is that we are 

cleaning up the mess that was left behind by Tories.  Those 

wise men, both east and west of us, are cleaning up their own 

corruption.  And good luck 



474 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1993 

to them. 

 

On the other hand, sir, according to the Royal Bank of Canada, 

Saskatchewan's economy is expected to bounce back from an 

almost decade-long slump this year.  Notice that, almost a 

decade, sir.  That sounds very much like nine years to me.  

What a strange coincidence. 

 

In 1993 and '94 our economy is expected to increase by 3.7 and 

4.4 per cent respectively.  And that's the Royal Bank of 

Canada, sir.  The bank expects unemployment to fall by a full 

percentage point.  And it says, not because more people are 

leaving the province, but because 18,000 more jobs are 

expected to be created over the next two years. 

 

The Royal Bank expects average personal disposable income to 

increase 3.8 per cent in this province this year.  They expect 

retail sales to rise 4 per cent this year, and surge -- and surge is 

their word, sir -- surge an additional 5.8 per cent in 1994.  So 

there is good news, sir, and from very unexpected sources. 

 

Even housing starts demonstrate our success.  Again from the 

Leader-Post, the headline: Housing starts soar in 

Saskatchewan.  But they're down in Newfoundland.  They're 

down in Prince Edward Island.  They're down in Nova Scotia.  

They're down in New Brunswick and down in Quebec.  But 

they're up in Ontario, the only NDP province east of us.  

They're down in Tory Manitoba.  But to complete the record 

and for fairness, sir, they are up in Alberta, but down slightly in 

B.C. (British Columbia). 

 

If we cut programs, it is not because we want to.  Programs 

cost money and we just haven't got any.  The PCs (Progressive 

Conservative) gave it away to those who were so rich that they 

didn't appreciate it anyway -- people and companies that collect 

mines and oil wells the way some of us collect stamps or comic 

books, sir.  They want the whole set.  They've already had more 

than they can use, but the Tories gave them even more. 

 

During the '70s, sir, prices were good, and governments owned 

for our people forests, oil and gas wells, and mines.  And with 

the income, Allan Blakeney and his government didn't buy 

yachts in the Caribbean.  They didn't buy condominiums in 

Hawaii.  What they did buy was services for our people -- 

dental services for kids at school, pharmaceutical services, the 

drug plan.  They imported chiropodists from Europe because 

we don't train them here. 

 

They set up a hearing-aid plan when we found that we as a 

government provide hearing-aids that the door-to-door rip-off 

artists charge $300 for, for $34 -- a tenth of the price, sir.  

Where those crooks would sell anyone a hearing-aid or 

preferably two, our plan would give a proper hearing test.  And 

if the type of deafness couldn't be helped by a hearing aid, they 

just wouldn't sell you one. 

 

Had the NDP been in power during the '80s, maybe 

these services would have been continued and expanded.  After 

all, it was our money, the profits from our companies owned by 

us, managed by us, and for our benefit.  By now perhaps we 

may have given ourselves denture services and expanded 

coverage on spectacles.  Nothing was impossible then, sir. 

 

By now we're broke.  Our wheat doesn't even return the cost of 

production, sir.  Our mines are given away, and our oil and gas 

wells are owned by the eastern financiers, our forests donated 

to Weyerhaeuser.  If our government could wring a couple of 

hundred million dollars out of those pirates after the deal was 

done and signed, imagine the price that we could have got if we 

had negotiated that deal in the first place, instead of the Santa 

Clauses living across the way there. 

 

You know, when my wife and I immigrated to Saskatchewan a 

quarter of a century ago, we found it to be a land of milk and 

honey.  And now it is all gall and brimstone.  A few words by 

John Greenleaf Whittier come back to my memory, sir.  He 

said: 

 

 For all sad words of tongue or pen, 

 The saddest are these: it might have been. 

 

The opposition when in government, sir, seemed to be playing 

so many Mr. Micawbers, waiting for something to turn up.  By 

now perhaps they realize that things don't turn up.  Things have 

to be dug up.  Work is required -- using that nasty, four-letter 

word that makes them cringe so much. 

 

You know, when I took flying lessons over 20 years ago, my 

instructor told me, this plane will do one of two things.  It will 

do what you let it do or it will do what you make it do.  

Through nine years of Tory managelessness, the economy 

drifted in whichever direction the wind blew. 

 

Our ministers of Finance, the previous one and the present one 

-- they both deserve credit -- have grasped the controls in both 

hands and forced the economy to do what they want it to do.  

And that is the difference between managing the economy, sir, 

and running a soup and caviar kitchen for the super-rich.  As 

I've said repeatedly, the fear of the opposition is not that we 

will fail, but that we shall succeed. 

 

Not only is this a budget for '93-94, sir, it is a plan for '94-95, 

'95-96, and '96-97.  The deficit is already down in '92-93.  It'll 

be slashed again this year, as the minister has stated.  It'll be 

down again next year and the year after that. 

 

When we have a balanced budget, sir, three years from now, 

we can go to the voters and show them what we have done is 

what we have promised.  And in our next term, sir, we shall 

truly be able to rebuild the services that are still here -- granted 

in somewhat skeletal form, but they're there nevertheless.  We 

will flesh them out as money becomes available, as our 

economy improves, as it surely will.  We shall cross the river, 

sir; we shall overcome all obstacles on our search for the 

promised land. 



March 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 475 

You'll have noticed, sir, that we have already passed the gravy 

train that The Globe and Mail tells us went off the rails.  It's 

lying there in the ditch rather sadly, hissing feebly with its 

wheels in the air, spinning aimlessly.  Why?  You'll notice, sir, 

that the train was pointed in the wrong direction anyway. 

 

We don't have a train, sir, and for a while there's not going to 

be any gravy.  But we have a caucus that has strong backs.  We 

have a splendid cabinet that knows the direction we need to go 

in.  A sled or a wagon will carry the load. That'll do.  Our 

ancestors used them before us.  We've enough wheat and cattle 

that we can live on bread and beef.  Saskatchewan will survive 

and will ultimately prosper.  And, sir, with this budget we're 

really on our way.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I appreciate the 

opportunity to make comment today about the budget which 

was delivered last Thursday by the Finance minister. 

 

I, like many Saskatchewan residents, have spent the past few 

months wondering what the government had in store for us.  

After seeing this budget, I must concur with the many people 

with whom I have spoken who tell me that it is far from 

brilliant economics but it should get an A for political 

manipulation. 

 

Hundreds of hours of high-priced government time were spent 

on an exercise of promoting the worst case scenario so that 

people would not be too upset to see tax increases.  And the 

government did a pretty good job of it for all the wrong 

reasons.  The Premier's pre-budget road show not only cost 

taxpayers money, it cost many people confidence in our 

economy at a time when it was so desperately needed. 

 

Since then, in what I consider to be a feeble attempt to cover 

their tracks, they have accused me as well as the official 

opposition of spreading gloom and doom.  I truly wish for the 

day when they realize that the taxpayers are watching and 

they're listening and they are not going to be fooled by the 

government's accusations or their budget. 

 

So what do we have in this expensive document?  Well it starts 

off with 20 pages from the minister, 20 pages which tell us 

about difficult choices from the perspective of government, a 

government which compares itself to a household earning 

$50,000 and having debts of $125,000 and is still spending 

more than it is earning. 

 

This is interesting because that is exactly the position of many 

Saskatchewan families, where families find themselves today 

as they struggle to pay off their mortgage and meet monthly 

expenses while the government, this government, keeps adding 

to those expenses with no regard for the fact that people's 

incomes are not rising to keep the pace. 

 

(1545) 

On the very first page, Mr. Speaker, the minister has already 

illustrated the failure of her government to see the problems it 

is creating for Saskatchewan people.  If we are to read this 

budget as though we're one big happy family trying to deal 

with the problems left to us by our Conservative parents, then 

our big brothers in the NDP had better understand the first 

basic premise: sacrifice the size of government first, the quality 

of people's lives last. 

 

Why didn't the government start off by telling people of its 

diligence in reducing the cost of government?  I recognize that 

it is not the single greatest expense, Mr. Speaker, just like 

government knows that an extra 2 cents per litre on fuel doesn't 

seem all that important.  But people want to see that the effort 

has been made. 

 

The Premier has been travelling our province at the people's 

expense in the last few days, saying, show me where I could 

have cut deeper.  So let's talk about that this afternoon. 

 

Herein lies one of the major disagreements that I have with the 

approach of this budget.  There has been approximately 16 

months since this government took office.  During that time 

we've had two budgets, two Finance ministers, and more than 

200 days of sitting in this House as elected representatives.  

That has cost the people of Saskatchewan $29 million. 

 

That cost includes of course the salary of the Premier, his 

allowances, per diems, support staff, and other payments.  It 

includes the cost of an expanded cabinet, their staff, their 

salaries, and those of the 36 people who keep the back benches 

warm in case the government requires a majority vote.  The 

cost of clerks and staff to run the Legislative Assembly, all of 

the other members, and that cost of course to run the 

Legislative Assembly, of the clerks and staff, is some $3.102 

million. 

 

How much of that money was really spent amongst all of us 

discussing ways that we could save the taxpayers money?  Not 

very much, I know. 

 

Have a look at page 88 of the Estimates.  The government 

reduced the cost of the Board of Internal Economy by $6,000.  

And I congratulate them and say that's very good.  But they 

increased the general administration costs by $45,000.  That 

could have meant one less pink slip, Mr. Speaker, one less pink 

slip somewhere else, or two or three pay cheques for people in 

the private sector.  Maybe $45,000 that could have been spared 

that affected some school somewhere. 

 

They raised the cost of mail and photo services.  And that's 

only a thousand dollars.  But that might have fed a few hungry 

children in the province of Saskatchewan.  I know it's not 

much, but like the saying goes: look after your pennies and the 

dollars will take care of themselves. 

 

Now moving down to item 3 on page 88, the government 

increased the cost of the Legislative Assembly services by 

$8,000.  Now I realize that they 



476 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1993 

anticipate a longer sitting year this year, but did they solicit 

input regarding how and what to be able to reduce? 

 

Committees of the Assembly cost an extra $24,000 this year.  

And yet the Standing Committee on Agriculture has never met 

once, Mr. Speaker.  Not once in some very, very tough times 

for farmers. 

 

There was $3 million spent on policy development in 

agriculture.  Yet the 66 MLAs in this Assembly never got 

together once, not even a smaller contingent of people -- not 

once -- to talk about it in committee. 

 

The Constitutional Committee cost us money last year, and it 

doesn't even exist any more. 

 

So why haven't the costs of committees gone down?  The 

government did manage to chop some $26,000 off the cost of 

allowances to MLAs, which works out to be a grand total of 

$393.93 per MLA.  That's just over a dollar a day for each of 

the 66 people in this House. 

 

Now I know the members calling out, Mr. Speaker, are 

commenting on the fact that I have requested some funds for 

my office.  And I would like to make comment that one of the 

speech writers for the Premier of this province probably earns a 

greater salary than the entire sum given to my office.  I think 

that if they're worried about the kind of opposition that they 

might be able to get, they probably have good reason to feel 

that way. 

 

The most important thing here is that the government needs to 

have taken more time to look at what they could do before 

taking more money out of the hands of the people of our 

province. 

 

The government took some monies out of their caucus grant, 

which is commendable.  Unfortunately when all was said and 

done, the cost of running this legislature increased by $18,000, 

which is the average income of a Saskatchewan farm family, 

Mr. Speaker, and the total, the grand total came to $15.336 

million. 

 

The point I am making is that people don't have any reason to 

believe that government started with itself.  They are making 

expenditures which do not seem necessary to anyone who is 

outside of government. 

 

Now let's look at the Electoral Office.  An increase in wages 

this year, a non-election year, to $239,000.  Now on top of that, 

the taxpayers of Saskatchewan have to give another $507,000 

as far as expenses are concerned.  Now are we having an 

election that the people don't know about?  And if not, why 

does this department need an extra $36,000 in salaries to 

operate? 

 

Executive Council -- here's a department whose mandate is, 

and I quote: 

 

 . . . to provide organization and record keeping services to the 

Premier and Government.  It also (lends). . . support to the 

Premier in his roles as: 

Head of Government; Chairman of Cabinet; Chairman of 

Planning and Priorities Committee; and, Head of the political 

party with the mandate to govern. 

 

Now part of the Executive Council as well is media operations 

of government, which is an added expense to taxpayers.  Its 

mandate is to: 

 

 . . . prepare and distribute news releases and summaries.  It 

also operates the radio and television facilities for news 

conferences . . . and advises on the preparation of news 

releases and summaries. 

 

And by the way, Mr. Speaker, this job is also shared by the 

many, many people who work for the ministers and work for 

the caucus. 

 

I find it very interesting to note that the overall operating 

expenses of Executive Council were trimmed by a whopping 1 

per cent, while the total amount of money paid to members of 

the Executive Council went up by how much?  Forty-seven per 

cent. 

 

So this is a government that started at the top.  If one includes 

the cost of running the Legislative Assembly and the Executive 

Council, the overall cost was $16.215 million in 1992.  In 1993 

costs were reduced to 16.082 million, a hugh reduction of not 

quite 1 per cent.  Now ask me why people who speak to me 

every day are cynical. 

 

The Provincial Auditor doesn't get any more money, the one 

individual to look at ways in which we can cut costs. But the 

Provincial Secretary, the member from Regina Dewdney, 

whose mandate is, and I quote: 

 

 . . . to coordinate and manage intergovernmental relations, 

protocol services, communications policy and 

French-language services.  (As well as) . . . the Office of the 

Lieutenant Governor, the Legislative Building and the 

Wascana Centre Authority . . . 

 

Had a budget of $5.8 million in 1992.  But, Mr. Speaker, 1993, 

it goes up a million dollars.  How?  The cost of protocol was 

cut, the cost of French-language coordination was cut, the cost 

of maintaining Wascana Park and the legislature was cut.  The 

Lieutenant Governor's office did not get more money and the 

constitutional and intergovernmental affairs took a cut. 

 

What went up, however, Mr. Speaker, were the administrative 

costs of the Provincial Secretary.  The budget for 

communications went up by $10,000.  The budget for offices, 

mail records management, and renovations went up by 

$562,000, and the cost of salaries and operating expenses went 

up by $834,000.  The overall budget for the Provincial 

Secretary jumped by over $1 million.  We just closed a school, 

a neighbourhood school in my constituency in Saskatoon to 

save $150,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan understand, 



March 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 477 

as I do, that these are not the magnitude of the savings needed 

to get us out of debt.  But they are signals.  They're signals that 

people have been waiting for in order to judge their elected 

officials, in order to judge their government on its commitment 

to eliminate waste and mismanagement. 

 

How can we believe a government which is telling us it is 

trying to do the most it can with the least of our tax dollars 

necessary?  How can we believe them when they tell us that 

they are acting in the people's best interests? 

 

On page 74 of the budget, the Indian and Metis Affairs 

Secretariat will cost us $36,000 more in salaries to operate this 

year than last.  The physical operations for the department will 

cost 55 per cent more than last year -- a $106,000 increase. 

 

Now the interesting thing here, Mr. Speaker, is this.  This is a 

very interesting thing.  The programs operated by this 

department, the programs to fund Indian and Metis 

organizations for the development and provision of services, 

including employment opportunities for their members, has 

been cut, cut by 45 per cent or $300,000. 

 

How can a government that claims to care about people, claims 

to support the empowerment of aboriginal peoples, a Premier 

who represents a constituency in which these programs are so 

necessary, make a move to cut programs by 45 per cent while 

increasing the cost of the department which administers the 

monies by 55 per cent. 

 

I don't have the time, nor do I have the staff to scrutinize every 

expenditure in every department, but I'll tell you something -- 

I'm getting around to it.  To all the government members 

keeping the back benches warm, I can only say, shame on you.  

How can they sit idly by and not ask these questions of their 

Minister of Finance and their leader, the hon. member from 

Riversdale? 

 

And have they become so sensitized to political rhetoric and 

doom and gloom that they cannot rise from their seats and ask 

these simple questions on behalf of their constituents, the 

taxpayers of this province?  How can they watch the Premier 

on television, watch the cabinet ministers and the Minister of 

Finance travelling around this province, claiming to have made 

the hard choices, when they know that they have actually been 

deliberate in their choices to make unnecessary government 

spending not a priority? 

 

Now I know that someone in the back benches will be handed a 

canned speech which will say how nave I am to think that we 

can pay off the deficit by eliminating these few hundreds of 

thousands of dollars.  Well I have news for them.  I've heard it 

before.  Part of my job and part of their job is to point out every 

inefficiency within this system, every single inefficiency, until 

we get it squeaky clean, efficient, and effective. 

This government wants to talk about a partnership.  That is 

what people expect of them.  They expect of them to 

participate fully in the process.  People do not support paying 

one more dime of taxes to their government until this income 

abuse is stopped.  People fortunate enough to have jobs want to 

know that their representatives have done away with 

everything they can before asking for more.  And they, like I, 

believe that if these few hundred thousand dollars in oversights 

are so easy to spot, then there must be more once one digs 

below the surface. 

 

Can they honestly tell people in this province that after raising 

the cost to businesses and private citizens for telephone, power, 

energy, and motor vehicle insurance, the most they could come 

up with to apply to the deficit from CIC (Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan) was some $40 million?  I 

believe that people would like to have the members of the Gass 

Commission or some other independent body tell us what they 

think is the reasonable projection for earnings from CIC and 

what percentage should be dedicated to debt reduction. 

 

The government has just invoked some new taxes and tax 

increases that are going to cause some real trouble in our 

economy.  In fact this is not gloom and doom; it's reality.  

Unfortunately the government members seem to have had their 

vision for our province affected by so many days of looking 

through smoke and mirrors.  Let me give them a clear look 

through the eyes of some of the people who have been 

watching their government the last few days. 

 

(1600) 

 

On Thursday morning I got four calls, four phone calls about 

the 9 per cent tax on clothes.  Three were from women -- this 

was Friday morning -- three were from women who said they 

would be shopping in Alberta.  The fourth was from a 

Saskatoon clothing store whose owner wanted to know why the 

NDP MLAs in Saskatoon aren't speaking out against this 

budget. 

 

Being a Saskatoon MLA, I told her where I stood.  But, Mr. 

Speaker, I can't seem to tell where some of the others are 

coming from.  Other than the Finance minister and the Premier, 

I haven't heard too much public endorsement of this budget 

from the Saskatoon MLAs. 

 

On Saturday in fact I went into a shop in the constituency of 

the Minister of Social Services.  The owner told me that she 

had actually told the hon. member from Saskatoon Broadway 

what would happen as a result of the increase in the sales tax.  

It seems the NDP with one wave of its wand has changed that 

one business from a clothing store to a closing store. 

 

I wonder how many others there will be, how many other jobs 

will be lost until the government realizes that just like the last 

time, their numbers aren't going to work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it reminds me of a story, and I think we 



478 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1993 

need a little levity right now.  There is a new minister I had 

heard of who was wanting to hire a new staff member.  And so 

the new minister was down to the last three candidates for the 

job -- an accountant, a lawyer, and a person who had worked as 

a government official in economics for some time. 

 

The accountant came before that minister and the new minister 

had asked a long, involved amount of questions and finally 

said, I have the most important question, the most important 

question: what is two plus two?  And the accountant says, four.  

Well the minister said, I've really appreciated our interview; I 

think you've done a great job and I'll be getting back to you. 

 

The next person comes in, the second person in the final group 

of three, and it's the lawyer.  And the new minister has gone 

through all of these interviews and finally states to this lawyer, 

I have the last and most important question to ask you: what is 

two plus two?  The lawyer leans over, looks around, and said, 

well I believe it's somewhere between three and five.  Well the 

new minister congratulates this candidate and says how much 

that they've really enjoyed interviewing this person.  He says, 

I'll get back to you. 

 

In comes the last candidate, the last candidate is interviewed, 

and the final question comes from the minister, the most 

important question according to the minister: what is two plus 

two?  And the government official says, what do you want it to 

be? 

 

And that's part of the concern.  How can we really trust what 

the numbers are, Mr. Speaker?  How much do you want it to 

be? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance seems to have overlooked 

a lot of things -- overlooked the fact that there are 60,000 farm 

families in Saskatchewan trying to survive a serious crisis in 

agriculture.  After 16 months in power, after spending more 

than $30 million to operate this Assembly for two years, after 

spending more than $3 million last year just on the policy and 

planning arm of the Department of Agriculture, guess what?  I 

guess there aren't 60,000 families any more.  I think I stand 

corrected; I think they're down to about 54,000 in the province. 

 

But 60,000 or 54,000 families in our province have no idea 

whatsoever as to what is happening with farm support 

programs for the long term.  But I'm sure that everyone will 

feel a whole lot better knowing that the Department of 

Agriculture is going to spend an extra $33,000 this year on 

statistics.  Why not put that money on the table?  Why not put 

that money on the table to facilitate discussion amongst 

farmers, farm families, about what might solve their problems.  

Allow people in this legislature who have ideas to bring them 

forward to the people of our province.  Allow other people with 

ideas to bring them forward and have some really valid 

discussion, instead of $33,000 on statistics. 

 

When is this government going to start spending money more 

efficiently to arrive at solutions that make 

sense to people?  When, Mr. Speaker, is the NDP government 

going to put all of those people to work over there in some 

meaningful way to find out what is being done wrong in this 

administration and what can we do better? 

 

Mr. Speaker, perhaps one of them, just one of them would like 

to try to answer this question:  how can a government expect 

people to believe that it knows an economic opportunity when 

it sees one when the same government increases the tax on 

gasohol, which has ethanol in it, in this budget?  Why on page 

22 of the budget would the government show that it has 

doubled the amount of money to support development of the 

agricultural industry when it doubles the budget for ethanol for 

1.6 million to 3.2 million.  Why would this government then 

turn around and add a deterrent to purchase gasohol by offering 

an incentive to purchase propane? 

 

Mr. Speaker, parts of this budget may look good on paper, but 

it just is not going to happen in the real world.  The tax 

revenues are not going to be there again.  Revenues raised 

through taxes on farm inputs are going to fall short.  Retailers 

will be pressured to cut costs and lay off staff in the wake of 

more cross-border shopping.  It happened last time.  All you 

have to do is look at the facts. 

 

Why would you believe that adding a tax to adult clothing and 

shoes won't increase the problem?  This government does not 

seem to understand that having people leave to buy clothing 

and shoes means more than that.  It means that they're going to 

stock up on others items as well, items like cigarettes and 

alcohol. 

 

The previous minister of Finance stood in his place and gave a 

pat response every time I stood up and said, don't you realize 

that when you increase taxation on such things as alcohol and 

cigarettes that it's going to likely increase smuggling?  His 

comment was a flippant: prove it.  Now the present Minister of 

Finance now reports that she didn't raise taxes on cigarettes and 

alcohol.  Why?  Because they feared smuggling. 

 

Now it leaves one wondering if the member from Regina 

Dewdney has received information from the Minister of 

Finance that has proved what was said even a year ago.  I've 

had numerous calls from people who say that they're going to 

be doing their shopping elsewhere, particularly this coming 

Christmas.  That means disposable incomes spent not only on 

shopping, money spent on hotels and meals and gas during the 

trip.  This is money that will not be spent here in our local gas 

stations, our local restaurants.  Money that will disappear not 

only from the bottom line of this budget, but from the bottom 

lines of Saskatchewan business people. 

 

This budget document, produced and distributed at 

considerable expense, is based on some very, very major leaps 

of faith.  It assumes that potash prices are going to go up.  It 

assumes that our dollar is going to remain competitive against 

the American dollar.  The budget also makes assumptions 

about the fact that 



March 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 479 

people in our province will be able to find work.  It assumes 

that those working will see their incomes rise by .5 per cent. 

 

And how is all this substantiated?  Well why should we believe 

it?  There are many charts and graphs which refer to the 

tax-supported debt per capita.  All these assume that people are 

not going to leave Saskatchewan over the next while.  All of 

the income tax projections assume that the trend which saw 

thousands fewer people working this year has nothing to do 

with people moving, being unable to find jobs, or ending up on 

welfare.  If projections are done without taking those trends 

into consideration, Mr. Speaker, we are in trouble all over 

again. 

 

Last year the NDP took more than $500 out of every family's 

budget through sales tax and gas tax, as well as increased 

utility and insurance costs.  This budget seems to be based on 

the assumption that people have increased their budgets and 

that another $500 hit-plus on those same families will not have 

any impact at all on their consumer buying power.  Yes, Mr. 

Speaker, this budget is rife with assumptions. 

 

It assumes that interest rates will continue to decline, that 

federal offloading will stop, and that it's going to rain on our 

crops.  While I agree that none of those things are within our 

control, none are within the control of our government in our 

province, just as potash prices aren't, oil prices or the price of 

grain; having reasonable expectations and a contingency plan 

is. 

 

This administration has placed far too much emphasis on 

painting Saskatchewan in shades of grey and black, and far too 

little time focusing on the generation of wealth and industry in 

Saskatchewan.  Sales tax incentives to business are very hollow 

offerings at a time when profits are only a dream for many 

entrepreneurs who are struggling just to pay the bills and 

hoping for a wage at the end of the month. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier and the Minister of Finance have 

both publicly stated that this budget is a long-term plan.  But 

municipalities are being cut back over the next few years and 

will undoubtedly pass their misfortune on to whom? To the 

only pockets there are -- the taxpayers -- crudely disguised as 

provincial and federal taxpayers, hoping that our local 

governments won't notice us until the provincial debt is 

eliminated on the backs of municipal ratepayers. 

 

And yet, in spite of making everyone from local health boards 

to municipalities to retail clothing stores appear to be the bad 

guys, the government has made two grave and fundamental 

errors.  This government, Mr. Speaker, has not swept the 

corners of its own house.  It has come down heavily, very 

heavily, on the people of this province who are already bending 

under the weight of the tax burdens they face. 

 

And the second grave error is that it has asked people to accept 

the word of a government which has deceived the people on 

many occasions.  Asked the people to accept the word of 

politicians that these 

numbers will be met and that no more taxes are going to be 

needed in the future. 

 

Well I have three suggestions for this government.  Have 

another look in the corners and put your promise in writing. 

 

I urge you to empower the Provincial Auditor to strike an 

independent body along with the employees to conduct 

efficiency and productivity audits of every government 

department, and to question every line in this budget where 

savings can still be made. 

 

I also urge this government to put whatever credibility it may 

think it has on the line and to legislate its promise, its promise 

regarding taxation, through a taxpayers' protection Act to give 

people the confidence in the government that it seems to think 

that it should have in its budget. 

 

Furthermore, commit yourselves, with a deficit reduction Act, 

to true deficit reduction. 

 

If the Minister of Finance will commit to doing these three 

things, then I, along with the people of this province, I'm sure 

can support this budget, subject to the changes recommended 

by efficiency and productivity auditors.  If the Finance minister 

cannot make such a commitment, I strongly suggest she 

withdraw this budget and return to the drawing board. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I rise 

today to speak in support of a very historic and trend-setting 

budget.  In fact I believe it's with a great deal of pride and 

excitement and anticipation that the people of Saskatchewan 

wholeheartedly support our budget. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think back to last Thursday; it was 

March 18.  And I think back also that as minister of Culture I 

have been I think perhaps made more aware of our historic 

roots in Saskatchewan. 

 

But March 18, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was the day after St. 

Patrick's Day.  And I think that St. Patrick's Day in many 

people's eyes is a day of good luck, and I believe had extended 

over to March 18 to the people of Saskatchewan because that 

budget is actually going to be a lucky budget for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But it requires more than luck, Mr. Speaker; it requires good 

management.  And that is exactly what our Minister of Finance 

has put forward in this document. 

 

(1615) 

 

Now the Minister of Finance, I know by her name, must have 

probably a little bit of Irish in her; but she's not a leprechaun, 

Mr. Speaker, and she can't make magic.  But I think that budget 

that we brought down on March 18, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

started to build a rainbow over Saskatchewan, a rainbow that 

will end in 1996 with a pot of gold. 



480 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1993 

But in that pot of gold there won't be gold, Mr. Speaker, but 

there'll be the word "freedom."  And I think more than anything 

else that is what the people of Saskatchewan want.  They want 

financial freedom. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- As well, Mr. Speaker, being the minister 

of Culture, I've learned other things.  I've learned also that we 

have a substantial Chinese culture in Saskatchewan and it's a 

very interesting culture and I've learned that the year of 1993 is 

the year of the rooster.  It's a year that's ruled by the attributes 

and the traits of the rooster, the animal. 

 

And I think when you read this, you're quite intrigued about it 

because it talks about industry and it talks about honesty and it 

talks about the traits of hard work and sacrifice and I believe 

that 1993 is indeed going to be the year ruled by the rooster. 

 

And as I thought about it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I thought, well 

if 1993 is a year that's going to be ruled by the rooster, what 

was the last decade?  What happened from 1981 to 1991 and 

how would we characterize this? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I thought about it and I decided that that 

must be the decade of the rule of the wolverine.  And I looked 

up the wolverine -- I used to teach school and I remember that 

it was a very interesting animal and so I went back and I looked 

at it -- and here are the characteristics of the wolverine:  it's a 

very intelligent but very crafty and cunning animal.  It's very 

aggressive, very greedy, extremely destructive.  It has low 

social values; it's not a social animal at all; in fact it provides 

minimum care for its young and for its elderly. 

 

And I recall watching on TV one day and I remember seeing a 

documentary about the wolverine and listening to people who 

operated a fishing camp.  And they spoke about some 

wolverines that had come into the camp and these wolverines 

had eaten everything that they could eat.  They dragged off 

everything that they couldn't devour.  And what they couldn't 

eat and dragged off, they sprayed a very odious spray on so 

nobody else could use it.  It was a scene of total destruction, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And when the owners of this camp came 

back, these animals lurked off into the bush.  And they sat there 

and they growled and they snarled at all the people that were 

trying to put this camp back together. 

 

So I say to the people of this Assembly, that when I look at 

what happened for the last decade, it seems to me that we were 

ruled by the wolverine.  It was an animal obviously that has no 

sense of responsibility.  It has no sense of remorse, and it cares 

only about its own appetite. 

 

Now I think that in . . . it sets a context of what we are going to 

be dealing with as far as our government and its ability to put 

Saskatchewan back together.  Because in opposition, Mr. 

Speaker, we have this band of men who refuse to acknowledge 

the complete reversal of 

Saskatchewan's financial position from the year 1981 to '91.  

They simply cannot accept the fact that in the last year of an 

NDP government, 1981-82, we had $130 million surplus.  We 

had interest payments on our public debt of $43.3 million.  And 

we had a total debt, a total combined debt of $4 billion, a little 

less than 4 billion. 

 

And then after 10 years of the rule of the wolverine, what do 

we have now?  We have an annual deficit, when we took over, 

of about $860 million according to the Gass Commission.  We 

have a total combined debt of $14.7 billion and we have 

interest on the public debt of 760 million. 

 

And they don't like to acknowledge that.  They feel that that 

should not be talked about.  And they jigger the figures around 

to suit themselves.  But all you have to look at, Mr. Speaker, is 

look at the interest.  In 1981-82 we paid a total of $43.3 million 

of interest on the public debt, and the last year in their office 

we paid a total of $760 million.  Surely, surely those figures 

must tell you something because these are the facts. 

 

But the members of the opposition cannot accept these facts 

because it is not their nature to accept it.  And I don't believe it 

that they deny it.  It's simply that they cannot come to terms 

with it; they cannot comprehend what they have done. 

 

But there was one person, Mr. Speaker, who was a Tory, and 

one person who understood what was happening; one person, 

who was in the Tory caucus, who had the intelligence and the 

integrity and the courage to speak the truth.  And this is what 

he said, Mr. Speaker, on June 18, 1991, the day that he 

resigned.  He said: 

 

 We have a responsibility, Mr. Speaker, to deliver government 

services to the people in the most efficient manner possible.  

This province is on the verge of bankruptcy, and we cannot 

afford to do otherwise. 

 

That's what Mr. Hodgins, MLA from my constituency, said the 

day that he resigned.  He was, as I said before, the only Tory 

that had the intelligence, the integrity, and the courage to speak 

the truth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on Saturday, February 6, there was a very 

interesting article in The Globe and Mail.  And it says:  "How 

the gravy train went off the rails."  And this isn't something that 

Saskatchewan New Democrats have made up and concocted 

simply to make members of the opposition look bad.  This is an 

accepted fact by everybody who has looked at the state of 

Saskatchewan, has analysed it, and have come to the same 

conclusions.  And I read what they said in this article: 

 

 The days of the Tory pork barrel are gone now, leaving this 

province of 950,000 souls flat broke.  The Devine era began 

with a small budgetary surplus and an accumulated debt in 

Crown Corporations of $3.5-billion.   When the 



March 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 481 

 Tories left, the debt was nearly $15-billion. 

 

 The government made dozens of bad deals and, as three 

provincial investigations over the past year have shown, 

devised many ways of hiding cabinet ministers' personal and 

political expenses in various Crown corporations. 

 

And it goes on and on.  And that's not our document, Mr. 

Speaker.  That is an independent analysis done by a very 

credible journalist in Toronto. 

 

But what we have, Mr. Speaker, is a group of . . . a band of 

men over there that still sit and snarl and growl from the chairs 

over there because they simply cannot accept what they have 

done.  They deny it.  They don't take responsibility for it.  And 

worst of all, they want everybody else to deny it and to not take 

responsibility for Saskatchewan as well. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, truly that has got to be the very worst 

part of it -- that they simply want us to continue to govern as 

they had done in the past.  And that is simply unforgivable. 

 

Now I hear the members of the opposition make claims that we 

have neglected Saskatchewan municipalities and communities, 

and this I find very interesting because I happened at one time 

to be a mayor. 

 

And I remember very clearly in 1989-90 when Canadian "88" 

Agri-Products was looking to come into Saskatchewan.  And 

we were working with Mr. Hodgins at the time to try to get 

support for the proposal from agri "88" and Mr. Hodgins, a 

minister in your own cabinet, did not know that a deal was 

being made behind his back with Cargill.  He did not know 

that. 

 

We met several times with the ex-premier of this province, the 

member from Estevan, and we spoke to him. And there was the 

mayor from Yorkton, the mayor from Rosetown, the mayor 

from Melfort, and the mayor from Tisdale.  And we said to the 

premier and to his cabinet, you have $370 million invested in 

this fertilizer project.  Instead of doing that, why don't you take 

that $370 million and divide it up $10 million for 37 

communities and let us devise our own economic plan, or $5 

million for 74 communities and let us contribute and let us 

build our own economic development plan. 

 

But he said no, he needed a world-class fertilizer project in this 

province, and hell or high water, he would build it.  So we lost 

$370 million that could have gone to the communities in 1989, 

'90, and '91.  And instead it went to the biggest corporation in 

the world, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then I remember also the Bi-Provincial upgrader at 

Lloydminster.  The government provided $177 million for the 

construction and for the agreement to build that provincial 

upgrader.  If they had taken that $177 million in 1989-90, Mr. 

Speaker, and if they would have converted that into a program 

to build 

and replace infrastructure across Saskatchewan, we would have 

the best, most progressive communities in this country.  We 

would have an infrastructure program that would be second to 

none and we would have municipal mill rates that would be 

very, very low. 

 

But they decided instead, Mr. Speaker, that the Bi-Provincial 

upgrader was more important than provincial infrastructure and 

communities.  And they dedicated that $177 million to another 

international corporation. 

 

And then we look further, Mr. Speaker, and we see that on the 

sale of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan they lost $441 

million in shares.  And these aren't our figures, Mr. Speaker.  

Those are the figures that came out of the Gass Commission.  

And what could we have done in the communities across 

Saskatchewan with $441 million?  Well we could have had a 

revenue-sharing program and a capital program that would 

have lasted for a very, very long time, a program that would 

have built those communities into modern, viable, energetic 

communities. 

 

And they had that choice back in 1989, in '90, and '91, Mr. 

Speaker.  They had that choice.  That money was there.  And 

where did they put it?  They didn't put it into the municipalities.  

They never, ever had one thought or regard for municipalities 

-- not once.  Because I was there and I can remember what was 

going on, and I was part of those discussions. 

 

They spent the money on their silly dreams and their greedy 

schemes and they left the communities of Saskatchewan hung 

out to dry, and they did it for 10 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- And now, Mr. Speaker, they complain 

when we have decreased . . . when we decrease our spending, 

they sit over there and they snarl and they growl from the 

weeds and they say, you shouldn't be reducing your spending to 

municipalities because it's offloading. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we have very little choice left.  We don't 

choose to decrease our money to municipalities.  We know that 

municipal governments across Saskatchewan are the most 

efficient and effective way of delivering services and we do 

support them. 

 

But right now, Mr. Speaker, the pot's dry; the money's gone.  

It's been gone on Saferco; it's been gone on the Bi-Provincial 

upgrader; it's been spent on Millar. It's been spent on many, 

many different places, but it's not been spent in the 

communities across this province. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, they talk about the taxes.  And they 

complain and they say, quote: we have picked the taxpayers' 

pockets.  We have put 1 cent E&H on, raising it from eight to 

nine, and we've added on the 



482 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1993 

adult clothing.  So with that, we brought in about $70 million.  

And we hear the Leader of the Opposition sitting over there 

and he says, you had a choice; you could have harmonized. 

 

And I sit here and I say, okay;  they say we could have 

harmonized for $180 million.  But where do you think that 

$180 million is going to come from?  Some great god in some 

heaven?  Is Zeus going to drop off the $180 million to you?  Is 

$180 million less of a detriment on the taxpayer than $70 

million on an E&H? 

 

I simply cannot understand their logic in this, Mr. Speaker.  

There's only one taxpayer in Saskatchewan.  There isn't some 

great god up in the heavens that's going to drop out $180 

million simply because they say the word harmonization. 

 

And they want to tax, Mr. Speaker, what the Tories want to do, 

they want to tax and they want to tax haircuts and they want to 

tax books and they want to tax dry-cleaning and accounting 

services and oil changes.  They want to tax everything that any 

taxpayer ever has in the economy.  They want to tax it for $180 

million.  And they think taking $180 million out of a taxpayer's 

pocket is better than taking $70 million out. 

 

(1630) 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I don't think the taxpayers of this province 

are that nave.  I think they can say, $180 million in this pocket 

or $70 million in that pocket, I think I would still take the 70 

million, thank you.  And you can forget your greedy schemes 

and your silly dreams on that one as well. 

 

And then they sit over there and they talk and they talk about 

doom and gloom, that we preach doom and gloom.  We preach 

reality.  We preach fiscal responsibility and economic reality, 

and we tell the people the truth. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- And when we tell the people the truth, 

Mr. Speaker, that bothers them.  That bothers them.  And they 

think that's doom and gloom.  And of course for them it is 

doom and gloom because it exposes exactly what they've been 

all about for the last 10 years. 

 

And so they sit over there, Mr. Speaker, and they talked a few 

weeks ago about the doom and gloom had chased away a 

potential investment for Melfort.  Now to show you the 

hypocrisy and the dishonesty of what those people said, I took 

the opportunity to write to the investment company that was 

supposed to have invested in Melfort -- the company that they 

say we chased away. 

 

And I have the letter here, and what it says is: all developments 

of this chain -- and I'm not going to mention it -- in Canada is 

cleared.  This is from the manager of the franchise sales for 

Canada, and he 

says: all development of this chain in Canada is cleared 

through my office and as of this date there has not been ever 

discussed with anyone a hotel for Melfort.  We are actively 

however pursuing a number of opportunities in your province 

and expect to have a substantially larger presence there before 

the end of the year.  In fact we have specifically targeted 

Regina, Prince Albert, Swift Current, and Lloydminster, and 

are currently seeking out other opportunities as well.  We think 

that the future of your province is bright, and hope that we can 

be a part of it. 

 

This is a company that you said we chased away with our 

gloom and doom.  This is a hypocrisy.  You take a statement 

and you concoct your own terms around it with not one shred 

of evidence as to the facts -- not once. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, to show further how this group, this 

band of men sitting in the weeds snarling and growling over 

there, how they exaggerate and how they distort the truth, they 

have decided today that a letter that I sent to Mr. Cholod, 

president of SUMA, was somehow inappropriate.  They 

decided that the relationship between this government and 

SUMA could better be explained by members of the opposition 

rather than a direct communication between this government 

and that association. 

 

And I know a lot about that association.  I used to be it.  They 

are still my very close friends.  And I don't think that there's 

anybody over there that can tell me anything about SUMA that 

I haven't already learned or don't know or can't find out. 

 

But I will tell you, Mr. Speaker, that the letter that came back 

from Mr. Cholod after I sent the letter saying we were in 

discussions . . . we've had two meetings discussing and scoping 

out this terms of reference of how we can eliminate or how we 

can restructure the local funding options for health care, and 

we're in those meetings and we're discussing it.  And then out 

of the blue Mr. Cholod says, we want to repeal the revenue 

held back. 

 

And I send a letter back and say: Mr. Cholod, we are in 

discussions; we are in there in good faith. And at this point in 

time if you're going to jump the discussions and decide that 

you're going to get ahead of the whole process and decide we 

want to repeal the Act, then there's no further need to go ahead 

with the discussions.  And in fact that's paraphrasing what I did 

say. 

 

But those people across the way decided that they spoke better 

for SUMA than SUMA itself.  And I don't believe that SUMA 

wants to be politicized by members of the opposition, to be 

used for their own political purposes.  I know that SUMA is an 

association that has integrity, it has credibility across 

Saskatchewan, and above all, it's not political.  And they don't 

need members of the opposition speaking on their behalf. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, we hear more words from them about 

how we should be supporting all sorts of 



March 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 483 

programs in Saskatchewan -- more support for the health care 

programs, more support for agriculture.  Well I ask . . . I 

challenge the members of the opposition, I challenge you -- we 

will pay for those programs if you pay your interest on your 

debt.  You take the $760 million . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- You take it.  That's your debt.  You pay 

it.  You do the honourable thing.  You pay the $760 million and 

we will be more than happy to have the best agriculture 

program in the country and the best health care program in the 

country and the best education program in the country and I 

will be able to give every municipality all the money and 

revenue sharing and capital grants that they could possibly 

want.  If you take care of your interest payment of $760 

million, we'll dedicate that money to community development.  

Is that a deal? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, are they going to be able to 

come up with the $760 million that they blew in the last 10 

years?  No, Mr. Speaker, not these people.  We have to 

remember that we were ruled by the decade of the wolverine. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what that leaves is that everybody in 

Saskatchewan must sacrifice.  Everybody in Saskatchewan 

must sacrifice to pay for their party.  That $760 million has to 

be paid -- this year it's $847 million. 

 

So what we have to do is try as effectively as possible to work 

with the municipalities to help them restructure and coordinate 

their programs.  And so this year, Mr. Speaker, we have 

allocated $500,000 to the inter-community cooperation 

program to help municipalities start on this.  They're very 

encouraged by it.  They're working together and I see this as a 

great opportunity for Saskatchewan municipalities to reshape 

and take hold of their own destiny. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, we have told SUMA that -- they have a task 

force that was brought in at the last convention -- and we have 

told SUMA that we would help them pay for that task force; 

we would find money to allow that task force to go ahead and 

do a lot of its work. 

 

We also, Mr. Speaker, have allocated money towards many 

other programs in our department and I'm going to give you 

some breakdown on those other programs.  We have dedicated 

125,000 to an enhanced training program for fire protection.  

We have dedicated a further 1 million . . . just looking for my 

notes, Mr. Speaker.  We have dedicated . . . my mind has taken 

away those numbers from me, and I will get them in a moment, 

Mr. Speaker, but we have allocated our resources mainly to 

areas where we feel that there is a critical need at this point in 

time. 

 

We have dedicated $4 million to water and sewer services for 

northern municipalities.  We have 

dedicated, over the next five years, $6 million to capital grants 

for the northern municipalities.  We will have a $4 million 

capital program for housing in the northern municipalities with 

upgrades and 30 new units going into the North.  We have 

taken very seriously, Mr. Speaker, the need to attend to the 

quality of life and to the essential services in northern 

municipalities, and we will continue to focus our attention in 

those areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that in this time of decreased funding, 

we have allocated our resources as fairly and as equitably as we 

possibly can. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, in regards to the lotteries, the lottery 

funding in Saskatchewan has grown substantially over the 

years, and this year with the discussions that are going on 

around the report from the Provincial Auditor and the Gass 

Commission, we have . . . am taking our responsibility to some 

of the agencies that are legislated under the provincial 

government very seriously. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, we will be taking from the lotteries 

$9.1 million and allocating it to the Arts Board, to the Heritage 

Foundation, to Wanuskewin, to the MacKenzie Art Gallery to 

the Science Centre and to SaskFILM.  Those agencies will 

share direct funding through the Consolidated Fund for the 

amount of $9.1 million. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, we will be sitting down with the globals, 

Sask Sport and its globals, and we will be coming to a 

resolution of the problem of the remarks of the Provincial 

Auditor regarding accountability.  We believe that there is an 

attitude of respect and a desire by the globals to resolve this 

problem.  And I am sure over the next year that the problem 

that we have regarding accountability with the lotteries will be 

resolved. 

 

We make our commitment to the sports, recreation, and culture 

organizations of Saskatchewan that they are indeed extremely 

important for the quality of life of Saskatchewan.  And we 

believe the volunteer services that we have in place now are the 

best way to deliver these programs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- So, Mr. Speaker, in regard to the 

department of municipal government, we have to the greatest 

extent possible allocated our funds to those areas that we 

believe urgently need our attention. 

 

I want to take a moment, Mr. Speaker, to talk about the 

remarks made by the member from Greystone, the leader of the 

pizza party of Saskatchewan. 

 

She speaks loudly and passionately about democratic process, 

Mr. Speaker.  She speaks about the need for politics to be 

inclusive, not exclusive.  She speaks very eloquently about the 

need for integrity in politicians and in the process.  And yet she 

represents a party that has a track record that has historically 

and more currently made people blush with shame.  They make 



484 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1993 

patronage an art form.  They respect democratic principles only 

when it suits them. 

 

And everybody is aware of the shenanigans that went around 

the nomination process in Regina Wascana constituency, and 

more recently with the Saskatoon-Humboldt. 

 

But how did she square that, Mr. Speaker?  How does she sit 

there, and she enunciates in very eloquent terms about what 

democratic process is, and yet her own party is probably the 

most abusive of all when it comes to neglecting . . . or deciding 

that when it doesn't suit their purposes they will simply set 

aside the democratic process. 

 

So this leader of the pizza party of Saskatchewan decries 

patronage.  She says patronage is a sin.  And at every 

opportunity you hear her talking about how everybody in the 

world indulges in patronage except the leader of the pizza 

party.  And yet everybody in Canada knows that her party 

invented patronage. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I don't think she should be quite so 

sanctimonious.  In fact in her speeches . . . and she talks also 

very eloquently about truth and honesty.  And in her speeches 

she . . . in this House she has made remarks about me.  In fact 

she said that I have hired my entire campaign team to work at 

SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation). 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that is a complete and total falsehood.  That 

is simply not true.  I have not hired one person at SPMC that 

came from Melfort.  And yet she will stand there and say that. 

 

And if she says that about me, how many other things, Mr. 

Speaker, does she say that she has incorrect facts on?  Or does 

she care about the truth?  Or does she care about the facts at 

all? 

 

She talks about the need to reduce funding, starting at the top 

and leading by example.  And she continually says that she 

needs more money.  She's asked for $200,000 more from the 

Legislative Assembly to help her operate her office.  And at the 

same time she tells everybody else that we have to have 

restraint and reduction in government operations.  What makes 

her operation more important than anybody else's operation?  

We have reduced our expenditures and yet, at the same time 

out of the other side of her mouth, she wants to increase hers. 

 

Would it help, Mr. Speaker, if she got that $200,000?  Would it 

help her to find the truth and speak the facts or would she 

continue to . . . Perhaps if she had more money, perhaps if she 

had more money to research the facts she might actually know 

what she was talking about.  But I doubt that, Mr. Speaker.  

She talks about reducing government and she makes some very 

superficial analysis in her speech a few moments ago, filled 

with inaccuracies and a huge amount of ignorance, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

She was doing a critique on the budget for the Legislative 

Assembly, and among other things, she 

was talking about the increases in the Legislative Assembly 

budget, but she didn't.  She neglected to say that the Standing 

Committee on the Environment held hearings all across this 

province, did a comprehensive public hearing, did an excellent 

job, and that cost the province about $130,000. 

 

(1645) 

 

She also neglected to say that the security staff cost for this 

Legislative Assembly was being transferred from SPMC to the 

Legislative Assembly budget.  She didn't mention that.  She 

only spoke in very superficial terms about the cost increasing. 

 

And another area she spoke about, Mr. Speaker, she said that 

the Indian Metis Secretariat had an increased cost in their 

budget this year.  But she didn't say that that increased cost was 

due to major economic development programs within that 

secretariat. 

 

And she continually jumps on the bandwagon about tax 

increases.  And yet at one time -- and I still believe they still 

are talking about harmonization -- she still is in favour of 

taking $180 million out of taxpayers' pockets through 

harmonization, but at the same time she talks about the sin of 

tax increases.  And I agree.  None of us like tax increases, and 

we would rather not do it.  But simply speaking, she is very 

nave when she relates the facts around some very specific 

programs. 

 

Another area she talks about is a need for support for ethanol.  

And yes, we doubled ethanol support to $3.6 million.  And I 

would've thought that she would've been very supportive of it.  

But she also complained that what we were doing was creating 

competition by giving propane an advantage as well. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think her analysis of the programs and of 

the budget was very superficial.  I don't have time here to go 

through them all, but I'm sure they'll come to light as we go on 

through this debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another thing that the leader of the pizza party did 

a few months ago, and it caused me great concern, was that we 

are trying to develop a new property assessment system in 

Saskatchewan.  And above all what this system does not need 

is for politics to become engaged in it. 

 

And when I hear the member from the pizza party talking about 

the need for a fair and equitable new reassessment system in 

Saskatchewan, I get very concerned.  Because that is not a 

political process, Mr. Speaker.  That is a process controlled and 

operated by municipal governments, and politicians on all sides 

of the House would do well to keep their remarks to themselves 

and their political interest out of the assessment system in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in closing, I want to go back to the opening 

statement at the beginning of my speech.  And there I said that 

we are starting today to build a rainbow over Saskatchewan.  

And in 1996 there will be a pot at the end of that rainbow.  And 

in this pot there'll be something more important than gold. 

There 



March 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 485 

will be freedom.  And, Mr. Speaker, this is not just a hope.  Mr. 

Speaker, this is a promise.  And this promise will be fulfilled 

not because of our government, but because of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

They want to return to the age of fiscal responsibility and 

balanced budget.  They don't want to see any more of their 

taxpayer money going to bankers in the East.  The promise of 

fiscal freedom will be fulfilled because of the hard work and 

the dedication and the perseverance and the sacrifice of our 

people. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the people of 

Saskatchewan for their encouragement and their support for 

this budget.  I also, Mr. Speaker, want to thank you and the 

Legislative Assembly for your attention to my remarks this 

afternoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am pleased 

to be able to rise today to make an address about the budget. 

 

But before I start, I would like to refer to a few comments that 

were made by the member from Bengough-Milestone.  She 

talked about a pamphlet that was in her constituency, a 

pamphlet with my name on it.  And indeed that is the case, Mr. 

Speaker, there is such a pamphlet out there. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the reason that pamphlet is out there, 

because the people of Bengough-Milestone felt that the 

member for that constituency was not doing her job properly.  

In fact I have been receiving many letters, many phone calls 

from the people of that constituency to look after their concerns 

and to answer their questions. 

 

And these people that are calling and writing, some of them are 

apolitical, Mr. Speaker, they couldn't care less which party is in 

government.  But there are a good many others, Mr. Speaker, 

that do have party political affiliations, and those affiliations 

include the New Democratic Party, the Liberal Party, and the 

Progressive Conservative Party. 

 

They are calling me and my colleagues, Mr. Speaker, because 

they feel that this government is not listening to them.  They 

feel that this government has reverted back to the ways of the 

1981 and '82 NDP government.  They didn't listen either. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also have another pamphlet that is going around 

in my constituency.  And this pamphlet deals with taxes, it 

deals with government priorities, it deals with justice -- who is 

receiving justice and who isn't receiving the benefits of justice 

in this province.  But most important, Mr. Speaker, it asks 

questions.  It asks the members of the public to respond, to give 

their opinions on what is happening and what they would like 

to see happen.  They have the opportunity to respond in 

whatever manner they wish, to express their own ideas. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, I am sending out in my 

constituency.  But the pamphlet that went out into the 

Bengough-Milestone constituency with my name on it or my 

name as the contact person within the PC caucus was not sent 

out by me, Mr. Speaker.  No, it was not.  In fact, it was sent out 

by the Bengough-Milestone PC association.  They paid for it 

and they're alive and well, Mr. Speaker, and ready to fight. 

 

I have another pamphlet here.  This one's being sent out by the 

member opposite.  And I'll quote the first line from it:  New 

Democrats promise to eliminate waste and mismanagement and 

to run government more efficiently.  And this one on the back 

it says: printed by the New Democratic Party caucus office. I 

wonder where she's getting her money for to send these out. 

 

The member for Bengough-Milestone talked about 

Rafferty-Alameda in her speech.  And I notice whenever the 

members opposite talk about Rafferty-Alameda, they always 

talk about no water.  But when they do that they never mention 

Alameda.  Mr. Speaker, the Alameda dam is in my 

constituency. 

 

Last summer there was 35 feet of water at the dam face, Mr. 

Speaker, and that water is still there.  There would have been a 

lot more water in that dam had the dam been allowed to finish 

on time and the gates closed.  The dam would have been half to 

three-quarters full, Mr. Speaker, just from the run-off that we 

would have had last summer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the member from 

Bengough-Milestone has spent any time in her constituency 

looking at the snow pack, looking at the lakes, looking at the 

dugouts in her constituency. 

 

Two years ago the water table in that area was very low.  There 

was a significant rainfall one night in the 1991 summer.  That 

water, Mr. Speaker, was saved at Nickle Lake in Weyburn and 

it was saved at the 601 causeway at Mainprize Park.  If that 

water had been allowed to progress downstream, there would 

be a significant amount of water in the Rafferty dam. 

 

But because of the drought in that area, Mr. Speaker, all of 

those areas were very dry.  In fact Weyburn had been on water 

rationing.  But the members opposite never talk about that. 

 

If you went into that area today, Mr. Speaker, you would find 

that a good many of the dugouts in that area are almost dry if 

not dry because there has not been the normal run-off; there has 

not been the normal snowfall that one would expect.  And that 

isn't just one localized phenomenon; that has been going on 

there for 10 years, Mr. Speaker, 10 years.  Even in my own 

area that drought has had an effect.  This drought is not just 

localized in the Rafferty-Alameda area; it's been all across 

southern Saskatchewan.  And the farmers know all about it, 

Mr. Speaker.  And the people in the urban towns know all 

about it because in some of those areas they've had to ration 

their water. 



486 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1993 

The member from Bengough-Milestone talked about pitting 

communities against communities, that we were somehow 

pitting rural against urban.  Well, Mr. Speaker, I believe it's her 

and her government that are doing exactly that. 

 

I'd like to ask the member for Bengough-Milestone which 

hospitals in her area are volunteering to close.  I'm sure that the 

hospitals at Pangman, Radville, or Bengough are jumping up 

and down, asking to be relieved of the burden of having a 

hospital in their communities.  Their people don't get sick; they 

don't have to worry about travelling any distance to a hospital.  

I just wonder, Madam Member, which one of those hospitals, 

which two of those hospitals, is volunteering to close. 

 

I suspect, Mr. Speaker, that in fact the people of those 

communities and those hospital boards are fighting to remain 

open.  They're fighting for those small amount of funds that the 

members opposite are sending them.  Even though there may 

not be enough funds there to maintain those hospitals after the 

Minister of Finance gets through with her budget, those 

hospitals still wish to remain open. 

 

I was very interested, Mr. Speaker, when the member said in 

her remarks, what we say is what we mean.  And I really hope 

that she meant that.  I really hope that the rest of her colleagues 

mean that when she says it, because I'd like to read a few 

quotes to you.  This is from the Premier, CKCK-TV, 

September 3, 1991, and I quote: we believe in living within our 

means.  We think $4.5 billion expenditure a year, roughly, is 

what we now expend in this province of Saskatchewan is 

enough. 

 

Now did she really mean to say what she meant?  Or what was 

this?  Did she really believe this, Mr. Speaker?  Did the 

members opposite really believe this? 

 

Another quote to say what . . . when she says, what we say is 

what we mean; no new taxes would be imposed.  Instead the 

NDP would cut wasteful spending and encourage new 

economic development -- The Leader-Post, September 6, 1991. 

 

Now is that what they really meant?  That's what the member 

from Bengough-Milestone seems to be indicating; that if you 

listen to her speech and what she says, she really means it.  

Well I wonder, Mr. Speaker, do her colleagues really mean it 

when they say, 4.5 billion is enough or no new taxes? 

 

Another quote, Mr. Speaker: I say the people of this province 

are fed up with taxes and we are going to change that.  Well, 

Mr. Speaker, they included the ex-premier's name in here, so I 

didn't use it. 

 

And now I'd have to say, Mr. Speaker, that the people of this 

province were fed up with taxes then and they're even more fed 

up with taxes now.  They're more than fed up with the new 

government's taxes. 

 

A quote, Mr. Speaker, from the Star-Phoenix, 

September 21, 1991:  The party has also promised to abolish 

the provincial flat tax.  This is the NDP Party.  They promised 

to abolish it, Mr. Speaker.  I believe it's somewheres around 3 

per cent now.  That's hardly abolishing it.  If the math is 

correct, Mr. Speaker, if you move from one to three, that's 

increasing it.  And fact is, Mr. Speaker, that's a 300 per cent 

increase. 

 

But somehow or another, when the member says: what we say 

is what we mean, well why is that tax still there, Mr. Speaker?  

Why has the Premier and the Minister of Finance and the 

cabinet and all of the back-benchers not eliminated this 

particular tax, Mr. Speaker?  Perhaps they didn't really mean 

what they said. 

 

Another quote, Moose Jaw Times-Herald, from the Premier, 

October 17, 1991.  And this is during the election campaign, 

Mr. Speaker, and I quote: but we're not going back to taxing 

people.  This was during the election campaign.  It's not some 

comment that was made previously in the heat of a debate in 

this House perhaps; this was during the actual election 

campaign.  We are not going back to taxing people. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think perhaps the person who said this, the 

Premier, should go back and read the budget that his Minister 

of Finance just presented to this House.  And there were very 

significant tax increases in there, Mr. Speaker, and there were 

very significant tax increases last year. 

 

Another quote from the Star-Phoenix, October 12, 1991.  And 

this too was during the election campaign, Mr. Speaker: 

creating more jobs will also stimulate revenue without raising 

taxes -- without raising taxes will stimulate new jobs. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I agree that if you don't raises taxes, in fact 

if you cut taxes . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  It now being 5 o'clock, this House 

stands recessed until 7 p.m. this evening. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


