




















































Hansard: June 01, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2087 

 June 1, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I have a 

petition here to present to the legislature this afternoon, and I'll 

just read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to be able to present this petition on 

behalf of a number of Saskatoon residents and communities 

surrounding Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker,  Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to join my colleague in presenting petitions to the 

Assembly as well regarding the NewGrade Energy Bill before 

this Assembly.  And the prayer reads: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I so submit. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have some 

petitions, and these also are from the Saskatoon area, Mr. 

Speaker.  And I will read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I would like to lay that on the Table, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, I too have petitions to 

present: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from Stoughton, Regina, 

and the Saskatoon areas.  I would like to present these to the 

Assembly. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am happy to 

present on behalf of people from the Saskatoon area today a 

petition that is self-explanatory from the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. governance and 

financing arrangements. 

 

I'll now present these. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to join with 

my colleagues in presenting a similar petition.  And the prayer 

reads: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitioners all reside in the city of Regina 

and it is my pleasure to table these at this time. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have petitions 

that I want to present to the Assembly.  And the prayer is: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitioners are from Tugaske, Eyebrow, Brownlee, 

Davidson, Saskatoon, Kenaston and areas in that district 

between here and Saskatoon.  I want to lay these before the 

Assembly. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's 

my pleasure today to present petitions.  And I'll just read the 

prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever 



2088 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1993 

pray. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, I have citizens from Saskatoon, Carmel, 

Benson, Stoughton -- Stoughton, Saskatchewan; Lang, 

Saskatchewan; people from all over the province of 

Saskatchewan.  I so table. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I too 

have a petition from citizens from the province of 

Saskatchewan regarding the proposed 230,000 volt power line 

from Condie near Regina to the Queen Elizabeth power station 

in Saskatoon.  And I shall read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that the Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to do the 

following: 

 

 (1) Order SaskPower to facilitate the production of 

non-utility generated power in areas of increased demand, 

namely Lloydminster and Meadow Lake; 

 

 (2) Order the Minister of the Environment to undertake a 

complete environmental assessment including public 

hearings; 

 

 (3) Order SaskPower to ensure that there is a full and 

complete compensation package for all affected landowners; 

 

 (4) Order SaskPower to table in the legislature a complete 

economic analysis by an independent auditor that proves the 

economic benefits of the proposed line; 

 

 (5) Order SaskPower to table in the legislature a review of all 

national and international studies on the effects of electric 

and magnetic fields on humans; and 

 

 (6) Further order SaskPower to cease and desist all planning, 

surveying, or preparation for construction until this petition 

has been honoured. 

 

And the people for whom I'm reading this, Mr. Speaker, are 

from Dundurn, Denholm, Clavet, Saskatoon, La Ronge, and 

various places throughout the province. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order, the following petitions have been 

reviewed and pursuant to rule 11(7), they are hereby read and 

received: 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to defeat any 

legislation introduced to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. 

corporate governance and financing arrangements. 

 

And: 

 Of citizens of the province humbly praying that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the government's 

decision to close hospital facilities. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 

am very pleased today to announce sitting in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker, and ask all members to welcome to the House today, 

52 students, grade 4 and 5, from William Grayson School in 

Moose Jaw.  They are accompanied by their teachers today, Pat 

Barbier and Carol Macdonald. 

 

I had a wonderful opportunity to meet with these students for 

about half an hour and they asked some very, very good 

questions.  They are leaving a little early now to attend over to 

the Government House to tour there.  Thank you all for 

coming, and I'd ask all members to welcome these students. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce to 

you and to other members of the Assembly 58 students, grade 4 

and 5, from Wascana School here in Regina.  They're here with 

their teachers Janice Ryan and Linda Walsh, as well as 

chaperons Laura Lee Smith, Penny Matte, Judy Sum, Gaylene 

Weir, and Debbie Faer. 

 

I want to say to the students, welcome to the Assembly, and I 

look forward to meeting with you after the question period.  

We will be meeting in room 218 and getting our picture taken.  

So welcome to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I have 

three introductions that I'd like to make this afternoon.  The 

first, Mr. Speaker, to you and to other members of the 

Assembly, is a constituent of mine, Mr. Leo Weaver, who is 

sitting in your gallery.  Mr. Weaver is a bus driver, works for 

the Saskatchewan transportation corporation and is a member 

of the executive of the Amalgamated Transit Union. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to welcome some more guests 

here in the east gallery, members of the Retail Wholesale & 

Department Store Union who are locked out and presently 

engaged in a dispute at Westfair Foods.  Note some new faces 

are here from yesterday and I'd ask all members of the 

Assembly to welcome them. 

 

And thirdly, I understand there's a group of . . . a representative 

of a group of employees of Federated Co-operatives Ltd.  

These are employees who have been thrown out of work, 180 

employees who have lost their jobs, some would say through 

the undemocratic actions of Federated Co-operatives . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I would ask the member to 

please not engage in any political rhetoric when 



June 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2089 

he's introducing guests.  The member has been here long 

enough to know that. 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Members of the 

representatives of these employees are here to watch the 

proceedings of the Assembly today.  So I'd ask all members of 

this Assembly to welcome this group of working people and 

fine folks of Saskatchewan here to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Funding Reductions for Seniors 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question, Mr. 

Speaker, is to the Minister responsible for Seniors.  Madam 

Minister, over the last 19 months we have seen your 

government undertake the single most brutal attack on seniors 

in the history of Saskatchewan. 

 

Madam Minister, you have cancelled the senior's heritage fund.  

You've gutted the Saskatchewan Pension Plan.  Madam 

Minister, you have closed hospitals.  You've cut funding to 

long-term beds.  You are phasing out level 1 and 2 funding, and 

increases on prescription drugs, utility bills, taxes, have made it 

extremely difficult for thousands of seniors on fixed incomes to 

get by month by month. 

 

Yet at the same time, Madam Minister, the same time you are 

slashing the real income of thousands of seniors in this 

province, you have political assistants in ministers' offices 

receiving salary increases up to 46 per cent -- increases, 

Madam Minister, up to $1,400 a month.  Madam Minister, 

there are seniors in this province don't have income of $1,400 a 

month. 

 

Madam Minister, can you stand in this House and tell the 

seniors they must make do with less so that your political 

assistants can enjoy huge salary hikes? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I want to thank the member for the 

question.  And I want to say that in our budget decision 

making, we had to deal with current fiscal reality brought about 

largely by 10 years of Tory waste and mismanagement.  And it 

forced our government to make some very difficult decisions. 

 

The priority of our government, after consulting with many 

individuals, groups, and organizations, was to target our very 

limited resources to those seniors most in need.  And this was 

done by continuing the Saskatchewan income program with the 

higher rates introduced in October of 1992 and by providing 

health coverage for low income seniors for optometric, 

chiropractic, drugs, and other health-related programs and 

services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Madam Minister, you certainly 

changed your tune since the days you used to stand on this side 

of the House and pretend that you cared about seniors.  Madam 

Minister, the concern you had for Saskatchewan seniors ended 

on election night, and you've been attacking them ever since. 

 

Madam Minister, you have hiked drug cost, hearing-aid cost, 

oxygen, insulin, chiropractic care, and optometric care.  You 

have increased sales tax, income tax, power bills, phone bills, 

and natural gas bills. 

 

Madam Minister, these increases may not mean that much to 

those 24 ministerial assistants whose salaries have been hiked 

to over $46,000 a month . . . a year, sorry.  A year.  Now, 

Madam Minister, but to a senior trying to get by on just a few 

hundred dollars a month, those increases amount to a 

substantial portion of their total monthly income. 

 

Madam Minister, again I ask you: why should the people who 

built this province repeatedly be asked to sacrifice when the 

people at the top of their government make no such sacrifices?  

Would you please answer that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- To reiterate, this government was faced 

with a $15 billion debt when we were elected in October of 

1991.  After coming to terms with the fiscal crisis facing this 

province and after consulting with literally hundreds of people, 

groups, and organizations, we made a decision to target our 

very limited financial resources to those seniors most in need.  

That is the decision that we made. 

 

We have ensured that seniors will continue to receive 

Saskatchewan Income Plan; for low income seniors we've 

ensured that they will receive a host of health coverage for low 

income seniors.  That's the commitment of this government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  It seems like 

when you don't have a good answer, you bring out the blame 

thrower again.  Madam Minister, there was a very telling 

paragraph in the Finance minister's budget.  In her address this 

read and I'll quote: 

 

 This Budget requires sacrifice.  But there are some in our 

midst who cannot be asked to sacrifice; they have nothing left 

to give. 

 

Madam Minister, when I heard that, I thought that the minister 

was talking about seniors on fixed incomes, about seniors 

trying to get by on less than a thousand dollars a month.  I had 

no idea, Madam Minister, that you were talking about 

protecting ministerial assistants, while those who do need help 

in our society will be asked to pay more and more and more. 

 

Madam Minister, your government shows compassion to 

ministerial assistants whose average salary increase has been 

fourteen and a half per cent, 



2090 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1993 

on average.  Your government shows compassion to the 

Deputy Premier, who gets $800,000 budget increase to run the 

NDP (New Democratic Party) campaign.  Your government 

shows compassion to its political cronies like Don Ching and 

the Lord of the Flies at SaskPower.  When are you going to be 

showing a little compassion for the seniors of this province, 

Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- As I said earlier, the current fiscal crisis 

facing this province, brought about by nine and half years of 

Tory waste and mismanagement, has caused our government to 

face the music, and the music is that this province is not doing 

very well financially. 

 

After consulting with numerous groups, numerous seniors' 

organizations, individuals, and people across this province, we 

made a decision to target our very limited resources to those 

seniors most in need. 

 

Now had your government not spent $500,000 on High R 

Doors in North Battleford, had your government not spent 

close to $400,000 to paint strips on buses, we might have a 

little bit of money in this province.  But time after time after 

time, you chose to waste the taxpayers' money, and we're now 

coming to terms with that.  And that's called fiscal 

responsibility, accountability, and reliability. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Well, Madam Minister, I don't think I said 

anything about not needing to make some changes.  What I'm 

asking you, Madam Minister, is why on the backs of the 

seniors?  Madam Minister, you want to talk about money 

wasted; we could go back into your term of government in the 

'70s and show you some. 

 

However I want to recap, Madam Minister.  You and your 

government . . . here's the recap.  Seniors' heritage program, 

cancelled; Saskatchewan pension plan, cancelled; prescription 

drug plan, cancelled; level 1 and 2 funding, cancelled; 52 

hospitals, closed; long-term bed funding slashed; oxygen cost, 

insulin cost, hearing-aid cost, chiropractic and optometric cost 

all increased; income tax, sales tax, fuel tax, utility bills, all 

increased.  And the NDP campaigned on a promise to protect 

seniors.  That's the problem, Madam Minister -- what you 

promised and what you're doing. 

 

Madam Minister, I suggest to you the seniors of this province 

don't need assistance from your government. They need to be 

protected from your government.  Madam Minister, when are 

you going to start doing what you were elected to do and start 

helping seniors instead of attacking them on every issue? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I have a list 

that I'd like to read of Tory waste and mismanagement.  Nine 

hundred thousand dollars spent by the Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation on an option to purchase the Regina 

YMCA (Young Men's Christian Association) in 1988, written 

off; 349,000 spent on the Department of Finance's glossy 

budget documents in 1989-90; $322,000 spent by the Crown 

Management Board to pay the salary and severance of Otto 

Cutts, the former president of SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation); $705,816 spent by the Crown 

Management Board to pay the British firm N.M. Rothschild & 

Sons for advice on privatization, gone; $401,518 spent by the 

Crown Management Board to pay Wolfgang Wolff, the 

president of the board of directors of CMB including a 

severance package of $236,000, gone. 

 

Time after time after time, hundreds and hundreds of thousands 

of dollars of wasted taxpayers' money that led to an 

accumulated debt of $15 billion.  And now we have to make 

difficult choices because of this kind of waste and 

mismanagement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Information on Piper Aircraft Project 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the Minister of Economic Development.  Mr. 

Minister, it has come to our attention that a number of media 

outlets have made application under the freedom of information 

Act for the following information: the total amount of 

government money spent on the Piper Aircraft deal, the number 

of consultants hired to work on the Piper Aircraft project, the 

names of those consultants; and the total amount government 

paid these consultants. 

 

This request has been denied, and I quote: the prospects of 

negotiating a Piper deal are still being addressed, is the reason 

given for denying them. 

 

Mr. Minister, you yourself have admitted that the Piper deal is 

dead -- another failure of your government's dismal economic 

development record.  Mr. Minister, since the reason given for 

withholding this information is no longer valid, can we expect 

this information to be forthcoming? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to 

the member opposite that the individual or the company 

negotiating the Piper deal was in fact Mr. Paul Hill, a very 

well-known business person in Regina.  And to take those 

kinds of shots at an individual who worked very, very hard and 

in fact is still looking at the possibilities of Piper . . . .that is 

what he says.  If you get the Regina Leader-Post, in the 

clipping as it relates to Piper he said very clearly that it's on 

hold at this time.  That's what he said. 

 

And at this time the deal, while not moving forward, obviously 

the companies involved in looking at bringing Piper to 

Saskatchewan or purchasing it, are 



June 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2091 

still looking at the deal.  It's not dead.  There's still a very, very, 

I might say a remote chance that they would want to go back 

and negotiate at some point.  And for you to stand here and say 

and discredit the company that was involved in negotiating the 

deal, because quite obviously I personally wasn't involved and 

the department wasn't involved -- we've said this from day one 

-- for you to attack companies for trying to negotiate a good 

deal, is not legitimate. 

 

Now I want to say to you, some of the deals that you did 

negotiate, your members when you were in government, I'll tell 

you that many of those deals, if we were to do them over again, 

we would wish that we would have walked away from a great 

deal of them if we could only have that chance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, no one is 

attacking Mr. Hill.  What is simply being requested of your 

government is the information about your government's actions 

with respect to this deal, the Piper deal.  And once again we see 

the spectacle of your open and accountable government doing 

everything it can to cover its tracks on another one of its 

failures. 

 

Mr. Minister, it seems fairly straightforward, this request for 

information.  Why would you be so concerned about not 

allowing that information to come forward to the public?  Did 

you spend too much to go after the Piper deal?  Is it because 

you don't want the names of the NDP consultants you hired 

exposed?  Is it because you don't want us to know how much 

money you spent for those consultants?  Or is it all of those 

reasons, Mr. Minister? 

 

Mr. Minister, can you tell us: what is the reason, the specific 

reason you will now allow this information to come forward 

when you know and you even admit there's only a minute 

chance of this deal ever coming together? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I would just ask that 

members of the Assembly and the press would observe the 

questions that are being put by the members opposite.  When it 

came to CPR (Canadian Pacific Railway) where there was a 

need for a $15 million tax reduction for the railways, the 

member for Greystone says we didn't pay enough.  Not enough 

money was spent by the government, by the taxpayers to get 

that deal.  The member opposite now from Kindersley says that 

we maybe spent too much trying to get Piper. 

 

And I wonder why they don't sit down and discuss whether or 

not they want economic development or not, and whether or 

not we're spending too much money, as the member from 

Kindersley says, or we're not spending enough, as the member 

from Greystone says. 

 

But clearly I want to indicate to you that there's a great 

deal of economic development being done in the province, as 

indicated by PGS (Plant Genetic Systems (Canada) Inc.) 

announcing in Saskatoon the establishment of an international 

centre for plant genetics in Saskatoon on Saturday.  On 

Monday of this week, the Royal Bank said that they're setting 

up their pay system -- 60 new jobs -- in Regina. 

 

Now obviously not every deal is going to work that the private 

sector goes after.  And Mr. Hill would be the first to admit that 

the Piper deal, although we jointly went after it hard and he did 

the negotiating, simply wasn't on.  And some deals won't go. 

 

But I can tell you when it relates to some of your deals, i.e., the 

Co-op upgrader, many people in this province -- in fact I would 

say the most -- would wish that that deal had never been cut by 

the previous administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, it was the 

media who made the request for information on the Piper deal, 

because they realized that the deal is gone.  Only you seem to 

be holding to the fact that it may still be able to be revived. 

 

And it's interesting to note how the principles of the NDP have 

changed depending on which day you talk to them.  On Friday 

we saw the Premier making a big fuss about how the terms of 

the Co-op upgrader deal were never disclosed, even though he 

knows the fact that his party was kept informed every step of 

the way.  But now when we see the NDP working on a deal, it's 

perfectly all right to keep the information from the public. 

 

Mr. Minister, the people of Saskatchewan are getting really 

tired of watching you do one thing and say another thing.  If 

you really believe in openness and accountability, just release 

the information and let the public decide whether the money 

was well spent or not.  Why are you afraid to do that, Mr. 

Minister?  Why won't you come clean on this issue? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, the member from 

Kindersley is off base again.  We've indicated to the press and 

to anyone who has asked that we will make public the cost of 

studies and analysis as it would relate to Piper and any other 

arrangement or deal that we are working on in Saskatchewan.  

That's not the issue. 

 

The issue here is, is that we are still involved with our private 

sector partner in an arrangement.  And until the day that the 

deal is not there or is there and we can release the documents, 

you will just have to be patient. 

 

But I can make the commitment -- and I have at many 

occasions -- that when the deal comes to fruition or is not on 

go, completed or not completed, we will release to the public 

the total cost of trying to arrange 



2092 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1993 

the deal. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, just a few 

minutes ago we heard how well your government has kept its 

commitment to seniors.  Now we are seeing how well you have 

kept your commitment to an open and accountable government. 

 

You refuse to release any information about the Piper 

negotiations because they're an embarrassment to your 

government, and that's simply the case.  You refuse to release 

the security report on your U.S. (United States) gambling 

partners, GTECH and VLC (Video Lottery Consultants).  You 

refuse to tell the reason that a bingo licence was revoked and 

then reinstated the next day.  You refuse to make CIC (Crown 

Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) accountable to this 

legislature and to the auditor through the books, as 

recommended by the Gass Commission.  You refuse to give us 

a list of court cases your government is involved in.  You 

refuse to give us any information . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Does the member have a 

question?  Does the member have a question?  I want the 

member to put his question. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, it's a very 

simple request.  The media is simply asking for information on 

the Piper deal.  You yourself admit the chances of it are very, 

very remote of it ever being put together again.  Will you 

release the information on that deal for us today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The answer to the member from 

Kindersley, Mr. Speaker, is yes, we will release the documents.  

I have told you this incessantly over the last few months that in 

fact we will release the documents at a time when the private 

sector partners involved in this arrangement conclude that 

either the deal is completed or that it will not go ahead.  We 

will be releasing the documents. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Education and Health Tax Increases 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Premier.  You have received two letters from the Swift 

Current Chamber of Commerce blasting both the performance 

of your government and the performance of the two ministers, 

the Minister of Economic Development and the Associate 

Minister of Finance who met with the chamber on May 13. 

 

Mr. Premier, the chamber says that Medicine Hat is the 

beneficiary of $50 million of retail sales to Saskatchewan 

customers annually.  That's $50 million, Mr. Premier, that your 

high tax policies are draining to this . . . out of the south-west 

part of the province.  That's a lot of economic activity. 

Mr. Premier, why don't you listen to the members of the Swift 

Current chamber and do something about your tax policies . . . 

(inaudible) . . . reverse the situation that is there.  Would you do 

that for us please? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The question 

that the member from Morse is asking was asked of us when 

we were at the chamber meeting in Swift Current a couple of 

weeks ago, and we indicated very clearly the position that the 

government was in.  And the reason we're in this position is 

because of the previous government's huge debt load that was 

left to this province.  That's why we have to levy an extra 1 or 2 

per cent on the E&H (education and health) tax, as we had to, 

since the day we formed government. 

 

The other thing I want to mention, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

member quotes some figures.  When we were in Swift Current, 

the president of the chamber of commerce said that Swift 

Current was losing $10 million to shopping in Medicine Hat.  

When a letter to the editor indicated how erroneous that was, 

how silly it was for somebody to go to Medicine Hat and save 

$27 in taxes and spend $50 in gasoline, then the president of 

the chamber of commerce immediately raised the number to 

$50 million.  And when that number gets challenged next 

week, he'll raise it to a hundred million dollars. 

 

I mean there's absolutely no credibility in what this man says, 

nor is there much credibility in the question that the member 

asks. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, the member from Swift 

Current, who used to be a member of the chamber of commerce 

and also a member of the city council, is refusing to identify 

with those people.  I prefer to identify with them. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, Mr. Premier, those people say that they're 

losing $50 million out of the south-west part of the province.  

Maple Creek, Gull Lake, Cabri, all of those communities are 

losing money on a regular basis.  And that, sir, is causing a 

serious problem to the Minister of Finance. 

 

Would you provide an opportunity for the people of the 

south-west part of the province, including all of the province of 

Saskatchewan, to come together with you to meet to solve 

some of the problems that they understand are there and want 

to meet with you to identify them and to provide solutions to 

you and your cabinet?  Would you do that for them, please? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have met with 

the chamber of commerce from Swift Current every time 

they've asked to meet with me.  I've met with them privately on 

an executive basis.  I've met with them when they've had larger 

groups of 



June 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2093 

numbers there, and the Minister of Economic Development and 

the Premier has met with them.  We have done everything 

within our power to meet with these people. 

 

What is happening over here in this House today is a member 

getting up and quoting numbers that are completely erroneous.  

And those numbers will not be the same next week because as 

soon as this number of $50 million is challenged, they're going 

to raise the number to 100 million.  You make it whatever you 

want.  So until they've got some facts and figures of what it 

really is, I don't think there's any credibility. 

 

Let me point out one more thing, Mr. Speaker.  Cross-border 

shopping into Alberta is not a new phenomena on the west side 

of the province.  If these people think that this just happened 

this March because the E&H was raised 1 per cent, they're 

fooling themselves. 

 

Cross-border shopping has always been there and people have 

always gone over to Alberta to shop.  But not because of the 

tax.  They go there simply because they like to shop in Alberta, 

not because they're saving any money.  Because it can be easily 

proven that they do not save money if you consider the costs of 

going to Alberta and paying the hotels, the meals, and the 

gasoline.  You have to buy $1,000 . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, the president of the Swift 

Current Chamber of Commerce is Mr. Al Kiesman.  He's a 

chartered accountant, Mr. Minister.  He's a chartered 

accountant and he says as per the attached document, it appears 

that Medicine Hat is the beneficiary of annual Saskatchewan 

retail sales in the amount of $49.357 million. 

 

Now do you want to tell the people in Swift Current that Mr. Al 

Kiesman is not telling the truth?  That's what you told us here 

in the Assembly today, Mr. Minister. 

 

And I ask you again, Mr. Premier, why don't you allow the 

people in the business community in the province of 

Saskatchewan to identify with the opportunity to develop a 

policy that will increase the investment in this province, 

increase the amount of retail sales in this province, and provide 

an opportunity for people to work in this province?  Why don't 

you meet with the business community to have that happen?  

Why don't you meet with them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I can assure the 

member opposite and the chamber of commerce in Swift 

Current and the people in Swift Current that when they want to 

call a meeting with any ministers or MLAs (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly) -- and I think I can ask the Premier to 

come as well -- we will meet with them.  We have met with 

them.  It's not a matter of not having met with them. 

These people always say that you don't consult with them.  But 

their definition of consultation is simply this, if you don't do it 

my way, you didn't consult with me.  And that's exactly what 

the member from Morse is saying now. 

 

I will reiterate again, the member from . . . the Minister of 

Economic Development and the Minister of Labour and I were 

in Swift Current for the chamber meeting.  This same Mr. 

Kiesman that you're referring to stood up in the public meeting 

and said, this area is losing $10 million of sales to Medicine 

Hat annually.  When that figure was challenged by a letter to 

the editor, he raised it to $50 million. 

 

Don't give us the line that this man is a chartered accountant 

and suddenly has the corner on the market of all the figures and 

facts in the world.  This man is . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave, for the introduction 

of guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce 

to and through you to the other members of the Assembly, 54 

grade 8 students from Silverwood Heights School in 

Saskatoon, seated in the east gallery.  I will be looking forward 

to meeting the students in room 218 at 3 o'clock for 

refreshments and a photo and to answer any questions they may 

have.  And I would like to ask the Assembly to join me in 

welcoming them to Regina today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Tourism Awareness Week 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise today to make a 

statement on Tourism Awareness Week in Saskatchewan.  As 

part of the Partnership for Renewal economic . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. Order.  There is just way too 

much noise.  I can't hear the minister's statement. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- . . . economic strategy, I recently 

announced the 17-member minister's task force on tourism 

partnership, consisting of industry-government representatives.  

The group will examine ways to enhance Saskatchewan's 

tourism marketing development through potential new funding 

sources, organizational structures, and revenue generators. 

 

In the meantime, however, by entering into the spirit 



2094 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1993 

of Tourism Awareness Week, each of us can help the industry 

in its effort to promote our province's many attractions and to 

encourage individuals to help tourists feel welcome here in the 

province. 

 

Tourism, Mr. Speaker, is part of the fastest growing and high 

value added sector in the province.  It has great potential for 

growth and job creation.  And right now, Mr. Speaker, job 

creation is one of the highest priorities of this government.  The 

tourism industry is service oriented and thus is a key 

component of successful renewal of the economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, travellers spend over $800 million per year in our 

province on tourism; $260 million of that total was spent by 

non-residents, making tourism Saskatchewan's fourth largest 

export. 

 

The tourism industry is very labour-intensive, supporting 

22,000 direct and indirect person-years of employment in 

Saskatchewan.  Tourism represents 3.6 per cent of 

Saskatchewan's GDP (gross domestic product).  And, Mr. 

Speaker, tourism also contributes to Saskatchewan's 

attractiveness as a place to live and do business by providing 

most of the amenities that add to the quality of life here in the 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the theme for this week is: home for your 

holidays.  Under this theme we are all encouraged when 

considering destinations for our vacation, to think about staying 

in the province and seeing some of the many attractions that are 

right here at home. 

 

Mr. Speaker, thanks to the government's policy of working in 

partnership with industry, there is a growing awareness of our 

province as a vacation destination.  Thousands of people in 

businesses and communities all over Saskatchewan have been 

working hard at developing a busy schedule of unique vacation 

experiences. 

 

I urge all members, Mr. Speaker, to help build on this strength 

and create jobs by sending the tourism message to all the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, indeed 

tourism is an important area of our economy in Saskatchewan.  

Mr. Speaker, unfortunately this government, as we've seen in 

question period, seems to be only interested in helping out 

tourism in Alberta.  The taxation policies of this government 

are just some of the reasons why we're seeing tourism slipping 

away from the province of Saskatchewan.  It's unfortunate that 

the government will not look at ways of enhancing tourism in 

this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think there's a number of ways that the government could be 

looking at to enhance tourism, and one of them is by not raising 

the sales tax such as they've been doing in the past few years, 

26 per cent increase in the last two years alone, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But in spite of all of that, the tourism industry in this province, 

Mr. Speaker, is working very, very hard and 

diligent in trying to attract people to come to this province in 

spite of the government's efforts to take that away from them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that it be 

moved to motion for return (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Motion for return (debate). 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that the 

second, third, and fourth orders be moved to motions for return 

(debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Item nos. 2, 3, and 4, motions for return 

(debate). 

 

(1445) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- There's two more here, Mr. Speaker, 

that I would move to motion for return (debatable): no. 5 and 

no. 6. 

 

The Speaker: -- Motion nos. 5 and 6, motion for return 

(debate).  Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I would at this time 

move that the House move to government business, adjourned 

debates, Bill No. 38. 

 

The Speaker: -- Did the member ask for leave?  The member 

must ask for leave.  Does the member have leave? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 38 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 38 -- An Act to 

amend The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I think it 

gives me some pleasure to be able to participate in this debate.  

I will try to be succinct in my remarks.  But my objective, Mr. 

Speaker, at this point is to simply lay out for the members of 

this province, for members of this legislature as well, my 

feelings and my thoughts on Bill 38. 

 

And I guess one of the initial responses I would like to have is 

that I would much prefer, Mr. Speaker, if I could spend my 

time in this legislature discussing issues like the Minister of 

Economic Development just 



June 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2095 

raised, and the response given by my colleague the member 

from Kindersley. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, we are faced with the situation in 

this province, in this legislature, of some legislation which in 

my opinion is unwarranted, Mr. Speaker, and is unnecessary.  

That I will try to explain over the next 10 or 15 minutes as I put 

my thoughts on the record on this issue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And let it suffice to say at the beginning that this is one of the 

most interested Bills that my constituents have found over the 

last number of years.  And I say that simply as a response to the 

response that I'm getting from my constituents in their concern 

over the elements within this Bill. 

 

The thoughts that I'm going to be expressing are to a large 

measure my own. But certainly, Mr. Speaker, I will be 

exercising the duties that I have as a member in bringing forth 

the concerns of my constituents.  And that is what I'm going to 

be doing. 

 

Over the last couple of months I would say, maybe even longer 

than the last couple of months, this opposition has been trying 

to talk some sense into members opposite.  Because the 

message that we are getting, Mr. Speaker, loud and clear from 

across this province, is that indeed there's a great deal of 

apprehension within the citizens' minds in this province.  And 

they are saying essentially, Mr. Speaker, that this legislation is 

unwarranted; it is unnecessary; and most certainly, Mr. 

Speaker, it is not wanted by the vast, vast majority. 

 

And I say that, Mr. Speaker, because my responses, the 

responses that I have received from my constituents, number 

literally a thousand.  And that is way more than on any issue 

that I have received.  And, Mr. Speaker, let me tell you that in 

those 1,000 responses that I have had, I think there is one that 

supported the Bill.  And I say I think because I cannot quite 

figure out the message that was left on that response which was 

unsigned, so unfortunately I cannot go to source and discuss 

with that individual precisely what his or her concerns happen 

to be. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is the magnitude of the response on the 

people in the Rosthern constituency.  And I think, Mr. Speaker, 

that I could ask my colleagues and they could confirm that that 

is precisely the response that they are receiving. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will go a step further and say that if members 

opposite got up and had their speech on the second reading of 

this Bill 38, that they in turn would get up and say yes, there 

has been a tremendous response from my constituents, and to a 

man and a woman, the response is almost identical to the one 

that I am expressing here. 

 

Now I recognize that there will be varying degrees, but, Mr. 

Speaker, far and above any other response I think that they 

would concur with what I have been saying so far. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the problem that we have here with this 

Bill, the essential problem, the focal point, is the Bill itself is 

wrong.  The Bill itself is fundamentally flawed, I say to the 

Minister of Justice, and that is why we really don't know what 

to do with this Bill.  When you have a Bill that is 

fundamentally flawed, how do you fix it up so that it is 

acceptable? 

 

And so I guess what we're going to be doing in the next course 

of the next number of weeks, whatever it takes to bring this Bill 

to its conclusion, is that we're going to try to make a silk purse 

out of that sow's ear.  And, Mr. Minister, I say to you that's 

extremely difficult to do.  I've tried that on a number of 

occasions.  And in my job outside of this legislature, I have not 

found a mechanism wherein that can be done. 

 

So there is a fundamental premise here, Mr. Minister, that is 

not going to allow us to come to a satisfactory conclusion 

unfortunately, I believe.  Mr. Minister, one of your premises is 

based on a high-minded principle and that high-minded 

principle, Mr. Minister, is essentially that discrimination is 

wrong.  Would you not agree, Mr. Minister, that that is the 

essential principle of this Bill, that discrimination is wrong? 

 

And I don't think that there is one individual in this province, 

Mr. Minister, that's going to take umbrage with that.  I think 

you've got 100 per cent agreement that discrimination is wrong, 

and it should not be tolerated within our society. 

 

And I don't think that I, during the rest of my remarks, am 

going to indicate that I support discrimination.  Certainly in 

listening to the speeches and so on, given by my colleagues, 

that has not come about either. 

 

But you see, Mr. Minister -- and I say to the Minister of Justice 

as the leader minister on this -- that the fundamental flaw in 

this Bill is that you are being totally inconsistent, totally 

inconsistent with the Bill and how it is in practice.  And you 

smile.  I'm glad that I got your attention.  So now I'm going to 

expose to you the fundamental flaws within this legislation. 

 

Mr. Minister, you say that you want to discriminate against 

homosexual on several counts.  Did you get the thrust of that 

statement?  First of all, the Bill is based upon the premise, 

discrimination is fundamentally wrong.  Then you go about and 

you say, members of the public, we want to discriminate 

against homosexuals on these bases.  We want to say that we 

will not allow homosexuals to adopt children.  That's what 

you've said.  You're not going to allow that.  Mr. Minister, 

that's discrimination.  That's discrimination.  You say that you 

do not want homosexuals to have spousal benefits.  You've said 

that.  But, Mr. Minister, that's discrimination. 

 

Within the very Bill that you espouse to be preventing 

discrimination, I've already cited two examples of 

discrimination inherent within the very basic principles of that 

Bill. 

 

You say that you wouldn't want any teaching of the 

homosexual lifestyles in school.  In fact I think I've  



2096 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1993 

read some excerpts where you say that would not be desirable, 

and we certainly would not recommend that, and we certainly 

don't want that, that the homosexual lifestyle will become a 

basis for teachings in school.  But, Mr. Minister, that's 

discrimination. 

 

You say that you do not want to recognize same-sex marriages.  

You don't want to recognize same sex-marriages.  We agree 

with you.  But that's discrimination.  That's discrimination. 

 

You say that if a person has two rooms to let, two rooms to 

rent, you cannot discriminate on the basis of sexual orientation.  

But at the same time, you have indicated that if a home wants 

to let one room then you don't have to accept homosexual 

couples.  Well, Mr. Minister, that is discrimination. 

 

Or isn't it discrimination?  In my way of thinking and most 

people that I've talked to, that is a classic example of 

discrimination. 

 

Can you see the web that I'm weaving here, Mr. Minister?  That 

within the old premise of a Bill that is saying discrimination is 

wrong, to which all of us would agree, you are saying, in 

support of the Bill to try to appease the opponents of the Bill, 

you are saying, oh yes, but we will allow discrimination on 

this; we'll allow discrimination on this and this and this.  And 

I've given you five examples of where you are saying, oh yes, 

it's all right to discriminate in that case. 

 

So I guess what I'm having a problem with is recognizing the 

seriousness with which you are advancing the cause of 

non-discrimination.  Because you're being inconsistent -- 

inconsistent in your own remarks as opposed to what the Bill is 

purporting today to do.  So, Mr. Minister, the inconsistency is 

something that I'm having a great deal of trouble with in this 

Bill. 

 

And I know that you have been quite amenable to having some 

amendments made.  At least you have indicated that in the 

media, that if we come up with certain amendments, that 

perhaps you would be allowing them to pass, and that they 

would form part of this new Bill.  And I assume from that that 

you mean that you would put into the Bill these concerns that 

the people are expressing in the ones that I have raised so far. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, if you're proposing to do that, even that 

causes me some concerns because of what I think that will do, 

in my opinion.  And I'm still out . . . the jury is still out in my 

mind, quite frankly, on a personal level whether I would even 

support those kinds of amendments, because I think 

fundamentally what those amendments will do is let you off the 

hook. 

 

Because now you're going to be able to say to the folks, look, 

we took all of those obnoxious sections out of the Bill, or at 

least we added safeguards into the Bill that will accommodate 

the concerns that people may have. 

But, Mr. Minister, by the same token -- and I'll be coming 

forward with some of these issues later on -- we know that if 

you are going to include these, the Human Rights Code, which 

seems to be the overriding law in the province of 

Saskatchewan, is still subject to the federal Bill of Rights and 

the code of rights.  And if there's anything perceived in the 

Saskatchewan human code of rights that is contrary to the 

principles established at the federal level, it's going to be 

overruled anyway.  So nothing has been gained by putting in 

amendments like this. 

 

But like I said, the jury is still out.  I think if it comes . . . that 

push comes to shove, I think I would support amendments.  

Because what it will do is cause this whole issue to be taken to 

the next step, to the next stage, to the federal, and the ultimate, 

Supreme Court.  And I think that is where the decision is 

ultimately going to be decided upon. 

 

And even there, I have an extreme concern.  Why are we going 

to take legislation passed by this Legislative Assembly to the 

Supreme Court for interpretation?  That's a concern that I have 

-- that we're giving extra power into the hands of the courts to 

make decisions, while we can make it very, very plain and 

simple and forthright, as legislators, to say precisely what we 

mean, to reduce the chances of it being misinterpreted by some 

judge or by some court jurisdiction. 

 

Now those are some preliminary comments.  What I want to do 

is lay out my position, the way I feel on some of these issues.  

And I will say at the outset that when it comes to issues like 

that, I take a somewhat simplistic approach.  I have been 

accused at times of being too simplistic and straightforward and 

can't see the trees for the forest. 

 

(1500) 

 

But the approach that I take on this issue is very similar to my 

approach when it came to the abortion issue.  And when it 

comes to the abortion issue, I know that as legislators here we 

are supposed to represent the views of our constituents.  And 

99.9 per cent of the time, I'm sure, that's what we all do on a 

regular basis.  And we are to do that -- that's the fundamental 

democratic exercise being put into motion. 

 

But there are some times within our lives where we have to 

take a personal stand and say that this stand is non-negotiable.  

Here I stand; I can be no other.  And that is the stand that I have 

taken on the abortion issue, where during the election I will go 

out and I will tell people my stand is pro-life.  My stand is 

against publicly funded abortions. 

 

That fraction of 1 per cent where mom's life will be in danger is 

so remote that essentially it does not exist, although it is there.  

And if my constituents would say to me, you go to the 

legislature and vote for publicly funded abortions, I'm afraid I 

would not do that.  I have told them I will not do that, in spite 

of the fact that I'm a democratically elected legislator. 

 

There are times when we must stand up and be 



June 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2097 

counted.  That is one of the things that it comes to when I make 

my mind up on that. 

 

This is essentially and fundamentally the same type of issue, in 

my opinion.  And so therefore my stand is no, I cannot support 

any kind of activity that is going to promote the homosexual 

lifestyle.  And I know you members have gotten up and you've 

been trying to tell the people that this is not a promotion of that.  

That's precisely what it is. 

 

But there's one difference between me here, and let's say, the 

Liberal leader for example, who in the past has said that the 

homosexual lifestyle has got to be protected.  Now all of a 

sudden there's a different tune coming up when a poll has been 

taken, and whoops, maybe that's not a proper thing for me to 

say now because my polls are indicating that the constituents 

say this is wrong. 

 

Well my instincts tell me and my inner belief tell me that it's 

wrong.  And I will be voting against this Bill, Mr. Minister.  I 

may be supporting the amendments; depends on how they wash 

out.  But fundamentally I'm going to be opposing this Bill.  

And by coincidence perhaps, by happenstance, I'm getting a 

99.99 support from my constituents in this matter. 

 

And I think that's something that you should take note of.  It's 

something you should take note of, Mr. Minister, because no 

person, no school, no institution, in my opinion, should be 

forced to accommodate a lifestyle with which they disagree.  

That's a fundamental premise.  If they do not like the hippie 

lifestyle, then they should have the right to exclude it from their 

home, from their school, etc. 

 

If they believe, for example, in chastity as a lifestyle, they 

should be able to then also be allowed to exclude any of those 

that lead a very active and free heterosexual lifestyle even.  

And if they believe that homosexuality is wrong, then they 

should be able to exclude homosexuals from their lifestyle.  

And again, Mr. Minister, I think that that is fundamentally 

wrong, and so therefore I cannot support it. 

 

And secondly, in going through my position here, Mr. Minister, 

I believe that the Human Rights Commission has extended so 

far that it is now actively and systematically denying human 

rights on a regular basis.  And this Bill, Mr. Minister, will 

simply add to the cannon-fodder of the Donna Greschners of 

this world as she wages her own personal war. 

 

And what I'm going to say, Mr. Minister, is a calculated 

statement.  I know what I'm saying when I say that the Human 

Rights Commission in this province of Saskatchewan has 

received over the last while almost a death blow.  The 

credibility of the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission is 

in serious, serious jeopardy -- the credibility -- simply because 

of the appointments that you have chosen to make in the form 

of Donna Greschner who has one aim in life, and simply by the 

appointment of another party faithful in the form of Nadine 

Hunt. 

I think, Mr. Minister, and I will repeat this -- I've said this 

outside the legislature and I will say it inside the legislature 

now -- for me to put the lifestyle and the whole aroma of 

Saskatchewan people and atmosphere within Saskatchewan at 

the doorstep of the Human Rights Commission the way it 

stands right now, is extremely disturbing to me.  And what I'm 

hearing from people out there, it is extremely disturbing to 

them because the lack of respect that you have perpetrated 

upon the Human Rights Commission. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I thirdly want to put forth as my position that I 

believe that this Bill is too open to interpretation -- too open to 

interpretation not just by the Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Commission but also the courts themselves.  And I think -- and 

this is something that you folks are hearing too -- that people 

are fed up with the trend that they have seen in different 

institutions making the laws.  And I made reference to this at 

the outset of my speech. 

 

Mr. Minister, the people of this province expect this legislature 

to pass laws.  They expect this legislature to say this is the way 

it is going to be, in unequivocal terms.  And, Mr. Minister, that 

is not what is happening here.  Because there is no doubt about 

it, no doubt about it by your own admission, that it will be the 

Human Rights Commission that will be determining many of 

the nuances that are evident within the wording of this Bill, and 

that they will be making the interpretation as to what is right 

and to what is wrong.  And I say that is fundamentally wrong 

within this Bill.  That's part of the fundamental flaw that this 

Bill has. 

 

Mr. Minister, on Tuesday, May 4, 1993, in the Saskatoon Star-

Phoenix there are some articles.  And I just want to quote a few 

lines because it kind of summarizes some of my thoughts.  And 

you say, for example, in this article:  "I don't know how we can 

do that" to write the intent into the legislation, which is a 

concern that I have.  That's too loosey-goosey.  It's not direct 

enough to say precisely what this legislature means. 

 

And you say: 

 

 I don't know how we can do that.  How do you write into a 

bill that this is not the thin edge of the wedge, or that we are 

going this far, (that we are going so far) but no farther.  I can 

say on behalf of this government that we will not be going 

any farther, but of course, that is not binding on the next 

government. 

 

So what you're saying . . . which is of course us, yes, I 

recognize that, Mr. Minister.  But what we are saying, that if it 

was us sitting over there we would probably not have that too 

much of a concern. 

 

But you're saying, it's not our intention; trust us.  But the 

people don't trust you, Mr. Minister, in this aspect.  Maybe not 

on a personal level, but certainly they don't trust the motivators 

behind this, the people that are egging you on -- the 

promotionists of this whole Bill. 



2098 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1993 

And eventually, Mr. Minister, it will come to fruition -- the 

concerns that the people of this province have on those four or 

five incidents that I enumerated at the outset of my remarks.  

That is their concern.  And you're not giving them any 

assurance, Mr. Minister, because you say we won't be going 

any further, but of course that is not binding in the future. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I say to you that when these issues, as 

surely they will, come up to the Human Rights Commission 

and ultimately to the Supreme Court of Canada for 

interpretation, those courts are not going to be looking at your 

second-reading speech where you try to give assurances that 

these were not your intentions.  They won't be looking at that. 

 

They'll be looking at the letter of the law and the letter of the 

law is very fuzzy.  Initially what's going to happen is, is that 

your self-appointed and self-styled Saskatchewan Human 

Rights Commission that is going to be interpreting this law.  

That's why there is absolutely no confidence in the people of 

Saskatchewan, or of the people of Saskatchewan, in this 

legislation and your assurances. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, I'm saying to you that if your purported 

intentions in this Bill are to eliminate discrimination on the 

basis of jobs, employment, and . . . What was the other one? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Employment, housing. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- And housing -- pardon me, I had a momentary 

mind lapse there.  If your intention is to eliminate that 

discrimination on housing and unemployment . . . or 

employment, then why not do it the direct route?  Don't do 

something indirectly what you are afraid to do directly. 

 

We don't need this type of thing put into the human rights 

legislation because you can easily go to the other Bills that are 

affecting employment.  Put it in there.  You can easily do that 

in the housing sector.  Put it in there.  Be specific if those are 

the concerns that you have, and we can address that without 

opening up this potential Pandora's box as it is tending to be 

turning out right now. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, there are a lot of concerns along that line.  

Mr. Speaker, I say to the minister further that for a government 

that claims it is changing the electoral law of the land because 

it believes in democracy, I find it reprehensible that this same 

government says that they will totally ignore a democratic vote 

of the people on this issue. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, I want to address a concern that has 

been expressed to me, and that I have, and that is that the 

minister has gone on record as saying, so you come up with a 

hundred thousand petitions opposing this legislation.  Well 

whoop-de-do, I'm not going to pay any attention to it. 

 

That's what you said, Mr. Minister.  You said to the folks out 

there, you can get as many petitions as you want, a hundred 

thousand, and I won't pay any 

attention to you. 

 

And do you know what, Mr. Minister?  I believe you.  I believe 

you because your government already has a track record where 

you don't listen to people. 

 

We had an issue in the last session following the election and 

the plebiscite when there were over 300,000 people -- 

signatures -- saying we do not subscribe to publicly funded 

abortions; please don't do that; change it.  And you said, oh no, 

my calculator shows me that that's only 63 per cent of the 

population; that's not enough to dissuade me; 63 per cent is not 

something that I'm going to be listening to. 

 

Well we have another democratic process in place which states 

that if we can come up . . . what is it, 15 per cent of the 

population?   It's about 95,000 signatures that these folks have 

to get, and then you will be forced -- you should be forced -- to 

have a plebiscite or a referendum on that. 

 

But you have already tried to pre-empt that process by telling 

people, oh don't bother, don't bother coming up with those 

names because even if you do come up with those names I'm 

not going to listen to you anyway because we know better.  It's 

that Big Brother mentality coming out again that you are 

determined that you know what is best for people.  And it 

doesn't matter what the population of Saskatchewan says; you 

are going to do it regardless. 

 

Well all I can say is, to the people out there, all I can say is, to 

the hundreds of thousands of people in Saskatchewan who have 

already registered their concern with us, all I can say to them is, 

don't stop, don't give up hope.  I think they should continue on 

their path.  I think they should continue to register their 

concerns with your government. 

 

It may not dissuade you at this time, but certainly upon 

reflection as you go to bed at night and you look at those stacks 

and stacks of petitions of people who have a legitimate 

concern, maybe it will begin to grow on you and you will have 

second thoughts.  And the power of the people, the voice of the 

people, is powerful.  And ultimately, Mr. Minister, if you're not 

going to listen to the people, you will pay the price.  You will 

pay the price. 

 

(1515) 

 

And when I went out to my constituents and said, there are 

certain things that I'm not willing to compromise and I will not 

do even if my constituents say you should, I have to pay the 

price for that, and I would pay the price politically for that.  But 

if you have your principles, you will stay by them and you will 

be willing to pay that price. 

 

Now if your principles are such that you are not going to listen 

to the people -- and goodness' sake, I don't know what those 

principles could possibly be -- that is a decision that you are 

going to have to make, Mr. Minister. 



June 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2099 

And I'm picking on you all the time, and that's not fair because 

you're part of a conglomerate there and it's a caucus decision 

that you have embarked upon.  And I realize that and I 

recognize that.  So I'm not picking on you personally because 

you're . . . I'd like to say you're a victim of circumstances, but 

perhaps you're a willing victim at the same time by my 

interpretation of that. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, I also . . . I'm wondering about the democratic 

process.  You say you're doing all of these wonderful things for 

the electoral process by changing boundaries unilaterally.  And 

yet you are not going to listen to the votes of the people as they 

register them in this process of trying to come up with a 

plebiscite. 

 

And at the same time we have already . . . my leader, in his 

speech, indicated to you, well if you're going to try to force this 

through the House, then at least let each member of your 

caucus stand up and be counted.  That's what we wanted to 

have you do.  In other words, let's go for a free vote on this. 

 

Now I know you're saying all of your members support this 

wholeheartedly and everybody's gung-ho and there's no 

problem with it.  Well if that's the case and if you're that 

confident, then let them make a decision on their own and 

publicly say:  of my own free choice, with no party discipline 

directing me, I am standing up and I am voting for this 

legislation. 

 

Now I know what part of your response is; that oh, this has got 

nothing to do with morality.  This is not a moral issue -- it's a 

legal issue.  And so therefore, because it's a legal issue, party 

solidarity and party discipline must be maintained.  And I 

think, Mr. Minister, if that is your response, that that also 

shows an inconsistency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in summary, I just want to say this:  I believe 

homosexually . . . homosexuality is to be morally wrong.  I 

think it's degrading.  I think it's dead wrong.  I think it 

transgresses about what God's plan for humanity was; I don't 

think it is in tune with God's plan for man. 

 

But not only does homosexuality transgress that law, the 

ultimate law, it also transgresses the law of nature.  I can see it 

no other way.  And it's fundamentally flawed, fundamentally 

wrong. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, even as we see some of the hideous 

consequences in society of this type of lifestyle that has a 

danger of being propagated through various sections, about the 

educational aspects and so on -- I'm not going to get into all of 

those areas; my colleagues can pick up on that -- but I want to 

say that even though I fundamentally believe that, I 

fundamentally believe it is unchristian, it's immoral to practise 

that lifestyle, I firmly believe . . . in the same breath, I will say 

if people want to follow that lifestyle, they should be free to 

follow that.  And if they want to do that it's not up to me to 

stand in judgement upon them.  That time will come. 

 

And I do not believe that discrimination should be there, but if 

they want to lead that type of lifestyle, let 

them.  I want to lead what I believe in, and I want to be able to 

raise my family in a lifestyle that I believe in and that my 

children will believe in.  And I don't want a conflict between 

the two. 

 

While I should not be able to dictate what goes on in that type 

of bedroom, they should not be able to dictate what goes on in 

my bedroom and my home. And anything that affects that, Mr. 

Minister, I take as a threat, I take as a threat upon my own 

individual freedoms.  And I do not think it's fair to . . . so it's a 

two-way street, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to take my place.  I'm 

going to say that we probably will be coming up with some 

amendments.  And I'm going to take the liberty of my leader to 

say that I will be able to vote as I want to vote on these issues, 

and I will certainly be doing that.  But fundamentally, Mr. 

Speaker, I just reiterate that the plan is fundamentally wrong, 

and I will be voting against this Bill. 

 

Thank you for your time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Draper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It really gives me a 

great deal of pleasure to rise today and speak in support of this 

Bill to amend the Human Rights Code.  It is legislation like this 

that makes the New Democratic Party what it is.  It is 

legislation like this that puts us at the cutting edge of Canada's 

conscience. 

 

It is in effect a reform -- a reform that unlike so many reforms, 

carries no price tag.  When a government tells you that they're 

going to reform taxation, you know that your taxes are going 

up.  But this amendment simply reforms the way that one 

person treats another. 

 

And the member for Rosthern has told us this afternoon that 

this Bill is unpopular and it has had a lot of press, a lot of 

letters against it. And I won't deny that.  I've had a lot of letters 

against it, probably the majority.  But the point with this Bill is 

that it is not that it is popular, but that it is right and it is just 

and it is fair. 

 

And I would point out to the hon. member for Rosthern and his 

colleagues over there, that a few years ago the federal Tories 

brought up in the House of parliament in Ottawa the matter of 

capital punishment, and despite the fact that the vast majority 

of the population of Canada, if they're asked, would say they're 

in favour of capital punishment, parliament voted it down as 

they voted it down before and as they will continue to vote it 

down.  Because parliament does not just reflect the opinions of 

the people in Canada, on certain occasions and on certain 

matters it leads the way.  It shows the way forward and says, 

you may believe this, but it is wrong.  The right way to go is 

this, and we are going this way and we're prepared to accept 

defeat on the next election on the matter of our principles.  And 

we on this side of the House are prepared to do this today. 

 

Some weeks ago I sat here specifically to listen to the 



2100 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1993 

arguments of the opposition in case I've missed something that 

might alter my attitude towards this Bill.  And one I heard, sir, 

was the mealy-mouthed mumblings of the member from 

Morse. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Could you repeat that? 

 

Mr. Draper: -- The mealy-mouthed mumblings of the member 

from Morse. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Draper: -- And that, sir, really convinced me that this 

amendment was just.  Such meandering, sir, I could really 

expect from a neophyte who was new to the Assembly, 

embarrassed at standing up in public and making himself look 

silly and opposing simply for the sake of opposing.  But I really 

expected more from somebody who until not that many months 

ago, had been a member of the government of this province. 

 

Since then, sir, I have listened with a great deal of interest to 

everything that the opposition said.  I've read everything that's 

been reported that they've said in the press.  And it seems 

significant to me that after all that the only amendment by the 

Progressive Conservatives in this House to the Human Rights 

Code in their period of office dealt with the mentally disturbed.  

And I wonder whether that was a matter of self-interest, a kind 

of nepotism. 

 

Sir, there seems to be no problem with the categories of family 

status or being in receipt of public assistance, and yet these 

grounds are equally important if not as inflammatory.  The vast 

majority of those who are on public assistance are embarrassed 

enough that they are unable to obtain and hold down a job 

without being asked what their means of support is. 

 

And I really don't see that such a statement when looking for a 

job would prevent them from getting the employment if they 

have the necessary skills.  But I do understand that it is very 

difficult if you're on welfare, to obtain accommodation. I really 

don't understand why this is; I just know from personal 

experience that it is the case. 

 

Landlords seem to have a funny idea that tenants should pay 

rent but not actually occupy the property.  And there seems to 

be some fundamental difference between the unemployed poor 

and the idle rich which seems to be worthy of debate in its own 

right.  Nobody but nobody should be denied accommodation 

because they are on assistance, and I'm sure the opposition will 

agree with that. 

 

It would have made a very sad end to the story of the good 

Samaritan if when he took the injured man to the inn, the 

innkeeper refused to look after the injured man because he 

wasn't paying for his own accommodation.  Think about it. 

 

The . . . (inaudible) . . . family status, sir, is a sign of the times 

really.  It used to be marital status in the days . . . and I 

remember it: single, married, or widowed, then gradually and 

grudgingly and embarrassedly, 

divorced and separated crept into the lexicon.  And now the 

situation is so confused that no single term seems to be 

adequate to cover all the possible permutations, so family status 

will have to do until we have a new norm. 

 

At one time not so long ago, the term common-law marriage or 

open marriage, were terms that drove the temperature past 

boiling point.  Now no one turns a hair even at our Roman 

Catholic hospital of St. Joseph's in Gravelbourg.  People are 

employed on the staff there that 20 years ago would have been 

considered as mortal sinners and shunned, let alone employed.  

But times have changed, as times must.  The pendulum swings 

from one extreme to the other and frankly, I think the same will 

happen with regard to the so-called sexual orientation. 

 

Today's avant-garde is always tomorrow's pass.  The daring of 

one generation is dismissed as old-fashioned by their children 

and grandchildren.  This Bill will pass and be forgotten in the 

light of tomorrow's course and ebb. 

 

Nevertheless, I really see no logic to the opposition's stance.  If 

simply making it illegal to ask a person's sexual orientation is 

promoting homosexuality, then pari passu we must be 

promoting everybody to marry or become a single parent by 

making it illegal to ask an applicant's family status.  Imagine it, 

Mr. Speaker.  Every 13-year-old girl is going to become a 

mother simply because of this act of legislation, and every 

15-year-old boy is going to be seduced in order to comply with 

that.  It's strange, but by the same token every working person 

is going to give up a perfectly good job and go on welfare 

simply because the NDP outlaws asking the would-be tenant if 

they're on welfare. 

 

Sir, the possibilities of this kind of thinking are enormous if 

you look at it a little bit closer.  If we reversed this Bill and 

made it illegal to ask a person if they were actually in 

employment or to ask a person if they were celibate, everybody 

would go out and get a job and everybody would stop having 

children. 

 

It just goes to show how being in opposition has stimulated the 

higher brain of the PCs (Progressive Conservatives) in just 18 

short months.  At the end of 50 years in opposition it's 

incredible to think of where they should go to.  You know, they 

are the nabobs of non sequiturs.  Pierre Elliott Trudeau 15 

years ago made the statement that the state has no place in the 

nation's bedrooms, and that should be sufficient to quash the 

opposition of the Liberals in this House. 

 

(1530) 

 

So in the armed forces we now have no longer a ban on 

homosexuals, and they can now serve their country at sea, on 

the land, or in the air.  Six provinces with Liberal and 

Conservative governments now prevent discrimination on 

grounds of sexual orientation.  We are simply bringing our 

legislation into line with them, so why is there such a howl 

from the opposition benches? 



June 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2101 

The other jurisdictions will follow in short order and I'm sure 

that the legislators in the provinces that have already enacted 

this legislation were bombarded with the same hate literature 

that we are getting now.  They passed their Bills and the sky 

has not fallen on their heads except for the usual swing from 

Tory to Liberal in mainly elections.  We too will survive, and 

in 10 year's time nobody will give it another thought. 

 

It's a very interesting Bill, sir, in that . . . an unusual debate in 

the three matters here, three categories of discrimination, but 

really the only one that's been seriously debated is this of 

sexual orientation.  We're getting the words homosexual, 

lesbian, gay, bandied about, yet none of these words appeared 

in the original code of human rights and they don't appear in 

the amendment.  Obviously this is a very emotional subject but 

we're getting off the track by a country mile. 

 

This Bill in fact protects heterosexuals as much as it does 

anybody else.  And I will give you a hypothetical example that 

will demonstrate that. 

 

There's a singer in the neighbouring province who uses nothing 

but lower case letters in her name and has declared that she is 

an open lesbian.  And she has a large entourage of musicians 

and managers, recording technicians, publicists, etc.  How 

would it sit with this House, sir, and with the general public . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I beg leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And I thank the 

member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg for allowing me the 

opportunity to make an introduction to the House today to you, 

sir, and to other members of the Assembly. 

 

Today I have the honour of introducing 23 grade 4's from 

Lindale School in Moose Jaw.  Mr. Speaker, Lindale is the 

school that Thunder Creek school unit has within the 

boundaries of the city of Moose Jaw.  They're all rural children 

from the constituency of Thunder Creek.  Today they have with 

them their teacher Sonja Susut, and bus driver Jerry Hoff. 

 

This class, Mr. Speaker, is special to me in a couple of ways.  

Lindale is the school which I attended from grade 6 onward 

through my public school days.  But today I have the honour of 

having my eldest son here today with his class.  And he's 

turning a bright shade of red right now, but it's always a 

pleasure when we have members of our family attend the 

House and be able to introduce them here.  So I'm very pleased 

and proud that Sonja's chosen today to bring her class to the 

legislature. 

I would ask all members of the legislature to help me welcome 

the grade 4 class from Lindale. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 38 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Draper: -- Mr. Speaker, sir, I'll repeat my question.  If this 

lady . . . how would it sit with this House and the general 

public if when this lady needs extra staff, she were to ask an 

applicant for the job what their sexual orientation was?  And if 

they declared themselves to be heterosexual, and she refused 

them employment on those grounds, I suspect that if such a 

case happened, the member for Morse and the member for 

Rosthern would be so hot under the collar they'd demand a Bill 

like this to protect that applicant. 

 

In fact, sir, this situation is probably more prevalent than we 

would think of.  Many homosexuals are forced from their jobs 

because of discrimination.  Because of that, they go into 

business for themselves and instead of being employees they 

now become employers.  A lot of them go into industries like 

music and the arts, the cinema, and literature, where there is 

tolerance of such abnormalities, and they become employers of 

labour of a much higher proportion than their numbers would 

apparently warrant. 

 

And a previous example of this sort of discrimination which led 

to problems like this was with the Jews in Europe who were 

refused admission to the professions like law, medicine, and 

teaching, and therefore went into jobs like goldsmithing, 

jewellery, furriers, banking, and financiers, and became, 

although an oppressed minority, a very important and a very 

rich and a very influential group. 

 

And I suspect that a lot of this sort of thing is happening under 

our eyes today, but we don't know it because these people are 

not labelled with a denomination and they don't all wear 

ringlets and Homburg hats. But it's there just the same. 

 

I'd like to mention some names of who may be familiar to you, 

names like Somerset Maugham, who was not only a doctor but 

was a very famous and successful novelist; Ivor Novello, a 

composer of light opera; Jean Cocteau, French film director, 

cartoonist, man of letters; and his protg, the actor, Jean 

Marais, who appeared in many of Jean Cocteau's films because 

of their mutual inclinations; Rock Hudson, the American film 

star, who died of AIDS (acquired immune deficiency 

syndrome) some years ago and made an open declaration of his 

homosexuality; and presumably Rudolf Nureyev, who I 

understand died of AIDS last year, although it's not completely 

clear. 

 

All these men were queer, as the saying goes, and 



2102 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1993 

without them we'd lose the music of Gisele and Swan Lake, 

because Piotr Tchaikovsky was another member of this tortured 

group.  Who amongst us would not have been proud to have 

any of these people as friends and neighbours or members of 

our family? 

 

And I'd like to bring perhaps a little bit of levity into it by 

asking which of the members of the opposition would have had 

the temerity to try and wrest the Crown or prevent from going 

into his castle, or any castle for that matter, Richard Coeur de 

Lion -- Richard I, Richard the Lionheart, King of England from 

1198 to 1212; crusader, man of God, a leader of armies, a 

leader of his country, and a preferer of young men rather than 

young women.  Stand up to him, see what homosexuality could 

be like under those circumstances. 

 

Sir, the impression that most of us have here of women's 

liberation movement is a bra-burning harridan, because that is 

what is shown on the television.  Similarly we are shown shots 

of militant gays and lesbians marching down Pennsylvania 

Avenue proclaiming that they are about to take over the world.  

There are such women's libbers, and no doubt there are such 

homosexuals. But they are in a very small minority, a minority 

in fact within a minority. 

 

The majority of gays -- and believe me, sir, that is a very 

unhappy and inappropriate term -- are quiet, unassuming 

people. Teachers, carpenters, and insurance clerks, to my own 

personal knowledge, who do their jobs as anybody else and 

simply wish to be left alone to pursue their careers to the best 

of their ability and snatch whatever happiness they can from 

their abnormal lifestyle. 

 

And abnormal it is, and abnormal most of them recognize that 

it is being.  The hopeless desire to be able to pursue a fulfilling 

family life like their neighbours, and yet for some abnormality 

of genes or upbringing -- possibly a combination of both; we 

really just don't know yet -- they are unable to do so. 

 

Sir, the law of averages would indicate that from one to six, 

depending on whose figures you take -- from one to six of the 

members of this Assembly are likely to have an abnormality of 

sexuality.  But in this Chamber, sir, we do not ask. 

 

And that, sir, is the point of the amendment to the Human 

Rights Code.  We do not ask what a person's sexual orientation 

is, in the same as we don't ask what their religion is.  If during a 

period of association with somebody we discover what their 

religion is, we don't bother.  We don't dismiss them.  We don't 

say they're not going to be friends of ours any more.  We're not 

going to mix with them in social functions.  We're not going to 

resign from the Lions Club or the Kinsmen because so-and-so 

is a Catholic or a Jew.  I'm not quite sure the vast majority of us 

wouldn't do that if we discovered that one of our close 

colleagues had a different sexual orientation to ourselves. 

And we are simply making it illegal for anybody to ask what an 

applicant's sexual orientation is before we offer them a job, an 

apartment, or a promotion.  And should an employer or a 

landlord discover that that sexual orientation is not acceptable 

to them sometime down the line, they simply have to ignore it.  

And in most cases, they would just shrug their shoulders and 

say, well I'll be damned, and forget about it entirely. 

 

This does not confer any special rights on anyone nor does it 

promote sexual deviance.  It simply acknowledges that sexual 

differences exist, have existed since the beginning of time, and 

will continue to exist until such time as we have some suitable 

means of treatment for these unfortunates. 

 

We have the ludicrous situation that where a homosexual could 

become a colonel in the armed forces, courtesy of the federal 

Tories, and in charge of perhaps a thousand men, but the 

provincial Tories would deny them any job; by grace of the 

federal Tories, again, could command a battleship or a tank 

battalion, but the Grand Devinians of Wacko, Saskatchewan, 

would not allow them the key of an apartment.  This, sir, is 

patently absurd. 

 

They brought up the matter of spousal rights.  And I'm sorry, 

this is another non-starter.  Spousal rights for the same-sex 

couple will not be enacted, have not been enacted, because they 

will not be necessary.  Spousal benefits became a bargaining 

point where, because of pregnancy and child-rearing, a wife 

and children became and are and always will be vulnerable. 

 

With same-sex couples, how many of them are likely to get 

children, for pity's sake?  Which means that both of them can 

work and earn their own benefits in their own right.  If one is 

severely crippled or mentally retarded or ill, they will get full 

protection under other legislation, under social services, under 

medicare, whatever. 

 

So this really is not a point.  It is a hare that's been started by 

the opposition and which their colleagues in the other provinces 

in the Tory parties have denied. 

 

Marriage has always been between male and female, and it's 

not going to change.  Marriage was instituted again for the 

protection of women and children, in particular the children.  

Same-sex couples are not going to produce children, so they're 

not going to need this sort of protection.  The Bill does not 

allow for either same-sex marriages nor spousal benefits, and it 

cannot be construed as such. 

 

As for the matter of adoptions, this does not come under the 

legislature.  This is a matter for the courts.  It's always been a 

matter for the courts.  It will continue to be a matter for the 

courts.  The courts have denied same-sex couples from 

adopting children.  I see no reason why they should not 

continue along that line. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Speaker, sir, no matter how many lessons you give a 

chicken, no matter how good the teacher, no matter 



June 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2103 

how bright the chicken, that chicken will never become an 

eagle.  And by the reverse procedure it is also true that an 

eagle, however unsuccessful an eagle that eagle may be, will 

never ever become a chicken. 

 

But one of the problems here is that we're having the Bible 

quoted at us right, left, and centre.  I'm surprised that some of 

the opposition haven't looked up a bit of Arabic and quoted the 

Koran or maybe a bit of Chinese and quoted somebody else.  

But Canada just cannot be compared with ancient Israel.  We 

are not a theocrasy.  We are a democracy.  And our government 

deals with crimes, not with sin.  If this were not the case, we'd 

still be stoning unmarried mothers and women taken in sin. 

 

And it wasn't so long ago that expectant mothers were expelled 

from high school.  Yet at the same time the expectant father 

involved was not expelled from high school.  This was 

considered unfair, and it no longer occurs.  And I'm sure the 

opposition would not want us to return to that, and I'm quite 

sure that if in some time in the future they are returned to 

office, they will not rescind this amendment to the Human 

Rights Code. 

 

And if the fundamentalist churches really wish to address a 

fundamental issue, I'll give them one to take up.  Let them start 

and carry out a campaign against pornography, particularly 

pornography with regards to children.  This is something that 

really needs a crusade. 

 

Some sage told us that people lead lives of quiet desperation.  

And if this is true of we who have normal sex lives, families, 

and children, how much more true of those who do not.  This 

government prides itself on its compassion.  And this Bill 

epitomizes that compassion to the nth degree. 

 

Mr. Speaker, sir, I'm really very proud that our government has 

had the courage to introduce these amendments.  And I am very 

pleased to lend my support.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 

pleased as well to stand in my place and speak to Bill No. 38.  

And as my colleagues before me have spoken and reiterated a 

number of points that they've been bringing forward, that have 

been brought to our attention by concerned citizens across the 

province of Saskatchewan, I want to take a moment to just raise 

a few of the concerns before I adjourn debate on the motion 

before us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think one of the most important factors that we 

must observe and take note of . . . and I think to a month and a 

half ago now when the Minister of Justice gave a 

second-reading speech on the Bill before this Assembly, and a 

number of comments since then.  And I think the emphasis at 

that time by the Minister of Justice was re-emphasizing the 

points of the reasoning for the Bill and the fact that he wanted 

to reaffirm in the public's minds at least or to . . . maybe 

his back-benchers, a number of the back-bench MLAs who 

have a number of problems and a number of concerns and have 

raised these concerns. 

 

The minister brought out a number of points and kind of 

indicated that he had gave a very solid, very stirring and sound, 

second-reading speech to reaffirm what the Bill was really 

doing.  And it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, as I listened to the 

minister and as we've been in this discussion since then, it 

would appear to me that if this Bill really didn't have a lot of 

problems associated with it, that if the Bill was really as clear 

as the minister indicates, that the type of speech that was 

presented by the minister wouldn't have been necessary 

because there'd have been everything in the Bill that would 

reaffirm what we have been saying all along. 

 

And I think what we've seen, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that there 

are a number of areas that this Bill still leaves wide open for 

interpretation, and certainly I'm pleased that the minister has 

taken the time to even sit down with some of us and listen to 

our viewpoint.  We would rather though have had the minister 

pull Bill No. 38 and sit down and address the issues of housing 

and employment directly through another piece of legislation, 

as we've seen a number of jurisdictions in . . . certainly in 

America. 

 

A number of states in United States of America have addressed 

the housing and employment problems that the homosexual 

community claim that they are facing, being discriminated on. 

And it appears to me, Mr. Speaker, that certainly that would 

have been an avenue that was open to the government as well, 

rather than opening up the debate on the human rights issue by 

adding the terms, sexual orientation, family status, without 

really taking the time to define what that means. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's the major area of concern, the fact that there 

is no real definition defining those terms and what they mean.  

That's why we say, and that's why we argue, Mr. Speaker, that 

what we find taking place . . . and down the road, it may not be 

here tomorrow, may not be today, may not be tomorrow, but 

down the road certainly the Human Rights Code and the human 

rights Bill over the past number of years have been used by 

individuals to get more and greater demands and greater access 

to, if you will, public funds and to put their demands at the feet 

of the public in general. 

 

And I feel very strongly, Mr. Speaker, that by opening the 

debate on the Human Rights Code and by changing the 

terminology, it will open the door to greater demands, and 

certainly by the homosexual community for some of the areas 

that they feel deprived of as yet that the public in general feel 

very strongly about.  Mr. Speaker, these are a few of the points, 

and a number of points I would like to raise at a later date and I 

believe that it would be appropriate at this time to allow for 

other House business to proceed.  Therefore I move to adjourn 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 



2104 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1993 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 87 -- An Act to amend The Mental Health Services 

Act 

 

Clauses 1 to 24 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, before moving, I would 

like to extend a thanks to the officials from the Department of 

Health who joined us here last Thursday, I believe it was, and 

who were here for the day and provided much valuable 

assistance to the committee at that time.  So in their absence 

today, I would like to thank them. 

 

And now I would like to move the Bill without amendment. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 87 -- An Act to amend The Mental Health Services 

Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move this Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

(1600) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Loans, Advances and Investments 

Saskatchewan Gaming Commission 

Vote 142 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask at this time that the minister please 

introduce his officials to the committee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you very much, Mr. 

Chairman.  I'd like to introduce two officials that are with me 

today.  I have Gord Nystuen to my left, who is the acting chief 

executive officer of the Saskatchewan Gaming Commission; 

and to my right I have Gwen Frankowski, who is the director of 

administration and human resources. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

would you provide to the committee those individuals who are 

working on your behalf in the minister's office, handling the 

Gaming Commission.  And would provide for me also the 

information as to how the individuals are paid, what they're 

paid, and details of their salary, and where they're located too.  

Would you provide that for me, please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, all of my staff are 

paid through Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation.  

The Gaming Commission pays for none of my personal staff. 

Mr. Martens: -- Did you provide that information to the 

member for Arm River when you were detailing that 

information? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Yes.  Mr. Speaker, under estimates 

for Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, that 

information had previously been provided. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- When the minister travels on the . . . with the 

responsibility of the Gaming Commission and individuals who 

travel with him, does he charge any of that to the Gaming 

Commission? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, I can say to the 

member from Morse that in terms of my staff, there have . . . 

under this budget item there have been no charges for travel at 

this point.  We have some travel costs that have been incurred 

by the Gaming Commission and Gaming Commission staff by 

the former minister in charge, and we can pass that on to him, if 

you would like. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Yes, I wouldn't mind having that.  Also would 

you be able to tell me which minister it was. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- It was the member from Churchill 

Downs.  We will pass that, if you'd like.  It's short items.  I can 

read them into the record for the member opposite. 

 

Sheila Denysiuk has incurred costs of $1,386; Dave Innes, 

$1,010; Robert Jeanneau, $8,847; Gerry Meier, $191; and the 

member from Churchill Downs, $40.  Just in addition to that, 

that was the amount that had been paid to these people in terms 

of reimbursement for travel.  The amounts are similar other 

than Dave Innes travelled in the amount of $3,827; Robert 

Jeanneau in the amount of $11,670; Gerry Meier in the amount 

of $1,602; and the member from Churchill Downs, $998. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Would you be able to pass that information 

over?  I was busy writing it down.  I didn't keep up with it. 

 

The travel, I believe you stated for some individuals was 

$11,000, $3,800.  Would you provide the details of where the 

individuals went and to the various places they went?  Would 

you be able to provide those details as well? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- To the member from Morse, I'll 

pass this over if a page would like to take this.  We can supply 

for you a breakdown of the travel.  The former chairman of the 

board, Robert Jeanneau, I think that was the amount, $11,670 

that you were curious about.  Part of that was reimbursement 

for commuting between Saskatoon and Regina, but we'll pass 

you a detail of those expenses across. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Was any of that incurred in air flights to any 

destinations?  Dave Innes as well, and Gerry Meier.  I'd like to 

have those details.  Also Sheila Denysiuk. 



June 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2105 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- We'll send across a detailed list of 

his travel, in terms of his flights and how much was for 

reimbursement as a member of the . . . or as chairman of the 

commission.  We'll have that sent across to you. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Actually, Mr. Minister, Mr. Jeanneau actually 

spent a significant amount of money.  And I would like the 

details if you could provide for the . . . what the committee 

within directly . . . Looks like there's in the neighbourhood of 

$20,000 in travel that he spent, one as the chief executive 

officer, and I suppose the other one would be too, of the 

Gaming Commission.  Have you got the information there?  

And would you be able to provide it to us today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, to put that 

information together, I'd like to remind the member opposite he 

may, and I'm sure he's aware having been a member of 

Executive Council and in charge of arms of government, he 

will well understand that the Gaming Commission appears 

before Public Accounts, and that's basically where detailed 

information is supplied. 

 

We're certainly more than willing to provide information.  But 

I'd just like to remind him that the items that we're discussing 

are from the blue book dealing with the money that was 

allocated for the purchase of the video lottery terminals. 

 

But as I say, we certainly want to be helpful, and we want to 

pass on as much information.  We don't perhaps have the 

amount of detail that you may want here today, but I'm sure as 

he is well aware the opportunity to do detailed analysis of the 

gaming corporation's expenditures will be afforded under 

Public Accounts. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, that's all fine and good.  

But that's a year after the fact when it's audited and then a year 

after the fact that it's assessed by Public Accounts and Crown 

Corporations. 

 

And so if I'd have the indulgence of the minister to provide 

them to me, it would be an asset for us to be of assistance to the 

taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan in detailing some of 

the things that I think are important for the taxpayers. 

 

The volume of dollars to travel anywhere is in the 

neighbourhood of $1,000 if you want to do business in eastern 

Canada or in the States.  And so if I would take this as an 

overview, Mr. Jeanneau probably went quite a number of 

places.  You indicated that it was for his travel allowance 

coming down here but it definitely would be far in excess of 

that. 

 

Dave Innes spent almost $5,000 in travel.  Others spent . . . 

And there's a big pile of money there, Mr. Minister, and we'd 

like to know the dates that these travel expenses occurred and 

the destinations of those individuals and where they went. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I want to indicate to the 

member as well, I clearly understand the cost of some of the 

trips that members of Crown corporations and line departments 

of government are asked to embark upon, and we are more than 

willing to supply a breakdown of exactly where these dollars 

were spent.  And I think the member as well understands, as 

I've indicated before, that what we're debating here today is on 

revenue. 

 

We're looking at the blue book; we're looking at the revenue, 

and we're looking at the projected expenditures of the Gaming 

Commission.  And maybe what I would do is refer him to page 

12 of the blue book under statement of revenue and other 

enterprises and funds which is where the . . . which is what 

we're looking at today. 

 

I could also indicate to him that we have in the blue book an 

item under loans to the Crown corporation, to the Gaming 

Commission in the amount of $23 million that will be indicated 

in the blue book.  And as well, on statement of debt, on page 

154 there's 20 . . . projected estimate for '94, $20.287 million. 

 

As I've indicated, we certainly want to be forthcoming and 

supply as much information as we can to the member opposite.  

We're more than willing to give you a breakdown of all of the 

travel incurred by officials and, you know, a detailed 

accounting of where in fact this travel has been. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Can you give me details of . . . the Gaming 

Commission is going to be blended or put together with the 

Liquor Board.  Would you give me an overview of how that 

amalgamation will take place. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well to the member from Morse, 

we are in the process right now of putting together the 

organization and how the organizational structure will look.  

We're certainly hopeful that we can have a model of that.  My 

officials indicate that they will be bringing that organizational 

overview to me within the next couple or three weeks.  And it'll 

be reviewed as to just how it will function. 

 

As the member will also be aware, the legislation with respect 

to the amalgamation has been before the House and we 

certainly hope under the guidelines of that, that we can put 

together a very efficient-running operation.  We think that there 

are some fairly significant cost savings that can be achieved 

with the amalgamation. 

 

We're trying to void ourselves of duplication of services, 

investigative authorities.  We want to look at the public health 

inspectors in terms of what role that the gaming inspectors, the 

liquor inspectors, and the health inspectors may be able to 

achieve by savings by amalgamating those roles.  And we 

certainly hope that the model that we will put forth will 

function well and that we'll have a very smooth-running, lean 

corporation when we've had the operation completed. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- What will the cost of the amalgamation be?  

You mentioned something about 



2106 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1993 

savings.  What are the costs of the amalgamation going to be?  

And would you be able to tell me where the office will be 

located -- in Regina or Saskatoon or wherever? 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- We're in the process right now of 

looking at office space.  And we would like to put the two 

operations, the Liquor Commission and the Gaming 

Commission . . . Those two operations as they exist now, we 

want to amalgamate them because we think it'll function a lot 

better having one set, you know, one place for the 

administration and management to work out of, but we haven't 

made a finalized decision on that yet.  As I've indicated, we are 

looking at different options with the net effect, we hope, will be 

a reduction in cost of property. 

 

In terms of costs of the consolidation, there's certainly no doubt 

that there will be costs associated with putting these two bodies 

together.  But I think we can . . . as an example, there may be in 

terms of management there may be some severance.  If there's a 

duplication in services that two employees provide, what we're 

going to attempt to do is to move those around; we have some 

vacancies over there now.  But we do assume there'll be some 

severance costs.  But the net saving we're hoping for is in the 

neighbourhood of 200 to $250,000 on an annual basis. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Is that for each of the Liquor Board and the 

Gaming Commission, or is that the combination of both of 

them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- No, that's the total cost. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- How are you going to handle the 

commissioners?  Are you going to streamline that too -- move 

some out and move some in?  Or how are you planning on 

doing that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- The actual size really hasn't been 

determined yet, because we're going to want to do this in 

consultation with some of the people who are involved in terms 

of what type of representation we actually put on there.  But I 

think it's fair to say that by having one commission as opposed 

to a Liquor and a Gaming Commission, that we can have some 

cost effectiveness in that area. 

 

But I think it's going to be a fairly diverse board, we feel, in 

that it will be a board that will be looking at the operations of 

the bingo halls, the video lottery program, the VLT program 

that we're looking at introducing this summer, at the operations 

of casinos; as well the hotels, the restaurants, and the different 

outlets that are involved in the sale of alcohol. 

 

So we want to be very careful when we're putting together the 

board, to make sure that the people who are represented in the 

industry have people on the board who understand their 

industry and who can understand their concerns on an ongoing 

basis. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I want to change direction here a little 

bit and ask you some questions about the VLTs (video lottery 

terminal).  On March 19, the individuals who wrote this up -- I 

believe you were the minister at the time responsible for this, 

for the Gaming Commission -- indicated that you had reached 

an agreement with GTECH of West Greenwich, Rhode Island. 

 

And it says here: 

 

 . . . will supply the central computer system as well as 1,000 

machines.  The company has also been given an option to 

provide 500 more machines within a year. 

 

And then the next paragraph you go on to say that: 

 

 Video Lottery Consultants of Bozeman, Montana, will supply 

the commission with 1,000 machines.  They also have the 

option of providing an additional 500 machines within a year. 

 

Would you tell me and the committee whether in fact that is a 

fact, or that was a fact at the time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I think what the 

member is referring to was a press release that was put out by 

the Gaming Commission with respect to the companies who 

were short-listed and then ultimately chosen to begin 

negotiations with to set price, to look at whether or not we 

could involve some Saskatchewan economic development. 

 

And the member opposite -- we've been through this in this 

legislature on a number of occasions -- will be aware that those 

are the two companies that were chosen to deal with, and the 

amounts that were quoted there are the amounts that the 

Gaming Commission was looking at with respect to purchases 

of these machines. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Did the Gaming Commission, through the 

minister earlier on -- perhaps not yourself -- did they initiate a 

study to investigate the credibility of the two companies that 

you're doing business with here?  Was there an investigation 

done, and would you provide that information to the 

committee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- As the member for Morse is well 

aware, there was an investigation done by an interdepartmental 

body of government.  Property Management Corporation was 

involved.  The Department of Economic Development, the 

Saskatchewan Gaming Commission, and I believe the 

Department of Finance was also involved.  And these 

companies were . . . there was an analysis done under Mr. 

Egan, who as you will know is a former commissioner or a 

former chief executive officer of the RCMP (Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police) in this province.  And he was as well in 

charge of the investigation. 

 

The economic base, I guess the soundness of these companies, 

were checked in some great detail.  The technology that they 

were offering and the kind of technology that they had on the 

market was analysed 



June 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2107 

in depth, and as well there was a security check done in 

consultation with other jurisdictions.  There were a number of 

American states who had been involved in dealings with some 

of the companies that were checked.  There were a number of 

provinces in our country who had done business with them.  

And a security check was done, and I believe a very in-depth 

analysis of the base of these companies was done. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, did you initiate that review? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- No, that review was initiated prior 

to my arrival as the minister in charge of the Gaming 

Commission. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Would you tell the committee which minister 

it was? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- No, that was initiated by the 

member from Saskatoon Westmount. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- That would be the Minister of Finance? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- That's correct. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Would you give me the day that she initiated 

that review? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- We don't have that information here 

but we can pass it across to you.  We don't have the exact date 

that the review was started. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it would seem to me that 

the issue has been raised often enough that you would 

familiarize yourself with the details of it, and I would like to 

have that information before we continue later this evening. 

 

I have a paper that you gave us in the Assembly here that says 

that the security review was completed with the assistance of 

two members from the security branch of SPMC, and you have 

that letter as well: 

 

 In addition to regular sources available for background 

investigations, information was requested through Canadian 

Law Enforcement Agencies and Security Personnel of other 

Gaming Control Agencies in the following jurisdictions . . . 

 

I want to ask you whether you did, whether that report had any 

information as it related to information provided from the 

Federal Bureau of Investigation in the United States. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Just to go back with respect to the 

date that this study was initiated, the request for proposals 

began on August 26, it was set.  It was put out in August 26 of 

'92.  So the investigation would have been between that time 

and as soon as the proposals came in and the date that the short 

list was done, which was in February of 1993. 

 

With respect to the jurisdictions and the enforcement 

agencies that were consulted in terms of the choice of the ones 

that were short-listed, there were a number of law enforcement 

agencies, not only in Canada, but in the United States, who 

were consulted in terms of the review and the work that was 

done by the investigative branch. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Did any of them include the FBI (Federal 

Bureau of Investigation) in the United States? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I have no reason to believe that the 

FBI would not have been consulted.  I would suggest as the 

major law enforcement agency in the United States and the fact 

that a number of gaming commissions throughout the United 

States were involved in the security check, that it's safe to say 

that the Federal Bureau of Investigation had been requested of 

information. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Have you read the report? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Yes.  I think I'd like to, if I could, 

just explain sort of the process.  The Federal Bureau of 

Investigation, as I am led to believe, will only deal with other 

law enforcement agencies, which would mean that the contacts 

that our investigative branch had within the RCMP would be 

through them gathering information that was supplied to that 

law enforcement agency by the RCMP . . . or by the FBI. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Did you read the report? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- No.  As I've indicated to the 

member on a number of occasions, I have not read the report.  

As you will know, it's the property and was commissioned by 

the commission, by the Gaming Commission, which is a 

quasi-judicial board. 

 

I have, after being briefed by officials from the Gaming 

Commission, was secure in the knowledge that they had done 

their job and had done a thorough investigation.  And I had a 

chance to look at the criteria that the selection process used to 

base their final decision and was comfortable at the time that 

they had done a proper diligence on this particular matter and 

had no reason to read the report. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I think that it would have 

been due diligence on your part, as a minister responsible for 

the Gaming Commission, to have reviewed that report.  

Because you're going to spend $20 million and you're asking us 

to approve $20 million to be spent.  And I would say that it 

would be in the best interests of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan that you would read the report who you're going 

to be paying the money to. 

 

And I would suggest to you, sir, that it's an important part of 

the agenda for you to do that.  And I would say to you also that 

it would be a responsibility of yours to read the report.  And I 

cannot for any observations that . . . Like I've been a minister 

myself.  And if there would have been matters of urgent 

pressing nature of this sort that would have been the 

responsibility, my responsibility, and I would not take it upon 

myself to 



2108 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1993 

understand clearly the scope of responsibility that I had, I 

would consider that as a slight on my position as a minister. 

 

(1630) 

 

And so for you to say that on one hand you don't want to be a 

part of the commission, I can understand that.  But surely you 

should have the right and the responsibility if you're going to 

spend $20 million of taxpayers' money, coming to this 

Assembly and asking for $20 million to spend -- actually 23 -- 

and you're going to be spending that and receiving revenues, as 

I understand, of over $40 million, then you have a 

responsibility to the taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan 

to put that review of that report in the hands of the cabinet, in 

the hands of yourself, to make sure that that is done properly. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, is what we're challenging you on here 

today.  And I think you should have done that.  And you'd 

better have some good reasons why you didn't, because I don't 

believe the reasons that you have presented so far. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well let me say to the member from 

Morse, I guess what I'd like to do is put this in context.  We had 

an intergovernmental agency who did a technical review, who 

did a very in-depth financial review, and who did a security 

review on the companies that we were about to short list. 

 

And let me also remind the member that what we're involved in 

here is the purchase of electronic equipment -- video lottery 

terminals which have PC (personal computer) boards, and they 

have relays and switches and lights and all of the things that 

electronic equipment do. 

 

And so let me draw a parallel between another piece of 

electronic equipment, a computer or desk laptop computer.  

Would you, sir, ask I guess, for the same in-depth analysis that 

was done on these video lottery terminals for the purchase of 

computers, or would you not? 

 

We wanted to make sure and ensure that the technology that we 

were purchasing was sound, that it was reliable, that the 

companies were in a good financial position to be able to 

deliver the product before we send a cent to them.  And those 

are the kinds of things that we asked from this committee. 

 

Now this committee came with a recommendation in terms of 

which companies they would suggest that we dealt with, which 

was taken to cabinet and a decision was made by cabinet . . . or 

to cabinet, based on the professional opinion of the people who 

worked on this committee to put together the recommendation. 

 

Now what I ask you is, do you see the purchase of perhaps a 

laptop computer as being somewhat a parallel to purchasing a 

video lottery terminal? Because I think you can draw some 

very strong parallels. 

I say to the member from Morse, what we're involved in here is 

the purchase of equipment, a purchase of electronic equipment 

to an aggregate of in the neighbourhood of $23 million.  Now 

some of these are computer systems; the central computer is an 

example that we're purchasing from GTECH, a similar 

computer that you may find perhaps housed in the Alberta 

Gaming Commission's central computer system because these 

people are dealing with the same companies that we were 

dealing with, and had done the diligence that we had done, I 

would assume, and I hope as in-depth as we did, to determine 

that they were buying adequate technology, that it would be 

technology that would satisfy the needs of the customers, and 

that they would be buying a central computer system that their 

people would be able to monitor because that's what we're 

embarked upon here, and that's what this money is going for. 

 

I guess maybe what I'd like to do is explain just a little further 

to the member opposite that we're setting up a central computer 

system that will be managed by the western Canada lottery 

foundation which is a Crown corporation of three provincial 

governments -- the Conservative government in Manitoba, 

New Democrat government here in Saskatchewan, and the 

Conservative government in Alberta -- and they'll be manning 

and housing this central computer system that will take 

information from the technology, from the video lottery 

terminals that we purchased, or that we intend to purchase.  

They will take the information from there, house that in the 

central location which we have announced will be located in 

Saskatoon, Saskatchewan. 

 

So what we will have here is a free-standing, 

government-owned electronic network that's going to feed 

information from the video lottery terminals through the 

Saskatchewan telephone . . . SaskTel's lines, into a central 

computer system which will feed out information that will tell 

us . . . And I think it's important to explain to the general public 

exactly what we're doing here, what we're buying.  Because I 

think there's been a lot of aspersions, a lot of innuendo, and so 

I'd like to clarify it. 

 

What we're buying here is a package of electronic equipment, 

electronic gaming equipment.  The proposal from the company 

that . . . or from the intergovernmental commission that looked 

at these companies that we intended to purchase from 

recommended these companies because they had sound 

technology and because the companies were on a sound 

financial footing.  And at the time they were investigated, to the 

best of their knowledge they felt that these were reputable 

companies and therefore recommended to the minister, who 

recommended to cabinet, that we purchase this electronic 

equipment. 

 

Now I'm not sure where the member is trying to take this.  But 

I'm . . . And if he's got a motive here, what I'd like to do is I'd 

like to see him make his point.  Because to play cat-and-mouse 

games here I don't think is helpful.  What we're here to do is to 

determine whether or not the government of Saskatchewan are 



June 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2109 

going to get adequate technology, the best technology we can 

buy, and whether it's going to serve the purpose of the video 

lottery terminal program that we're intending to put throughout 

this province, in perhaps up to 600 locations. 

 

Now I want the member opposite to understand that what we 

have here is a purchase arrangement not unlike if a government 

agency other than the Gaming Commission were to go out and 

put out a call for proposals on laptop computers, perhaps 2,000 

of them, because it's very much the same. 

 

What we're trying to do and what we're attempting to do is to 

put this in place.  We're hoping to have the central computer 

system in place very soon, the middle of July, so that we can 

continue with our arrangements and our decision to purchase 

these VLTs so that we can do what this program was intended 

to do -- to help the small hotels in rural Saskatchewan maintain 

a viable economic base. 

 

Not unlike what your cousins and what your neighbours and 

what our neighbours have done in Alberta.  The Alberta 

government has done very much the same as we've done.  And 

I would assume that they have done adequate due diligence as 

we feel we have. 

 

Not unlike what the Manitoba government has done in terms of 

purchasing the equipment to put into their rural hotels because 

they understand the problems in rural Manitoba and rural 

Alberta as we do in rural Saskatchewan.  And the goal and 

what we're trying to achieve here is another way for rural hotels 

to maintain some economic viability.  And that's the bottom 

line. 

 

And what we intend to assure is that we buy the best 

technology that we can, with the amount of money that we 

intend to spend, and that the central computer system that'll be 

hooked up to these machines will ensure that it'll be a 

smooth-running operation that will create no security problems.  

And that's what we're attempting to achieve. 

 

So I guess what I'll ask the member opposite, if you're taking 

this line of questioning in any particular direction, we'd be 

interested to know where you're heading with it.  Because at 

this point, it's really not clear what your motives may be. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well it's not really my point to have 

motivation in this one way or another.  It's I guess our 

observation that we would like to understand the motives of the 

minister and the Gaming Commission. 

 

The report, as I understand it, dealt with two companies, 

GTECH and VLC (Video Lottery Consultants).  The 

information that I have is that it indicated that VLC was okay; 

however you shouldn't deal with GTECH.  And I'd like to 

know from the minister whether this is in fact a fact.  And that's 

why it's important for the minister to have read the details of 

the report. 

 

Would you confirm for the committee that GTECH 

and VLC were the only two that were identified in the report, 

and also that VLC was given an okay and that GTECH was not 

to be considered?  Would you provide us the information about 

that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I can't provide that sort of 

information because the recommendation came to the minister 

the same as it came to the Alberta government who are dealing 

with the same two companies.  That both VLC and GTECH 

were companies that they would recommend with respect to the 

purchase of the video lottery terminals. 

 

So in order for me to confirm anything else, it would have to be 

confirmed contrary to the facts.  Because the facts of the matter 

are that these two companies were recommended by Mr. Egan 

and the people that he worked with, in the same fashion that 

these two companies were recommended by the government 

commission that looked at the Alberta request, and the same 

two companies that were recommended to the Alberta 

government.  That's what I need to confirm because that's the 

truth. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Would the minister give an overview of 

whether any other minister has read the report? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I can say, to my knowledge no other 

minister has read the report. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Would the minister indicate whether the 

Gaming Commission have read the report. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well certainly.  That's part of their 

mandate; that's their job.  As were the Alberta Gaming 

Commission who clearly made the same recommendation and 

must have read a report done quite similar to the one that we 

did here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Did Mr. Egan read the report? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well certainly Mr. Egan would 

have read the report.  He was one of the people that put it 

together and made the recommendation. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, then I will 

move a motion by the . . . from myself: 

 

 That this committee, pursuant to section 19 through 25 of the 

Legislative Assembly Act, command and compel the 

attendance before this committee of Doug Egan to provide 

sworn testimony responding to members' questions regarding 

allegations of impropriety in the conduct of the affairs of the 

Saskatchewan Gaming Commission. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, I believe it would be in order 

for members to speak to this particular motion. 



2110 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1993 

The Chair: -- Well I'm just checking to see whether it's in 

order.  And when I make a determination, then certainly. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, I believe that it is very 

appropriate that the House take this action.  Over the last month 

and a half repeatedly there have been questions in this 

Assembly that the minister either refuses to answer or says it is 

not within his realm. 

 

Today, Mr. Chairman, what we are requesting is that Mr. Egan 

be brought before this Assembly, before the bar of this 

Assembly, as a witness to help answer questions, questions that 

we believe will clear up for the Assembly, if there has been any 

impropriety. 

 

I would refer you, Mr. Chairman, to the substantive motions in 

the Committee of the Whole and the Committee of Finance, the 

section that says that this is very appropriate in these type of 

proceedings that witnesses, not officials, but witnesses can 

assist the committee in arriving at the proper conclusions. 

 

And I believe in the case of this one, where the public must 

know and understand clearly the process that has been gone 

through to make sure that it meets all the criteria and all of the 

answers that have so far been given in this Assembly, that I 

think all members would welcome the opportunity for a former 

member of the RCMP police and now an official with the 

Gaming Commission to give sworn testimony to this House.  

That is an individual whose testimony I would assume all 

members of the Assembly could rely upon in order to clear up 

some of the issues that have arisen.  And I would not 

understand, Mr. Chairman, at all why this committee would not 

look upon this in a favourable way in order to deal with this 

issue. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like 

to speak to the motion.  And I would want to say just in the 

outset that the member from Thunder Creek and the member 

from Morse spoke about ongoing questioning in this 

legislature. And they're right -- that has been the process. 

 

But I would want to say that as this process progressed, 

members of the government who were questioned with respect 

to this issue were as open as it was possible to be.  And I want 

to say that the members opposite know full well the process 

under which the freedom of information Act allows 

information to be tabled by this legislature. 

 

The members opposite will well know that information that 

was gathered by this interjurisdictional body was information 

that was received from some law enforcement agencies and 

gaming commissions around North America who asked that the 

information be held and be used on a confidential basis.  And 

the members opposite are aware of that. 

 

They've asked for a copy of the study that was done to which 

we've indicated and offered to help and assist 

them to find . . . to understand the system through the freedom 

of information Act to gather up -- if it is appropriate -- to gather 

it up.  They know that the Department of Justice has 

recommended that the information would not be appropriately 

released.  They understand all of that. 

 

And I want to say to the members opposite, if they have any 

evidence of impropriety by any member of the Gaming 

Commission, which they allege in here this evening but who 

are unwilling to allege outside of this legislature, if they have 

any information that would indicate any member of the Gaming 

Commission or any official of the Gaming Commission has 

acted in an improper fashion, then let them table it before this 

legislature. 

 

But I say, Mr. Chairman, they won't do that because they can't 

do that because they have no information.  It's only allegation. 

 

And I say to the members opposite, instead of the wasting the 

time of this Legislative Assembly, why don't you go before the 

press and make your accusations outside where they can be 

dealt with.  But all it is, is innuendo, political grandstanding, 

and political posturing.  And that's all that this motion is all 

about. 

 

And I say to the members opposite, you should be ashamed of 

yourself because you know exactly what the process is, and you 

know what this is all about.  It's all about your petty politics. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, what we 

want to have in this committee is an opportunity to detail the 

questions that we have asked up to this point. 

 

You, sir, made the decision.  You made the decision to involve 

two gaming companies that supply video terminals to the 

province of Saskatchewan.  You made that decision; it states 

that.  And that's why I went through this process.  It states that 

you are going to . . . well I'll read it: will supply central 

computer system as well as 1,000 machines -- that's GTECH.  

Video Lottery Consultants also will supply 1,000 machines.  I 

didn't say that; you did.  And "will" and "may" are two separate 

items.  Now when was the decision made for you to say, oh, I 

may.  Here you decided, I will; and now you decide, I may. 

 

Now to go on from there, you decided on subsequent occasions 

that you were going to take and deal with both of them.  Then 

you decided because the FBI started an investigation and 

because they laid charges on VLC, you decided that you were 

going to do this from GTECH.  Now are you busy studying 

GTECH? 

 

And we need to have some individuals here who will provide 

us the answers because I believe that you, sir, are deliberately 

not providing information to this committee that you should 

normally provide.  And that is, Mr. Minister, that somewhere 

along the line -- if you didn't have anything to be afraid of -- 

you would have someone come here and tell us, or you 



June 1, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2111 

would tell us yourself. 

 

But we, sir, don't believe that you understand what's going on.  

We don't believe that you understand what went on in the 

Gaming Commission.  You have had at least four ministers of 

the Crown dealing with the Gaming Commission since you 

took office 18 months ago. 

 

You have had chief executive officers in and out and in and out 

and back and forth.  How many times has Dave Innes been 

chief executive officer of this Gaming Commission?  How 

many times? 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, is what we want to ask.  That's what 

this committee needs to find out because we believe that if you 

had nothing to hide, you'd come forward with the information.  

I don't believe that you can hide behind the fact that the various 

agencies that you've inquired of which, incidentally for the 

public, had nothing to do with the FBI -- it had to do with the 

South Dakota Lottery Commission, Montana Gambling 

Investigation Bureau, Nevada State Gaming Control Board -- 

had nothing to do with the investigation by the Federal Bureau 

of Investigation, the FBI in the United States.  And yet they 

laid the charges, Mr. Minister.  They laid the charges on VLC. 

 

And you had decided, you had decided that you were going to 

buy from them.  You had decided, and I'm going to quote it 

here again, I will -- you will -- spend $10 million of taxpayers' 

money on a company that was being investigated by the 

Federal Bureau of Investigation and charges laid.  Of what, Mr. 

Minister?  Of improprieties, improprieties all over the United 

States. 

 

That, Mr. Minister, is what we are asking you to tell us, that 

there was no improprieties in this instance.  And we are 

challenging you, sir, to provide that information to this 

committee through the report that Mr. Egan wrote. 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  Why is the minister on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- On a point of order. 

 

The Chair: -- Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- The point of order is, if the member 

has documentation to show charges against VLC . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  That's a question of debate and not 

a point of order. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, you need to 

tell this committee whether in fact there are extenuating 

circumstances that relate to improprieties in the United States 

and if they're transferred into Canada.  We want to know that in 

this committee, and we need to know that in this committee.  

And if you have nothing to hide, then you could be able to 

stand there and say it.  You could be able to read from the 

report and say that is garbage.  But here you stand.  You 

have never read the report.  And you've read an executive 

summary, you said one day in this Assembly. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, is exactly the reason why we are asking 

the questions of you.  The kind of reporting that the committee 

gave and the committee is receiving here today needs to have 

substantiated to it the information provided in that report.  And, 

Mr. Minister, we want that report in this Assembly for the 

people of Saskatchewan to know and understand what was in 

that report. 

 

We need to have that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, Mr. 

Chairman, the member from Churchill Downs who perhaps has 

read the report would like to get in the conversation and say to 

this Assembly that he recommended VLC, who was 

subsequently investigated and charged in the United States for 

improprieties, that that is the kind of thing that he read about in 

that report. 

 

And would he provide that information to this Assembly when 

he was minister responsible for the Gaming Commission?  Did 

he travel all over the United States for $20,000 dealing with 

VLC and GTECH?  Those are some more of the questions that 

we need to have answered. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, this committee is going to ask you to 

provide that to it.  I think we have a legitimate right.  You're 

planning on spending 20 million of our dollars, 20 million of 

our dollars, and we closed down 52 hospitals in the province of 

Saskatchewan for the next . . . for the last four months of this 

term.  That's going to cost $5 million and you want to spend 20 

and you can't even give us a response?  That's disgusting, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

And we need, in the province of Saskatchewan, and open and 

honest government.  You ran on that, sir.  You decided you 

were going to do that and you said it all over the province of 

Saskatchewan that you were going to run on honesty and 

integrity -- open government. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, let's have an observation or two made by 

Mr. Egan.  And that's what we're asking this committee to ask 

Mr. Egan to come before this Assembly and tell us exactly 

what went on.  Because we, sir, have an intense dislike for the 

way you're answering the questions. 

 

And also, Mr. Minister, we need to have before this Assembly 

somebody who has the integrity to answer the questions.  And 

that we believe Mr. Egan would do, because he is a 

commissioner . . . former commissioner of the RCMP, and he 

would come in here and say one way or another what was 

going on.  That, Mr. Minister, is why we're asking him to come 

before the bar of this Assembly. 

 

The member from Churchill Downs, the former member . . . or 

former minister of Finance and the former minister responsible 

for the Gaming Commission probably did read the report.  

Would he 



2112 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1993 

say that, as a question, would the member from P.A. (Prince 

Albert) Carlton tell the Assembly that the member from 

Churchill Downs did not read the report?  Would he tell us in 

this Assembly whether the minister responsible for Economic 

Development read the report?  Would he tell us whether the 

Department of Economic Development minister and his 

officials read the report to provide it to cabinet? 

 

Those are the kinds of questions that we need have answered 

here in order to provide us the information of why we should 

let you spend $20 million.  And that, Mr. Minister, is the reason 

why we're here asking you these questions. 

 

Mr. Minister, VLC was accepted, we believe, in your report.  

GTECH was refused.  Now on the other hand you have 

GTECH accepted and VLC refused.  And on what basis are 

you doing that, Mr. Minister?  On the basis of information that 

you haven't even read? 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  It being 5 o'clock, the committee stands 

recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 


