




















































Hansard: April 29, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1331 

 April 29, 1993 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 13 — An Act to repeal The Mineral Taxation Act 

 

The Chair: — I would ask the Minister of Energy to please 

introduce the officials who are here with him tonight. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Chairman, I have with me this 

evening Mr. Bruce Hall, who is the director — behind me — of 

industrial minerals branch, and Pat Youzwa who is the deputy 

minister of Energy and Mines. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I've 

been waiting patiently to get at the new minister and this new 

Bill is going to give us a lot of time to get at it. So, Mr. 

Chairman, I want you to get ready for some real heavy stuff 

here. 

 

Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, after perusing this Bill in depth, 

and I've went to great lengths to talk about it with my 

colleagues, and in the interest of cooperation and time I think 

what we'll do, Mr. Minister, is allow this Bill to pass. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we accept the 

spirit of cooperation. I would like to thank the officials for 

coming out this evening and assisting me with the first Bill that 

I've had to put through the Committee of Finance. And with 

that I would move repeal of The Mineral Taxation Repeal Act. 

 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I also thank your 

officials and I certainly would have liked to have this happen 

before supper so you wouldn't have had to come out, but thanks 

very much for coming out. 

 

Clause 1 agreed. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. I would 

ask for leave to introduce additional amendments to Bill 7, The 

Social Workers Act. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Bill No. 7 — An Act respecting Social Workers 

 

Clause 15 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Chair, I would ask to: 

 

 Amend clause 15 of the printed Bill: 

 

 (a) by deleting subsection (1) thereof and substituting 

therefor the following: 

 

 

 15(1) With the approval of a majority of those members who 

vote at an annual meeting or special meeting, the association 

may make bylaws for any purpose set out in section 16."; and 

 

 (b) by adding immediately after subsection (6) thereof the 

following new subsection: 

 

 "(7) the registrar shall forward copies of proposed bylaws to 

all members by ordinary mail sent at least 14 days before the 

date of the annual or special meeting at which they are to be 

presented." 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

The Chair: — Just on that, we will need then a further 

agreement on the clause 15 as amended. Is that agreed? 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Chairman, if that is the only part that has 

to be done, we'll take all of them and put them in a bunch, and 

all the leaves that are necessary to accommodate the Minister 

of Social Services, if that is fine with the Clerk. 

 

Clause 15 as amended agreed to. 

 

Bill No. 14 — An Act to amend the Statute Law 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Chairman. We have with us tonight from the Department of 

Justice, Andrea Seale, Susan Amrud, and Madeleine 

Robertson. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, just a 

couple short questions on . . . This is Bill No. 14, I believe, the 

statutes law. 

 

An Hon. Member: — This is Bill No. 14. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Okay. An amendment . . . If I understand 

correctly, this is more technical in nature. It's a lot of changes 

and housekeeping. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes. I might have started . . . I think 

I said that when I gave them second reading. As a matter of 

policy, all we include within an Act called The Statute Law 

Amendment Act are typos. These are all in the nature of typos. 

If they are substantive changes, they have to go somewhere 

else. So these are all . . . I assure the member these are all 

typos. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 agreed to. 

 

The Chair: — To facilitate the handling of the Bill, is it agreed 

that we proceed page by page? 

 

Pages 1 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 



1332 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1993 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 15 — An Act to amend The Limitation of Actions 

Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister. My 

apologies. I should have welcomed the officials earlier. We get 

so used to seeing the same pleasant faces coming in, it's a 

pleasure. I understand from this Act we're actually opening up 

limitations on opportunities to possibly resurrect or raise 

assault charges going back a number of years. Is that true, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — This Act deals with a problem with 

respect to sexual assault. Where sexual assault occurs, 

particularly on children, they often have no means of getting 

redress for a lengthy period of time. Sometimes they reach 

adulthood with little memory of it. So with respect to matters 

involving sexual assault, the limitation period is removed 

entirely. 

 

I stress to members of the opposition that the judge always has 

the discretion to refuse to hear or to refuse to consider evidence 

which he considers unreliable because it is too old. And judges 

will always weigh the evidence, and if it's unreliable they will 

not accept it or act upon it. 

 

This removes a technical limitation which has proved very 

troublesome in this area because many of the victims are too 

young to complain and have no means of complaining and 

because in children the psychological tendency is, they tend to 

block out the memory and they have little memory of it. 

 

(1915) 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you for that, Mr. Minister, but I just want 

to bring to your attention that it would seem to me when you 

just open the door wide open, as this Bill seems to do, and in 

light of the types of accusations that seem to be coming 

forward, the fact that in our society nowadays, it just seems that 

it doesn't matter what a person does; you never know what 

interpretation could be taken from it. 

 

I think it could create a problem. And I'm wondering what kind 

of real protection is in the Bill, or if there's any protection at all. 

It would seem to me, Mr. Minister, that you may end up in a 

situation where . . . Let's just take an example where a parent, 

let's say a father, is in his 60's and maybe a daughter — and I'm 

just throwing this out as a hypothetical example — could be in 

their mid-40's or whatever, may reflect back on the changes in 

society and what we interpret as having been a sexual assault or 

maybe some kind of assault on a person's rights, and raise it 

just due to the fact that society has changed. And what that then 

does is really creates a great deal of animosity in an older 

person's life. 

And I'm just wondering, Mr. Minister, what checks and 

balances . . . You said that the judge has the ability to, say, 

listen to the case, each individual case, and determine. It would 

seem to me that it would be appropriate to lay out at least some 

guidelines that would have some control and some . . . should I 

use the word, restrictions, or at least placing responsibility on 

individuals, making them accountable for their actions. Has 

anything been done like that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I can tell the member that the 

question which you raise gave members of cabinet and 

members of caucus some concern. At the end of the day it 

seemed a question of balancing the rights of people who have 

no means of complaining — no practical means of complaining 

— against the rights we normally accord people to be protected 

from very old charges. The whole philosophy, if I may put it 

that way — jurisprudence is a better word — the whole 

jurisprudence behind limitation periods is, there is an onus 

upon the person to complain in a reasonably prompt fashion. 

That rationale, however, doesn't apply in sexual assault cases 

where people are often so young and where there's 

psychological blockages. 

 

The primary protection is I think . . . and when we thought 

about some limitations but were unable to write any limitations 

which we were satisfied would work very well. And at the end 

of the day I think we decided best to leave it in the discretion of 

the judges. Keep in mind that if the courts think it appropriate, 

they can always write the rules of court which will govern the 

procedure involved and will govern how evidence may be 

presented. 

 

So the judges have a wide discretion over what occurs within 

their court, both as a matter of . . . inherently and through the 

rules of court. At the end of the day we decided we'd best leave 

this to the judges to work their way through because the kind of 

cases in which all this would arise seem to us to be too varied 

to attempt to draw some definite rules which we would put in 

the Act. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. It would seem to me, 

Mr. Minister, that in light of what's transpiring in our society 

nowadays it still wouldn't have hurt to have at least some form 

of restrictions or at least some guidelines because even in the 

judiciary a judge's interpretation or the interpretation of a court 

can really vary from one case to the other. It would seem that 

depending on the . . . not just depending on the evidence, a lot 

of it can even depend on the judge that's on the bench at the 

day. One judge may give one interpretation. Another individual 

might give another interpretation. 

 

So just for the sake of most individuals I think it would have 

been appropriate to at least had some guidelines in the Bill to, 

if you will, have some restrictions, laying out some of the 

responsibility of the claimant so that indeed at the end of the 

day we're not raising up a lot of assault charges or questions 

that maybe are 20 or 30 years old. 



April 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1333 

And we all know the fact that your interpretation of what 

assault may be . . . we're getting to the point now if you just 

happen to look the wrong . . . look at a person the wrong way, 

you never know whether . . . what's going to come your way. 

And I think it would be appropriate to have something that 

would really at least address that and make sure that we're not 

just opening laws that become wide open for wide discretion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I'm sure the member understands 

this. This has no application to criminal law at all. With respect 

to criminal charges for assault, those may proceed at any time. 

Again, it's a matter of the Crown proving their case. But those 

charges may proceed at any time. 

 

This applies purely to civil cases where a victim of an assault 

will sue for damages. This has no application to criminal law at 

all. There's now no limitation on criminal actions, and criminal 

actions do now arise decades after they occur. And I've 

defended several myself. And they're not uncommon for sexual 

assault charges to arise decades after the event. This doesn't 

affect that at all. This only affects a person's right to damages. 

 

Much of what you suggest would normally be covered off in 

the rules of court if the bench thought it appropriate. They can 

set out in the rules . . . They have fairly broad discretion in the 

rules of court to set out matters of procedure, how evidence 

should be presented, and like matters. So a good deal of 

protection can be provided by the bench both inherently in the 

courts and in the rules of court. 

 

But I hasten to add, this is just in relation to civil matters; 

there's no bearing at all on criminal matters. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Did I hear you right? Is that . . . that this is 

dealing with cases where persons would bring up charges 

seeking compensation for problems that . . . or maybe a 

problem that was associated in years past. Is there a limit as to 

what a person can claim? Or is that kind of wide open? Or is 

that interpretation from the court as well? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — No, that's set, that is, the general 

principles as to how damages are calculated are set out . . . is a 

wide body of law established at common law, and it is actual 

damages. You're entitled in this case normally to actual 

damages. 

 

The calculation of them can be a very complex process. You 

need to calculate everything from loss of income, which can be 

done in some objective fashion; the questions such as pain and 

suffering, which are wholly subjective; injury to the person, 

which is a little of both. But the whole matter of calculating 

damages is a very complex matter which is dealt with 

exclusively by common law, by reference to previous decisions 

and the body of law which builds up on those. 

 

Mr. Toth: — So that what you're saying, this could refer to 

even an employee-employer relationship or any relationship 

on that basis where people are involved, more than one. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 18 — An Act to amend The Victims of Crime Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: — I'm just wondering if the minister could just 

quickly brief us on what the purpose of this Bill is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The member will recall that the 

Crimes Compensation Board was a victim of budgetary 

restraint, and we set up in lieu thereof a fund. This sets out the 

rules under which a person may apply, and it sets out the . . . 

this provides the limitation, in effect, and says that the 

application then can be brought within a year of a time the 

victim understands the nature and recognizes the effects of the 

misconduct. So it sets out the limitation period of a nature of 

which we were talking about in the previous Bill, actually. 

 

Mr. Toth: — So, Mr. Minister, when you talk about the person 

or the victim understanding, let's say it's . . . Are you saying 

that, say, five years down the road a person comes to or feels 

that maybe they've been victimized, and they make a claim; 

they have a year to state that claim or lay that claim of the 

victims' fund. Is that what you're saying? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — A year to apply. That's right. I've 

had cases myself in private practice where victims had no 

memory of it, were clearly suffering from all the effects of 

some things; sexual assault is a very common one. They get 

help, and all of a sudden they understand what's happened. 

Then within a year of a time of understanding it, they've got to 

apply. And of course they've got to satisfy the powers that be 

that they did bring it within a year of a time that they 

understood it, and the onus is on them to prove that. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Minister, you're saying . . . telling us 

that it begins at a time when a victim feels or assumes or I 

guess comes to a point in their life where they may feel they've 

been victimized. Who determines that? Like, that could be . . . 

possibly a person could be a year after something took place. It 

could be two years. It could be 10 years down the road. 

 

Who determines whether that victim finally who took that . . . 

or that individual that period of time to finally realize that 

maybe they had a claim or an opportunity to come to the claim 

point? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The initial determination is made by 

the Department of Justice officials, and of 



1334 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1993 

course it's always subject to review by courts in the prerogative 

writs. They've got to act judicially and in accordance with the 

law and give people a fair right to be heard. 

 

But apart from the ordinary rules with respect to exercise of 

judicial . . . or exercise of administrative discretion, it is the 

Department of Justice which will make the decision. 

 

Mr. Toth: — So then an individual, if they felt they had a 

claim or a right to a claim, would approach, I guess, seek legal 

counsel and approach the department, laying the claim out or 

expressing this claim, and then the department would pursue it 

and see if indeed there is a legitimate claim to be followed up 

on. Is that . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — That's basically accurate, except 

there may be no need to engage counsel. There's an application 

form provided and I think many would approach without 

engaging counsel. Some of the sums involved are not that 

large. And they may well decide they want to handle it directly, 

and I think many would. 

 

Many of the people who came before the Crimes 

Compensation Board — in fact I'd say that most of them — 

were never represented by counsel. They just handled it 

directly. Otherwise you're comment's correct. 

 

Mr. Toth: — So what you're saying — and I'm just trying to 

get an understanding of this — you're talking about, you have a 

year after you feel that maybe you've got a claim in place, the 

right to a claim. But when you're talking about that period 

beginning, is that period associated to the time that the victim 

feels that they have right to a claim or is that period, the 

one-year period, associated with the time when they fill out a 

form and apply to raise the claim or raise the matter before the 

department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — No. They must fill out the 

application form within a year of the time they understood the 

crime and were cognizant of the effects of the crime. 

 

Mr. Toth: — I guess that's the part I'm having a hard time 

trying to understand, where the determination is made on the 

date. Because, like, a victim may feel that they've got the 

ability or the right to file for a claim from this point and who is 

to determine . . . like they're contemplating in their mind 

whether or not they should actually apply. 

 

And so let's say six months have gone by; they've been 

thinking that maybe they've got a right. They're aware of the 

legislation. Six months have gone by from that time. And then 

they pick out a form and they fill out the form and they send it 

in to apply for the claim. Does that claim, the next period, 

actually start from the time they send the form in? Or who is to 

determine whether it was six months down the road or past that 

they actually finally realized that maybe they fit into this 

category and applied under this legislation or fit the legislation? 

(1930) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Under most circumstances the year; 

under most circumstances they have a year from the crime. 

We're making this unnecessarily complicated, I think. Under 

most circumstances they have a year from the crime to file the 

application. If they don't get the application within a year of the 

crime they've no right to compensation, so they've got to apply 

within a year. 

 

This section is simply worded in such a fashion that if they 

don't become aware of the crime for a period of time after it 

occurs — and on rare occasions that can happen — then the 

right to compensation . . . then the one year runs from the date 

they become aware of the crime. That's all this is. They've got 

to apply within a year of the crime, but if they're not aware of 

the crime for a further period of time, the one year runs from 

the date they become aware of the crime. That's probably 

stating it a lot more simply. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Okay. So what you're actually saying then is that 

in actual practice a person has a year to apply for damages. If 

for some unforeseen reason they weren't aware of the fact that 

they could apply, this extends somewhat beyond and then the 

court — or is it the Justice department? — then determines 

whether or not the individual is aware of that and makes 

allowances so that they can indeed get their claim processed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes, that's accurate. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Minister, if we take the example that was 

used on when the person becomes aware of it: you used the 

example of a person that's been victimized and not mentally 

recognize that they are victimized, and you used assault cases 

as one of those. What's to determine the day the clock starts 

ticking? Is there some way that a doctor must recognize this, or 

a psychiatrist must recognize this, as the date from which it 

begins? Because you could have some people coming in and 

saying, oh, I remembered it eight months ago when in fact it's 

been bothering them for five years. Is there some way that you 

have of determining that that is the day in actual fact that it 

happened, or whether they just want compensation when they 

find out they can get some money? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — As I say, the year would normally 

run from the date of the crime. If they are going to allege that 

they weren't aware of the crime or its effects until afterwards, 

they'd have to provide some evidence of that beyond the bald 

statement that they were unaware of it. 

 

The decision that's made here is no different than the decision 

judges make all the time about intentions and understanding. 

So the decision is basically the same as judges make all the 

time about when someone understands something and is aware 

of something. Normally though, you've got to provide . . . 

Normally you expect people are aware of something when it 

happens. If they claim they didn't know it until 



April 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1335 

later, they'd have to provide some evidence of that under 

normal circumstances to be believed. 

 

Mr. Martens: — On the basis of that, what . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Yes, I understand what you said. On the basis 

of that, if the court would then determine and go back and ask 

the question, when did you first understand what was going on, 

and then determine whether in fact she was eligible for that, or 

he, whatever. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes, that's accurate. I would just 

point out that the determination's made by the department, not 

the court, in the first instance at least. 

 

Mr. Martens: — So then the Department of Justice will make 

sure that that is determined prior to the individual going to seek 

compensation from the court. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Just let me be perfectly candid with 

the member. You're basically right, except that the amount 

awarded . . . it's the department which makes the determination, 

not only about whether they're within the year but the amount 

of compensation as well. Courts would be involved only if a 

victim asked for judicial review because they felt the 

department had not handled it properly. 

 

Normally, end to end, the department handles it. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 16 — An Act respecting the Interpretation of 

Enactments and prescribing Rules Governing Acts 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, I'd like to maybe get the minister 

for a minute to interpret the Act for me, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — This Act, just in general terms, this 

Act updates . . . There is presently a statute which sets out 

guidelines for interpretation of statutes; it's called The 

Interpretation Act. And it sets out a variety of rules which 

judges use in interpreting statutes. It has not been updated for 

some time, and this Act updates the interpretation statute . . . 

 

I was just confirming something that I thought I remembered. 

There is in Canada a body called the uniform law 

commissioners which regularly review what we call lawyers' 

Bills, and this is one of them. This in fact is a product of the 

uniform law commissioners and is, I suspect, being adopted 

across Canada. 

 

There's a fair amount of detail, and I think no overall general 

principle. There's a whole lot of more smaller things that are 

being done. But I can perhaps tell the member it was a product 

of the uniform law commissioners. We anticipate it will be 

adopted 

across Canada and generally sets out rules for judges to 

interpret statutes. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I notice just by quickly looking at 

the Act, there's a number of different sections in the Act, and I 

think maybe this is getting some of the technical information a 

lot of people aren't all that concerned about. 

 

But for our knowledge, I wonder if you could take a minute 

just to explain what the difference . . . what you mean by the 

difference. You get into rules of construction. You get into 

public officers, calculation of time. Rather than me getting up 

and asking you, could you just explain what the purpose of the 

different sections of the Act and what it covers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I'm not sure I could do justice to that 

question. You're asking really for a repeat of the 

second-reading speech. I'm not trying to be difficult here, but 

there is no . . . There's no general principle here except that 

we're updating the statutes relating to interpretation. Other than 

that, there's a lot of detail in here and no general thread that 

runs through all of the various sections. I'd almost have to go 

through the things almost section by section. 

 

So I don't know that I can give you a brief description of what 

it's doing beyond what I've already done. Otherwise I'll have to 

get into what each section does. I can certainly do that if the 

members want it. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Just for one example there's one section that talks 

about calculation of time and section . . . and not really wanting 

to get specifically into each clause but just for general . . . 

rather than waiting till that time. We talk about where the time 

for doing an act falls on a holiday, the times extend to the next 

day. I take from that that if it falls into a holiday period, like 

say something comes into effect, you're actually . . . it goes to 

the next working day? Even a business, it falls onto the next 

working day is actually coming into effect. Is that what you're 

saying? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — That's right. This is a section which 

deals with the time within which certain things must be done. 

A very common example of the use of this is for the service of 

documents. If the Deputy Premier were to slander me and I 

were to sue him, I would have to serve him with a notice that 

I'm suing him within 15 days. What this section says is if the 

15th day is on a Sunday, then I can wait until Monday to 

complete the service because it may not be possible for me to 

find him on Sunday or for me to engage the necessary officials 

to do it. That's what that section means, is that when the law 

requires something to be done by a certain day, it means the 

first day on which businesses are generally open. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Well I'm glad it's the Deputy Premier that you're 

looking at maybe possibly be sued and not me. 

 

Well what you're saying is that if that time period . . . like you 

have your 15-day time period and there's a holiday period that 

there's an added day onto it so that you're not caught on a 

position where it isn't a 



1336 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1993 

working day. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. A question 

related to the same type of thing. With Crown corporations, do 

the same type of extensions apply? If my SGI (Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance) licence on my vehicle runs out on a 

statutory holiday or a Sunday, can I get access to have that 

carried forward to the next working day without paying a 

penalty? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — No. As a general rule, this section 

. . . Well not as a general rule. This section does not apply to 

times within which payments must be made. And it doesn't 

matter whether it's your grocer's bill which says within 30 days 

or your licence fee which says within 30 days. You must pay 

that and it must be received by the end of the time or you'll be 

charged interest. 

 

So this section does not apply to any obligation to pay for 

anything, whether it be a licence fee, grocery bill, or anything 

else. This section doesn't apply to payment of . . . legal 

obligation to pay for services or goods which have been 

received. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, that disappoints me. 

I find it surprising that we would allow extension of papers for 

lawyers, but if a person needs an extension because he hasn't 

had the opportunity to purchase his licence because it was a 

Sunday or a statutory holiday, that he would now face a penalty 

because of that. I think that it should be done fairly. If we're 

going to allow extensions for time limits for lawyers, then the 

rest of the general public should also have that same privilege. 

 

Now you may say that because it's a payment that there's a 

special case there that they should have made that payment by 

the certain date. If they go in the day later than the first 

working day, they have lost that protection that they would 

have had in the case of the SGI. But why should they be forced 

to pay an additional penalty? If in the case of the lawyer, you 

owe in the next day. You don't lose the case because you were 

a day late because the law says that's not the case. You are 

given that extension. 

 

I really believe that with the Crown corporations, you should 

be given that extension to the first working day. I believe with 

The Income Tax Act, you are given that grace to move to the 

first working day. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — No, in fact that's not the case. If 

April 30 comes on Sunday, you got to get it in to the post office 

. . . they often leave the post office open on Sunday. No, that's 

actually . . . your example's not a good one. 

 

I recognize . . . the member makes a very interesting argument 

actually. It's not in the Bill and it would . . . I think the 

Department of Justice would be reluctant to, in their statutes, in 

these lawyers' Bills as such, pass something which had an 

effect upon another department, in this case a Crown 

corporation. It's really cut them out of their area. 

I guess the only justification I have to the member is in, 

generally speaking, these sections have had no application to 

the obligation to pay for goods and services. They're more 

strictly construed. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, under the 

areas of corporate rights and powers, I noticed that you make 

fairly extensive observations about the liability of individuals 

in relation to the corporation. Does that apply to the chief 

executive officers of these corporations, the individuals in the 

corporation where they have limited . . . or access to liability? 

Take on page 6 . . . 5, 6 and 7, you have under section 16, you 

have some significant applications that could be made in 

liability charges. Could you explain some of them to me and 

provide a direction for the committee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — This again is done by the uniform 

law commissioners and we're sort of . . . we rely extensively on 

their work. It attempts to deal with what has been a growing 

problem and that is the two-fold, sort of two-headed problem of 

conflict of interest and liability of directors and officers. Now 

an officer isn't always easy to define. It certainly includes the 

CEO (chief executive officer); it certainly excludes the 

cleaning people. And in between, you've got some 

interpretation problems. But it generally includes the senior 

people. It's plagued the business world in Canada. 

 

(1945) 

 

The whole matter of what's a conflict of interest and what is a 

duty and so on. This was done by the uniformity 

commissioners in consultation with the chartered accountants 

institute of Canada, the Canadian Bar Association, and the 

various business groups, and is an attempt to strike a balance 

between the need of these senior people to have some freedom 

of action with the need to define their responsibility when their 

action falls short of standards which are generally acceptable in 

society. 

 

So that's what it is, is an attempt to strike a balance and has 

been done at a national level of which we're sort of really 

adopting it here, really sort of adopting their work without 

attempting to improve upon it. 

 

Mr. Martens: — I attended, Mr. Minister, I attended a meeting 

that was sponsored by the auditor last Friday and we talked 

quite a bit about chief executive officers being responsible for 

actions that they take. And if we use the case in Alberta where 

the court is now going after — what is it? — Principal. They're 

going after the owners. Would they not qualify to go and take 

civil action against or criminal action against these individuals 

. . . not criminal, civil action against these individuals? Would 

they be limited, if they had this Act in place, to actions being 

taken? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — It would hard to say whether they 

would be more limit . . . whether their liability would be more 

limited or more general. It would certainly be clearer what their 

obligations are. The 



April 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1337 

purpose of this law is certainly not to affect any existing cases, 

but the purpose of this law is to clarify the law so that one can 

reasonably tell directors and officers what their obligations are. 

 

Under the current law it's very difficult to tell directors and 

officers what their liability is under the law in any 

comprehensible fashion. This is really an attempt to clarify it 

for the future. It actually would not affect any case now in 

progress, as a matter of interest. 

 

Mr. Martens: — I wasn't worried about any case in progress, I 

was just wondering whether those principles would apply to 

those cases . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay, the minister 

said yes, they would. It says there that: "No officer or director 

of a corporation is personally liable for any debt, liability, 

obligation, act or default of the corporation." 

 

Those are very broad. And then earlier on it says the individual 

must "act honestly and in good faith with a view to the best 

interests of the corporation." 

 

And those are the kinds of things that I think you need to be 

concerned about. 

 

The question I would have in relation to that: how many 

provinces do have this in their legislature, and does the 

Government of Canada have a similar controlling factor 

dealing with all of the corporations that are registered as 

Canadian corporations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Let me say for the benefit of the 

member opposite that these provisions are now in The Business 

Corporations Act. Principal Trust may not have been the best 

one because it was a private corporation. These principles are 

now in The Business Corporations Act in this province and all 

others and has been for some time. 

 

The effect of this section is to make the same provisions 

applicable to Crown corporations. The federal government has 

done this. One or two other provinces have done this. But this 

province is now applying the same standards of care to Crown 

corporations as is assumed by the . . . as people in private 

corporations have had for some time. 

 

Mr. Martens: — So, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, if I was 

to be asked to be a director of Husky Oil or of SGI, I would 

have the same principles allowed to be conducting business on 

the basis of that. Is that right? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — That's right. And of course it's 

always possible for a government to establish higher standings 

than this if they want. They may say that, with respect to a 

Crown corporation, you can't drive a Lexus automobile or 

something. I don't know; I just . . . that example just sprung at 

me out of the air. 

 

But you can always have higher standards, but this sort of sets 

a legal minimum. The minimums are the same as in the private 

world. So the member is basically accurate. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

Clauses 2 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 16 

 

Mr. Martens: — It says here that, "The Business Corporations 

Act, The Non-profit Corporations Act . . . " Is that to do with 

. . . I'll use as an example, we have corporations, non-profit 

corporations, which are . . . I'll give you one in my situation 

where there's a school that's been made into a non-profit 

corporation and the group in the community own this and they 

have certain rules and regulations that they have to have a 

meeting and all those kinds of things, an annual meeting and all 

that. Are they also under this and have the same liability, 

access or not access, as directors? Is that the same in a business 

corporation as a non-profit one? And then if I took it even 

further and then I use a bigger non-profit, using one like Sask 

Sport, for example. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes, the same provisions apply. 

With respect to the non-profit corporations, it's a different 

statute. It's The Non-profit Corporations Act which contains it, 

but the rules would be the same. This applies to Crown 

corporations. The other corporations mentioned in section 16 

are where you'd find the provisions relating to business 

corporations, or non-profit corporations, or whatever. 

 

Mr. Martens: — One other thing, under part (3) of section 16: 

 

 A corporation has perpetual succession and may: 

 

Does that mean that even after the corporation would close its 

doors, it would still have the right to be sued and to sue in its 

corporate name? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — A technical answer to your question 

is yes. The official advises me that normally when Crown 

corporations are wound up, the statute which winds it up deals 

with the question of future liability. So normally you'd find that 

in the statute winding it up. But the technical answer to your 

question is yes. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Okay, you answered the question on a Crown 

corporation. What about a business corporation, a 

non-government Crown? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — No, there are really different rules 

apply to private corporations. The Crown is perpetual; the 

private corporations are not. The rules relating to private 

corporations are really different and will vary depending on 

how and why, and under what circumstances, the private 

corporation was wound up. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Under 3(d) there, it says "acquire, hold and 

dispose of property other than land;" Why is land being treated 

different in there than other assets? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I'm informed that — perhaps for 

historical reasons, I'm not sure why — every 



1338 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1993 

Crown corporation's right to acquire and dispose of land is 

subject to an individual decision. This deals with none . . . this 

deals with anything else but land and gives them the right to 

hold it. Land however is dealt with differently, and I'm told in 

each case the right to acquire or sell land is subject to an order 

in council. And so it's dealt with in a different area. 

 

Mr. Martens: — So, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, then if 

SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation) 

owned land, or it would have taken it over because they had 

assets in that land and then they disposed of the company, that 

land would be dealt with in a different form than strictly 

disposing it in a civil suit in related items. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes, the member stated the matter 

correctly. 

 

Clause 16 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 17 to 49 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The Chair: — Order. I must ask that if others want to carry on 

conversations that are not related to the business of the House 

they do so behind the rail and not disrupt the proceedings of the 

committee. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 17 — An Act to amend The Fatal Accidents Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, if I 

understand . . . or Mr. Minister, if I understand this Act, this 

Act extends benefits to common law. The term "spouse" refers 

now to common law, in common-law relationships as well, and 

extends the benefits that could be incurred or claimed by a 

common-law spouse in the event of a fatal accident or in the 

event of a claim due to an accidental death. Is that what you're 

saying? 

 

(2000) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — That's correct. At common law, no 

action could lie because of a death of a person, and so at the 

end of the last century legislatures made provision for damages 

in the event of a death of a person. This extends that to 

common-law spouses and extends, as you can see in section 

4(2), extends the kinds and the areas in which monetary loss 

may be recognized and calculated. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, in looking at a person making a 

claim and due to the complexity of our society nowadays and 

the fact that persons enter the relationship with maybe another 

individual and yet they still haven't legally had a marriage 

annulled or a divorce take place, what happens in that? How is 

this Act affected? Would the individual who's been maybe 

possibly living with that person have the right then to claim, or 

is it the actual wife who's still, under The Marriage Act, still 

part of that relationship? 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — No, it is conceivable that both might 

claim. If you were to be divorced and remarried, it is 

conceivable that both might claim. Any person who is a 

dependant, who suffers loss as a result of a death of a person, 

may claim damages. You've got to prove actual monetary loss. 

But it's conceivable that both could claim if both the lawful 

spouse and the common-law spouse both sustained damages. 

The insurance company for the negligent driver, assuming 

that's how it happened, would have to pay damages to both. 

No, it's conceivable that both would be compensated. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Well if that's possible, then it certainly opens up 

the door, or I would think it would open or possibly open up 

the door for some fairly substantial claims because two parties 

involved laying claim . . . I guess it depends on what type of 

claim. Would it be the relationship prior to or following that, 

and how much of the claim can a party go for and what terms 

of the claims? I suppose this is something that would be settled 

or would have to go to the courts to decide what is accessible 

or what's available. Is there a limit on the amount of claims that 

can be given, and what process is involved? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — This is again . . . Assessment of 

damages is a matter for the judges. It's very complex. They 

have to try and estimate actual damages. There is no legal limit 

on the amount that can be claimed. The practical limit is 

usually the amount of the insurance policy since that's all that's 

available to pay. But that's a practical limit. There's no legal 

limit. And some of the awards can get extremely high. The 

awards can get into the millions and sometimes tens of millions 

of dollars in rare cases. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Just to have it clarified a little beyond that, if 

there's an individual who is still married, has divorce 

proceedings going on, and is cohabitating with an individual 

who has children, are they also in this whole circle? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — They will be once this is passed. 

Anyone who is a dependant, who suffers loss by reason of the 

death, can claim. It is conceivable that could include both the 

lawful spouse and a common-law spouse. Actually had a case 

of this where a person was killed as the result of a drunk driver, 

had a long-term and permanent relationship but common law, 

had severed a marital relationship some decades earlier. The 

only person eligible to claim was the lawful wife who did not 

know he was dead for some months afterwards actually. So the 

answer to your question is yes, they could both claim. Again a 

judge is going to scrutinize this and only calculate actual 

monetary loss on this. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Okay, Mr. Minister, go on one step further. 

The children of the divorced spouse and the children of the 

cohabitated spouse, can they also make claim? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — It includes children, stepchildren, 

adopted children, illegitimate children, 



April 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1339 

anyone who is a dependant, yes. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Would this impact in any way, Mr. Minister, 

with claims under the widow's allowance or an allowance 

through Canada Pension Plan? Would this make any impact on 

those kind of claims at all? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — No, this doesn't affect pensions or 

insurance in any way, shape, or form, as those are governed by 

different statutes. 

 

Mr. Martens: — On any insurance claim, whether it's life 

insurance or any of the insurance . . . let's say it's an accident 

and SGI or any of those kinds of claims. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — No, I might not have been as precise 

as I should have been. It wouldn't affect things like life 

insurance and pensions. It certainly would affect third-party 

liability insurance such as SGI provides to everybody. No, I 

may not have said it. When I said it wouldn't affect pensions or 

insurance I meant pensions or life insurance. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, what is determined as loss? Like 

what actions can be taken? When you're looking at loss what 

do you look at? Through the Bill I see a couple of things are 

mentioned here. We talk about medical and hospital expenses, 

funeral expenses. What areas can a dependant claim for under 

this Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — With respect to fatal accidents and 

fatal accidents only, the section 4 defines loss to be actual 

monetary loss. There's no loss for pain and suffering. Some 

jurisdictions do, but this is one that doesn't. It's just actual 

monetary loss: loss of support, funeral expenses, etc. And then 

this goes on and in the new (c), (d), and (e) includes three 

additional kinds of monetary losses which courts in earlier 

cases had concluded didn't fall within the existing section. So 

this section . . . really the section 4 is a response to 

interpretation of the earlier Act by courts in cases which came 

before them. 

 

Mr. Toth: — So what you're saying then, Mr. Minister, is 

when you're looking at monetary loss, are you basically then 

. . . you would be identifying — what would you say? — the 

earning power of that individual over that period, a period, if 

that person's life hadn't been ended; the earning power of the 

individual over a period of time as well as then you get into 

actual expenses incurred due to the seriousness of the accident 

and all that? Is that what you're telling us, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes. It varies from case to case. It's 

monetary loss. It can be extremely large if you kill a . . . if you 

were negligent and the person who dies as a result of your 

negligence is a 35-year-old brain surgeon whose income would 

be in the hundreds of thousands of dollars a year and whose 

spouse does not work and who has four or five children, the 

damages could be extremely large. 

 

On the other hand, if the deceased is perpetually unemployed 

and has made no contribution to . . . 

made little or no contribution to his family, the damages would 

be very small. So it's the actual contribution which the 

deceased would have made to the family, to the immediate 

dependants. 

 

Mr. Toth: — So when you're talking of monetary loss, Mr. 

Minister, you're actually referring to basically the job or the 

monetary value of the job that the person was performing then. 

 

Let's say a person that could have been . . . It's an individual, 

say in their early 30's. We're quite well aware of the fact that 

people can rise, do move, do change occupations, and their 

earning ability can change over the years. 

 

What you're saying: what this present Act just deals with, what 

the earning power that that individual would have had if they 

would have remained or continued to work at that present level. 

Is that . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Judges have some very difficult 

cases to decide here. A judge has got to try to figure out: was 

he going to improve himself? If he had a drinking problem, 

was it going to sink him or her? Judges can have some very 

difficult cases because they've got to try and figure out what a 

person would have done with the rest of their life. 

 

The fact that it's difficult doesn't mean they don't have to make 

a decision. Eventually they've got to look at the evidence and 

do the best they can with whatever evidence is placed before 

them. So yes, a judge would have to decide what a person's 

going to do with the rest of their life and what they will 

contribute to their family, yes. 

 

Mr. Toth: — It would seem to me, Mr. Minister, that what 

we're seeing in society nowadays, some of the rulings that are 

coming down probably far exceed what anyone would have 

earned in five or six given lifetimes, let alone one. 

 

I'm not sure if there shouldn't be at least some limitations in 

place. And certainly no one's trying to put a limitation on what 

a spouse or children should receive in the event of losing a 

spouse, especially the loss of, let's say, a father and a husband 

is traumatic enough, and certainly creates a problem especially 

if the wife is not employed. And we don't want to limit that. 

 

But as I look at the different settlements that we find coming 

down time and time again, it seems to me that the insurance 

that is building up that every one of us as individuals carry, a 

lot of that is beginning to reflect the fact that there is no 

rational, responsible, if you will, type of decisions made when 

allowances are made. And I don't think this Bill sets any 

limitations on it, but it would seem to me that maybe there 

should be. 

 

In the whole scheme of things there maybe should be some 

responsibility laid as to what a person can apply for. And I just 

think of the recent decision in the States, some 100-and-some 

million dollars or 90-some 



1340 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1993 

million dollars to that couple because their son was killed, 

going to court against GMC (General Motors Corporation). 

And it seems to me that a person, even in their lifetime, if there 

was even a couple million dollars compensation would have 

been more than fair. 

 

And I begin to wonder sometimes when we look at 

compensation if sometimes it isn't somewhat excessive. And 

certainly there are other people fall on the other side where 

they probably don't get sufficient and maybe not quite 

appropriate. And I wonder if there isn't a way of addressing 

some of that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — One mustn't confuse American 

jurisprudence in this area with Canadian jurisprudence. They're 

handled very differently. No one, except the American Trial 

Lawyers Association, is much of a fan of the American system. 

The American system provides awards, provides it in almost all 

states. Juries assess the damages and the decision of the jury 

cannot be appealed, and American juries are among the most 

generous institutions on earth. 

 

That is not the Canadian system. The Canadian system is that 

judges make awards. Jury trials are possible, but extremely 

rare, and it's all appealable. So that one mustn't confuse 

American jurisprudence and experience, which admittedly has 

been bad, with Canadian jurisprudence and experience, which I 

think has been much better. 

 

There is no real, concrete proof that our system is getting out of 

hand. The awards have increased, but there's been inflation. I 

can tell the member that officials at SGI are looking at this. But 

I think most members of the Bar and think many members of 

the insurance industry would argue that the Canadian system 

has worked reasonably well. No one accuses the American 

system of having worked reasonably well. Everyone agrees 

they've had a very serious problem with personal injury cases 

south of the border. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This is all of 

some interest to me because my father died in a car accident 

and so I have an observation to make to you about the fact that 

a life expectancy or the earning power of the individual are in 

fact legitimate reasons why you should make a claim of a 

certain amount. Just used as an example, and that was in 1973, 

a claim was made for $23,000 and it was paid by SGI. He died 

on January 13 and on those 13 days in January, earned 

$13,000. He was 59 years old. And they said over this period of 

time, he would have earned X amount of dollars and that was 

$23,000. 

 

And so when you calculate an individual's life expectancy and 

the terms and conditions that exist as it relates to saying that 

the benefits will accrue to the volume of dollars that he could 

have received, then there is a limitation. Why should — and I 

raise this as a question — why should a brain surgeon have 

more money paid out of the system than the person who was 

my father? Brain surgeons . . . And this relates to 

grief and to the things involved in that. And why should one 

person's life be of a significant more dollar value than another 

person's? 

 

(2015) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I would admit to the member from 

Morse that the results in this area can sometimes look 

capricious, when relatively affluent people are rewarded 

handsomely and people who have been less fortunate in life are 

treated in a much shabbier fashion. I admit the result looks 

capricious. I would only say that this discussion is getting a 

little outside this Act in the sense that that's determined by 

common law, not really under this statute. 

 

In any event, the jurisprudence behind this is that the court 

compensates for actual loss. The family of a high income 

earner loses more support than a family of a low income 

earner. Is it socially just? Perhaps not. But the jurisprudence 

here is, we compensate for actual loss, and we don't attempt 

any sort of a social policy in the area. 

 

As I say, the results may look a little capricious but that's the 

law in this and every other jurisdiction, actually. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Chairman, under (e) it says there: "any 

other out-of-pocket expenses reasonably incurred as a 

consequence of the death". Now does that mean the funeral 

expenses? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Funeral expenses are already 

covered. 

 

I'm informed by the officials that this is intended to cover 

out-of-pocket expenses. Some of the things which apparently 

weren't covered because the court found that they weren't . . . 

the language of the previous statute couldn't bear this 

interpretation, didn't cover phone calls which might surround a 

funeral, or travel expenses, might not cover time you had to 

take off for work because of the death of a member of the 

family. 

 

So this is intended to cover out-of-pocket expenses other than 

funeral expenses which actually were already covered. 

 

Mr. Martens: — What about legal costs in probating the will 

and those items? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — No. The legislators and the judges 

have just enough sense not to let the lawyers loose on the 

insurance fund by sending the insurance companies their bills. 

A client's got to pay that. Otherwise, otherwise you will truly 

see these things run quickly into the red. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Well that's basically one of the points that I 

was going to make from this. Are we coming to the place 

where this is not going to trigger more legal action against, to 

have higher settlements in relating to insurance and all of those 

things? Is this going to contribute or is it going to keep a status 

quo in your 



April 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1341 

opinion? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — It certainly won't affect the number 

of claims nor will it materially affect the amount. The 

additional items which are covered here are really secondary 

and much smaller in nature. The major loss on death has long 

been covered. These are simply some peripheral items which I 

don't think will add materially to the cost. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Just one other question. I understand from the 

Bill, you've extended the time period in which you can make a 

claim. It's gone from a 12-month to a 2-year, 24-month period. 

Is that true? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — That's correct. 

 

Mr. Martens: — What the purpose of that was . . . because of 

this onus involved in trying to get the information together to 

lay a claim, is that why . . . the reason it's extended, or what's 

the reason for that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — These things . . . There's a 

bewildering number of limitation periods which can confuse 

and confound even lawyers who deal with it every day. There's 

an effort here to try and standardize the limitation periods. 

 

The period is now two years under The Vehicles Act. This is 

making it the same period of time just so the public, and the 

lawyers who deal with it, will find the whole matter a little less 

complex and difficult. So it's standardization of the limitation 

period. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 19 — an Act respecting Survivorship 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, and 

Mr. Minister, I understand from this Act, what you're doing 

here is recognizing, I guess, The Survivorship Act, if it's, say, 

two individuals are . . . I guess probably the best example to 

use is, say, are accident victims. If I determine correctly what 

you're saying, you're determining that both individuals died at 

the same time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — With this Act, members will want to 

shed a few tears. A little bit of Roman law will die here. The 

situation has now been governed by a rule of the Roman law 

called the commorientes law which says that if two people die 

in circumstances in which it can't be determined who died first, 

you assume the younger died first. 

 

It produces some very capricious results in automobile 

accidents when you have a husband and wife who are found 

dead. Normally the wife is younger. The estates then pass from 

the husband to 

the wife, and if there are no children it may pass to the wife's 

family and is often . . . This is a particular problem with farm 

families. The son is often the person . . . family from whom the 

land comes. The son gets a farm from his father, before there's 

any children they're killed in a car accident. The whole effort 

goes — because the wife's often younger — the whole effort 

goes from the husband to the wife to the wife's family, with the 

husband's family left out in the cold. 

 

It is a bit of Roman law which sounded rational but in fact has 

been an enormous pain in the neck to the legal system for the 

last 2,000 years. With this statute in Saskatchewan it will be 

brought to an end. If we can't determine who died first, the 

estates are simply divided equally. The whole law is done away 

with and it'll be much more just, actually. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Just going on your last statement, when you say, 

divided equally, it just . . . both partners would, I guess, like 

you say, and just using the example of a farm, that farm would 

basically be divided down the middle. The wife . . . or wife's 

family would receive part or the husband's would receive part 

of that. 

 

If there's family involved, would that whole operation go 

directly to the . . . Let's say there are two sons or a son and a 

daughter. Would all the assets on the farm then go to the direct 

descendants rather than going, say, to the wife and then to her 

family? Is that how it would follow? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes, it would go to the direct 

descendants if there are any. And the staff point out that 

another major complication which is becoming much more 

frequent is the blended family and what happens when you 

have children which are not the children of both. It really 

becomes a very complicated problem with the blended family 

and so this brings that whole mess to an end. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Well it would seem, Mr. Minister, that even 

though we can enact legislation and bring Acts before the 

Assembly and bring in laws before our nation that it would be 

very imperative that parents or adults take the time to indeed 

lay out what their plans . . . or what they would really like to 

see done in the event of one spouse or both spouses maybe 

taken from this life prematurely. 

 

And if there's anything that I think possibly should be . . . 

probably be on the educational side is bringing this forward, 

because I think to a lot of people, and especially when you're 

younger, and none of us really want to face the fact that our life 

isn't . . . we're not guaranteed the three score and ten years as 

referred to in the biblical pattern. And it would seem that just 

by relating it or getting some educational aspect out there and 

letting other people know it, that in spite of all the laws and the 

rules that we can bring in, it's still not always that easy just to 

identify and say this is how things will be totally applied that 

would be satisfactory to everyone. 

 

Maybe you'd like to respond to that. 



1342 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1993 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes, none of this is any substitute 

for a will. And the only proper way to handle this is to see your 

solicitor and have a will drawn up. This applies to that 

percentage of people who for some reason or other will not do 

that. I guess Howard Hughes is the best example, who spent all 

his life accumulating an enormous estate but didn't bother to 

draw up a will. For some reason or other there's a surprising 

number of those people. This attempts to deal with those 

people, but none of this is any substitute for preparing a will. 

 

And you are right, the legal system needs to do as good a job as 

it can in educating people about the need to prepare wills and 

to make these decisions themselves. The member is quite right. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I also note that you talk of the fact 

that . . . let's say two individuals pass away but one passes 

away a few days after, say a major accident, and if I understand 

correctly, in the same circumstances that they have . . . it's 

determined that they actually had died at the same time. At 

least that's what I understand from clause 4(1). If the one 

individual who's been hospitalized is of fairly sound mental 

capacity and due to some other complications passes away, I 

think we'd have a difficulty in saying that they were deemed to 

have died at the same time. Is there a limitation as to that 

extended period, or what are we necessarily talking of in this 

portion of the Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — This is intended to cover the 

situation where the injured . . . the one who lives for three days 

or four and a half days, or whatever, doesn't regain 

consciousness. If they regain consciousness but their injuries 

are still fatal, which would be a rare case but I guess it's 

possible, they could then of course prepare a will and the 

hospital staff would normally cooperate in getting that done 

very quickly. This really just applies to the people who never 

regain consciousness. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Would it be fair to ask roughly how many 

conditions or how many circumstances that we face in any 

given year where people really haven't determined and made 

proper plans for their future, that this Bill would actually 

affect? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — It's very rare. The officials were just 

telling me as you were talking that they asked the Public 

Trustee if she had any files, actual examples of this, and it 

turned out she did not. In practising for some 25 years, I 

handled one such problem in 25 years. So it's extremely rare, 

extremely rare. We don't have any actual stats, but it's 

extremely rare that this ever happens. 

 

Mr. Toth: — One other question, Mr. Minister, and this comes 

back to a comment you made just a few minutes ago especially 

where say a couple have remarried and there's two sets of 

families. You've got two individual families. Property in that 

case would then be split down the middle and would be shared. 

That's what you're just saying. 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

(2030) 

 

Bill No. 32 — An Act to amend The Family Maintenance 

Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, what 

specifically are we talking about when we are talking about 

The Family Maintenance Act here? Are we getting into parents 

looking after their own? Are we getting into relationships 

where there's separation and maintenance agreements that have 

been raised? I'm wondering what all we're covering under this 

Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — This applies to responsibility of 

parents for children, this amendment. There is now . . . the 

statute now exists, and it states that you have liability; a parent 

is liable to pay maintenance on behalf of a child when they're 

under 18. The change here is subtle. The statute now provides 

you're also responsible when they're over 18 but still dependent 

by reason of illness and disability. This change adds the phrase 

"or other cause," so that you're now liable for children who are 

over 18 who are dependent by reason of illness, disability, or 

other cause. 

 

Actually what we're doing here is making our provincial statute 

the same as the federal divorce Act. There has been a subtle 

difference, but it's an important one. The difference is that 

under the provincial statute you're not liable for children over 

18 who are dependent because they're still in school. Under the 

federal divorce Act, you are. And this makes the two 

coterminous, if I can use that phrase, with respect to the 

circumstances under which you're liable for maintenance on 

behalf of a child. So that's the change. 

 

There is another change on the next page which was requested 

by some people. It is a section which provides that my able 

colleague, the Minister of Social Services, cannot make 

application on behalf of a child who is a ward of the 

department. It has never been the policy of the department to 

make such applications. Someone, however, became concerned 

that the department might change their mind and we're closing 

that avenue off by legislation so that the minister cannot make 

such applications. As I say, it's a change in theory only because 

no department . . . it's never been the policy of any government 

to actually do that. 

 

Mr. Toth: — So what you're . . . If I understood you correctly, 

you mention the fact that even if a person is over 18 years of 

age, which in normal cases they're almost considered to be 

coming independent, self-reliant, you're then suggesting the 

parents are responsible for the maintenance and well-being of 

that individual. If that individual was able to provide 



April 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1343 

for themselves, they'd probably be able to apply to, let's say, 

Social Services for some assistance. What happens here? Are 

we saying that, because a person isn't quite capable, the parent 

is responsible? That it's not the responsibility of the state to 

recognize that person as an independent individual? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — No. This really governs the right of 

one parent to support from the other parent for children. That's 

all it really governs. And it extends the responsibility, usually 

of the male, to pay maintenance on behalf of children who are 

still in school but over 18. 

 

That's been covered since 1968 under the federal Divorce Act, 

but our Act has never changed to cover that. Now you're liable 

for maintenance for children if they're over 18 and still in 

school. That's really the substantive change here. 

 

Mr. Toth: — So what you're saying then is, let's say a 

separation of family and there are two or three children 

involved and one child is say 18 or 19, the maintenance 

proceeds past the age of 18 then is what you're saying, as long 

as that child is getting further education. 

 

How long a period would be involved? Because a person could 

spend maybe five, six, seven, who knows how many years say 

pursuing an education or furthering their education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — This is in the discretion of the 

judges. However, in my experience most judges exercise 

doubts on behalf of the child. 

 

If a child's still in school — and sometimes this can carry on 

until the mid-20's — if a child's still in school, judges will 

generally order maintenance paid unless there's good proof that 

the child's become a professional student and is not benefiting 

from education and should go to work. 

 

But the courts usually exercise any doubts in favour of the 

children, and I think that's probably as it should be. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Another thing, Mr. Minister, and I'm not exactly 

sure if it's dealt with in this piece of legislation, but I guess one 

of the major complaints that I hear a lot of times in problems 

that arise from separation and divorces — and a lot of 

individuals certainly argue for proper maintenance and the 

proper funds and support — but the other area that arises is 

accessibility by both parents to I guess appropriate time with 

the child, to have access. Is that discussed or raised in this 

piece of legislation at all, identifying the fact that both parents 

should have equal access? 

 

Or I guess maybe one of the major concerns is sometime, and 

probably more so raised by the husband or the father, is the fact 

that they're in most cases paying the maintenance but a lot of 

times have very little access to the child. 

 

I think it would appear to me that we need to have 

some sort of maybe guidelines that would allow for a greater 

fairness on this basis. I wonder if you could just bring that . . . 

comment on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — That's completely outside the 

jurisdiction of this Act. This Act deals only with maintenance 

and not with access. Admittedly they're very difficult problems 

that courts struggle with, fathers complain about, and lawyers 

make lots of money out of . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That 

describes the whole problem of access, I think. 

 

Mr. Toth: — So what you're saying, Mr. Minister, then this 

specifically deals with maintenance and the continuation of 

maintenance as long as it's recognized that the child should be 

under the support of that parent through a reasonable time and 

education. That's correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — That's affirmative. 

 

Mr. Martens: — It's been brought to my attention in the last 

two or three months that we have maintenance, and we put the 

Bill into place here in the province. And I agreed with it at the 

time. 

 

However, what happens is different jurisdictions cause 

different problems with maintenance as I'm finding out. And 

I'm not a lawyer, but I have had to get these individuals who 

were not getting maintenance and individuals would move to 

British Columbia, and it happened on two or three cases where 

they moved to British Columbia. Court orders had to be given 

to those people in order to have the court established. And on 

one of these cases the individual had no job, was being paid 

unemployment insurance, and therefore the federal court had to 

be accessed in order to determine the maintenance. 

 

Now two things I think probably that I'd like to have a response 

from you, Mr. Minister, and that is: one, where does the 

individual who doesn't know how this process works . . . does 

the maintenance enforcement office provide counselling to 

these individuals when they say, my maintenance hasn't come 

for three months? Where is it? That's one thing I think that 

needs to be addressed by the counsellors that are there. 

 

And the other thing is the responsibility to some extent of the 

individual who is paying the maintenance should in fact have 

some way of being required to tell the maintenance office 

where he is going. Because what is happening is they're 

moving from province to province to province. And under the 

way this thing works, each time they have an additional time 

when they don't have to pay maintenance, and that is causing a 

serious concern to many of the people that have contacted me 

in the last few months. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes, if the member can stand a 

compliment from an old adversary, this is something that was 

greatly improved when your administration was in office 

during the '80s. I know you won't recover politically from this, 

but this is something that was greatly improved during the '80s. 



1344 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1993 

The member correctly points out there's a good distance left to 

go. I didn't know this, but my officials tell me that there is a 

statute which was passed last week in the House of Commons 

which will remedy the very problems you refer to, when it's 

proclaimed and in effect. So I gather some relief, at least, is on 

hand. We'll see how effective it is when it's proclaimed and in 

effect. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Would the minister provide just how that 

would happen. Could he provide some details on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The bugaboo here has long been that 

it's relatively easy for the federal government to find people, 

but not easy for the provincial governments to find people, and 

the federal government won't provide access to their data 

banks. This legislation will give the provincial governments 

who are struggling with maintenance enforcement, access to 

federal data banks and it will make it much easier to find them. 

So that, I'm told, is the crux of the new statute. 

 

Mr. Martens: — By these data banks, you're referring to 

unemployment insurance, pensions, or items that are in that 

fashion. Are there any others or are those not correct either? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The officials think it's probably all 

of the ones you mentioned, but they're not entirely sure. This 

has just been passed; it's not entirely clear exactly how the 

federal government's going to administer it. So we're waiting. 

Apparently the officials, the department itself, is waiting for 

further information from the federal government. 

 

Mr. Martens: — One last question. When the Department of 

Justice gets it, I'd appreciate having an opportunity to get the 

regulations as it relates to that and have an opportunity then to 

be able to assess it and advise some of the people that have 

contacted me about their concern. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — My ever-helpful officials here have 

made notes of that and will send it to you when it is received. 

 

Mr. Martens: — They used to, Mr. Minister, follow my 

instructions as well, so I know them fairly well. 

 

The observation that I would like to make on this too is that the 

information probably needs to have detail as it relates to, not 

only the regulations, but which data banks would be involved 

in there so that I could get these people to contact them. 

 

The other thing that is an observation I'd like to make is, there 

is a great deal of, what should you say, apprehension when 

speaking to the maintenance office in relation to . . . the 

clientele believe that the maintenance office is in fact 

withholding funds from these individuals. And I have to 

explain to them in a very considerate kind of a way that these 

people are, in a general sense, acting on their behalf. 

I wonder if there would be a way to find out whether there 

could be an explanation made to these individuals who are 

acting on behalf of these clients who are my constituents, that 

the attitude towards them is not one of conflict. Because they 

generally, I think, believe that the government is trying to keep 

this money from them, not understanding the details involved. 

 

(2045) 

 

And here's where some of the problem exists. I've had one 

individual who has left the province who has had two people 

ask for maintenance, and consequently, the first individual who 

contacted me has not been made aware of the details, nor 

should she be made aware of the details of the other 

maintenance orders that have been given. However the 

restriction that they have on confidentiality causes a concern 

and then their frustration steps in as to how to deal with that 

problem. 

 

So the clients have to understand that, number one, there is a 

confidentiality requirement here, and the second thing is that 

they need to have some confidence that these individuals are 

acting on their behalf. And I think that there has to be some 

method of doing that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I am told by the officials that the 

very issues you raise are actually under consideration now. To 

what extent and how much time should be spent, in some ways, 

counselling people and explaining these to them and what the 

breakdown should be, all I can say to the hon. member is I'm 

told the matter is under consideration. 

 

Now I'll undertake on behalf of the Minister of Justice to drop 

you a letter when the matters are resolved or the focus gets a 

little better and let you know what the outcome of the 

discussions is, and you can respond probably in his own 

estimates. Indeed, we'll try and respond before his estimates are 

brought up so that you can raise this directly with him in his 

own estimates. 

 

Mr. Martens: — I'd just like to say I appreciate that kind of 

response because it helps people out and that's really what 

we're interested in doing. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 

Minister, a similar type of Bill came forward in the last session 

where we were dealing with maintenance. And at that time we 

talked to the minister and to the Justice minister about 

following maintenance as people moved around and the types 

of things that could be done. At that time we asked the minister 

to approach the federal government to better able to track the 

person who is supposed to be paying, to utilize perhaps the 

Income Tax Act, to follow where these people were at. Has 

anything along this line been done? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes, in fact just in a few moments 

ago I was explaining to one of your 



April 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1345 

colleagues that the federal government has in fact passed a 

statute — it was passed last week — which in fact will give the 

provincial government access to these data banks. It was just 

passed last week. We have some informed guesses as to how 

it's going to operate but no hard information. 

 

We undertook to provide the information to the member from 

Morse. We will undertake to provide it to the member from 

Souris-Cannington as well so that you have the information as 

soon as it's available to us. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. One of the 

problems that a large number people have in collecting 

maintenance is the idea of garnisheeing wages from the 

employer of the other spouse. Is it possible to speed up that 

process? 

 

I've had a number of phone calls and complaints that the wages 

had been garnisheed from the person who is supposed to be 

paying and yet the spouse that is supposed to be receiving the 

money has never received it. And this may be two, three, and 

four months later. There seems to be quite a time-lag in there 

from the time that the person's money is garnisheed to the time 

that the person is supposed to receive it does actually get the 

dollars into their hands. 

 

Have you looked at that situation, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — There are problems with the federal 

government. But apart from problems with the federal 

government, that should not be occurring. If it's taking a matter 

of months then you need to raise the individual case with the 

appropriate authority. That should not be . . . apart from the 

federal government, which has been problematic, otherwise 

that should not be occurring. The member may want to send 

specific details on of the case that he's referring to. That 

shouldn't be happening. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Minister, I have brought that up 

with the minister at the time that it was occurring. And I 

haven't received a lot of complaints from that person since 

then, so perhaps it has been resolved. 

 

But it does seem to be a problem of some time-lag there. And a 

number of times I've received questions of concern from the 

people about the contacts that the maintenance enforcement 

officers have been maintaining. There seems to be some 

personality conflicts or some problems in dealing between the 

person who is supposed to be receiving the funds and the 

maintenance enforcement officer. There seems to be a 

reluctance of the maintenance enforcement officers to actually 

press forward with the claims against the person who should be 

paying. Has the minister looked into that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Again, this was . . . we had a brief 

discussion about this with the member from Morse. This matter 

is under consideration right now. We're hoping to . . . I am told 

to expect to resolve the matter shortly. Undertook to reply to 

the member from Morse and set out the position, the minister's 

views on 

it, and will make sure that the member from 

Souris-Cannington's copy of that letter. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I know in 

your statement to the member from Moosomin, you made the 

statement that access is not part of this legislation. Well, Mr. 

Minister, I think that some considerations of access should be 

included in the maintenance. That would be an incentive for 

that person who is paying the maintenance to continue to do so. 

 

It does on rare occasions become a problem. The person is 

paying their maintenance, and yet the other spouse is reluctant 

to allow that person to have access to the children involved. I 

think there needs to be some more work done in that area to 

allow better access. If the person is not supporting their 

maintenance in the proper manner, then I can understand the 

reluctance of the other spouse to allow access. Now it may not 

be right, but I can understand their reaction to that. 

 

But if the maintenance is being supplied in the proper manner, 

then I believe that access should be allowed. And it should 

actually be part of this or other legislation to allow proper 

access to the children. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Well this is one of those difficult 

areas of the law, where on one hand the children got to eat, and 

the theory is they should get their maintenance and not have 

their maintenance held up because of a squabble between the 

parents. On the other hand, it's very difficult to convince a 

parent who doesn't have access that he ought to pay his 

maintenance when the spouse — usually female — won't give 

him access to children. 

 

It is an area which has long troubled the law. It's really outside 

the parameter of this Act. I will ask the officials to appraise 

their minister of this matter, and could be appropriate for you 

to raise it with the minister in his estimates. We'll perhaps 

handle it that way. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, just in 

listening to some of the questioning my colleagues have raised, 

it would appear to me then that the significant progress has 

been made on the interprovincial removal of boundaries 

regarding the maintenance enforcement and what have you. 

And the reason I also just stand up just to reiterate that point is 

some of the concerns that have been raised even in my area 

where individuals have say been in one province and now 

come to our province, and some of the difficulties they're 

facing. 

 

And in fact the one has to do with a situation relating to an 

individual who just happens to be working for the federal 

government on a forces base. There seems to be some 

restrictions or difficulties, or there has been — and I'm not sure 

I trust that it's been resolved — but there seems to have been 

some fairly major difficulties in trying to get access and get I 

guess the proper maintenance, make sure that it's following 

through. 

 

So I trust that with the federal legislation, this 



1346 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1993 

legislation, that we are removing some of the borders that . . . 

or the boundaries I guess or the restrictions, the walls that have 

been built up and made it difficult for families to live as normal 

and productive a life as possible after a separation. 

 

I thank you and your officials. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, I'd like to thank the minister for 

his forthrightness and cooperative spirit and endeavours to 

really work with the opposition in addressing some of our 

concerns. And certainly thank you to your officials for the time 

they spent here tonight. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I would also like to thank the 

officials for assisting a minister who is not as familiar with this 

material as the Minister of Justice might have been. 

 

I also want to thank the members of the opposition. It was a 

very useful discussion actually. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Official opposition. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes. I want to make it clear I'm 

thanking the official opposition for their assistance. I do thank 

you for the discussions. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 7 — An Act respecting Social Workers 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I move the 

amendments be now read a first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, I move the 

Bill be now read a third time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 26 — An Act to repeal The Saskatchewan 

Computer Utility Corporation Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move this Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 13 — An Act to repeal The Mineral Taxation Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be now 

read a third time and passed under its title. 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 14 — An Act to amend the Statute Law 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move this Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 15 — An Act to amend The Limitation of Actions 

Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move this Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

(2100) 

 

Bill No. 18 — An Act to amend The Victims of Crime Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move this Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 16 — An Act respecting the Interpretation of 

Enactments and prescribing Rules Governing Acts 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move this Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 17 — An Act to amend The Fatal Accidents Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be now 

read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 19 — An Act respecting Survivorship 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move this Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 32 — An Act to amend The Family Maintenance 

Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move this Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 



April 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1347 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 52 — An Act respecting Culture and Recreation 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am 

pleased to, on behalf of the minister, say a few comments on 

behalf of the minister and move second reading of The Culture 

and Recreation Act, 1993. My comments are going to be very 

brief and for that I'm sure the members will be eternally 

grateful. 

 

The members will recall that there was a major reorganization 

of several departments which took effect at the beginning of 

this fiscal year. One of those reorganizations caused the 

combining of the two departments which had been looking 

after administering affairs responsible for municipal 

government into one department. And as a result it's necessary 

to pass some legislation to give authority for certain actions. 

 

The purpose of this particular Act to which I am speaking 

today is to provide a legislative base for the recreation and 

cultural activities of the Department of Municipal Government. 

This new Act is necessary as a result of the proposed repeal of 

The Renewable Resources, Recreation and Culture Act. And 

with the repeal of The Renewable Resources, Recreation and 

Culture Act, there would be no legislative authority for 

recreation and cultural activities and therefore there is a 

requirement for this legislation. 

 

Members who've had an opportunity to look at the Bill will 

have noted that there are no new provisions or no changes from 

what has been there in the past, and therefore I do not suspect 

there will be anything of a controversial nature that will be 

found here. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with that brief explanation, I now move 

second reading of the Bill, The Culture and Recreation Act, 

1993. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I will follow the minister's lead and 

be duly short and move that we adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 53 — An Act respecting Natural Resources 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to move second 

reading of a new statute entitled The Natural Resources Act to 

replace The Renewable Resources, Recreation and Culture Act. 

 

The new Act incorporates new resource management 

philosophies, updates the responsibilities of various resource 

management funds, strengthens enforcement officers' powers, 

and increases the levels of fines. Enforcement clauses have 

been reworded or added to make this new Act consistent with 

amendments to The Wildlife Act recently introduced. 

 

The Natural Resources Act authorizes officers to inspect 

commercial premises such as outfitters' and 

guides' business offices; inspect the documents; search 

vehicles, boats, and persons; and seize evidence pertaining to 

violations. It increases the maximum fine from $2,000 to 

$25,000 to be consistent with the maximum fine under The 

Wildlife Act. This will significantly deter unlawful activity in 

the outfitting and guiding industry. 

 

A new section dealing with the statute of limitations allows 

prosecution to take place up to two years from the date of the 

violation. Many investigations of illegal outfitting and 

commercial use of resources require intensive investigation and 

take up to two years to gather enough evidence to prosecute. 

 

Another major change in the Act is a new clause which enables 

the department to enter into resource management agreements, 

partnerships, and joint ventures to facilitate new, sustainable, 

resource management philosophies. New sections enable the 

commercial revolving fund, the resource protection and 

development revolving fund, and the forest renewal and 

development fund to receive money from third parties so it can 

be used for the specific resource management activity for 

which the fund was established. 

 

The key administrative issues in the draft Bill include changing 

the name to The Natural Resources Act, adding and amending 

definitions, and creating new sections dealing with the daily 

administrative functions of the department. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of The Natural 

Resources Act and urge all legislative members to support this 

new statute. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I believe 

my colleagues certainly would like to have some time to 

review this Bill and take into consideration some of the 

comments made by the minister in bringing forward his second 

reading. 

 

The name change I don't think is anything that any member is 

really all that concerned about. When we start talking about 

enforcement procedures and added enforcement by resource 

officers across the province, I think there are a number of areas 

that we want to raise some questions with the minister and with 

the department to in fact make certain that the added powers 

given to the resource officers are somewhat, I guess, 

controlled, are being limited, that we're not giving them 

extraordinary powers far and above the duties and the 

responsibilities they have. 

 

The minister also talked about the ability to raise some fees to 

cover some of the costs or to cover the costs of the Natural 

Resources in following up and it seems to me that some of the 

communities already . . . I'm not exactly sure but we have 

certainly seen or I've heard of the major fee increases in the 

department that have come into effect, and I think that people 

will be raising some of these issues with us. 

 

And in order to allow for greater research and the ability to 

indeed look at the overall aspects of the Bill 



1348 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1993 

before us, I move that we adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 55 — An Act to amend The Workers' 

Compensation Act, 1979 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. I'm going to 

in a moment — and I won't go on too long here — I'm going to 

take a moment to explain, I think in general terms, what we're 

doing with this legislation. There's been an enormous amount 

of confusion about it. And then I'm going to go through some 

of the more detailed changes. But I want to try to explain what 

we are doing with The Workers' Compensation Act because 

there's been a lot of misunderstanding. 

 

Prior to 1978 The Workers' Compensation Act worked like 

SGI. In SGI, you're in an accident, hit by a drunk driver, get a 

broken knee, SGI gives you 10,000 bucks and it's goodbye, it's 

good luck, and they never expect to see you again. That's how 

SGI . . . that's how the workers' compensation worked. It was a 

compensation scheme. 

 

After 1978 the system was changed. Although we still call it 

The Workers' Compensation Act, in fact it really was changed 

and became a rehabilitation scheme. Workers did not receive a 

pension for the rest of their life if they had a permanent injury. 

What they did thereafter is they rehabilitated people. 

 

Let us a suppose a steelworker, or a nurse might be another 

example, has got a bad back, can no longer lift. You might take 

the steel worker and turn them into a television repair person. 

And once the training was complete and they could repair 

televisions, then the compensation came to an end. No longer 

did they get compensation for life. 

 

What happened during the '80s was that rehabilitation was 

taken out of the system, and was neither fish nor fowl. It was 

neither the old compensation system nor the new rehabilitation 

system. What these amendments do, the main thrust of these 

amendments, is that we are going back, turning The Workers' 

Compensation Act back to a rehabilitation scheme. 

 

We might have changed . . . there's a certain value in leaving 

the name alone. Everybody knows what it is, everybody . . . it's 

familiar and it's easy to use. But a more descriptive term might 

have been the injured workers' rehabilitation Act. I once toyed 

with the notion of actually changing the name and then decided 

not to. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is the main change. There's been a lot of 

discussion about deeming and where deeming is at. I can tell 

members that deeming remains; the power to deem will 

remain. It will have a very different effect because they'll be 

rehabilitated first instead of simply being cut off and set adrift. 

The deeming itself will not be changed. What'll be changed is 

they'll be rehabilitated before they're 

deemed. It's really a very important change and it's been 

misunderstood almost since the work began on this last 

summer. 

 

I had intended, when I gave my second-reading speech, to table 

the Price Waterhouse report which was the subject of 

discussion today between myself and the member from 

Kindersley in question period, and I'd also intended to table the 

report of Judge Muir. He has given us an interim report which 

members won't have access to. I got it only a few days ago. It 

deals with the treatment that should be accorded to past claims 

which may or may not have been fairly dealt with. 

 

We asked Judge Muir for an update on his report; he gave it to 

us. I intended to table it when I was giving the second-reading 

speech. In fact I don't have it with me. My staff were a little 

unprepared for this and weren't quite expecting it today. 

 

I will however, Mr. Speaker, table that tomorrow immediately 

after routine proceedings. I will table the Price Waterhouse 

report and make as many copies available as members want, 

and I will table Judge Muir's report. It's just a single letter to 

me setting out what ought to happen with past claims. It's an 

essential part, I think, however, of understanding this whole 

Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in more specific terms, some of the changes to the 

legislation are that the legislation will specify the duties of the 

board for fair treatment of claimants and for providing medical 

aid. It will specify the duties of workers to take all reasonable 

action to limit the loss of earnings, to work with the board in 

developing vocational rehabilitation programs, clarify 

provisions requiring the board to pay compensation if a 

workplace injury materially aggravates, accelerates or 

combines with a pre-existing condition. 

 

It will improve benefits for dependants of workers who are 

killed or seriously injured, will enable the board to take 

employment tax credits such as northern tax credit into account 

in the calculation of probable income tax payable, will increase 

maximum fines from 500 to $1,000, limit the liability of 

contractors for assessment of subcontractors, will permit the 

reduction or increase of assessments of employers on the . . . 

based on occupational health and safety practices. 

 

That last sentence needs to be treated with care, actually. These 

comments, I think, were drafted, but I want to tell members 

opposite, we've been very careful with this. The business 

community was very concerned about the use of information 

we got from occupational health and safety officers in setting 

assessments. And in fact, what I've said to the businesses is 

basically your call. You people are paying the money. You're 

paying into the fund. You don't like it. I don't think the workers 

are uptight about this. This is your call. And so the Act which 

we tabled and which we're giving second reading to materially 

differs from what I had earlier told the business 



April 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1349 

community we're likely to do. 

 

This comment that I just made needs to be treated with care, 

because the use that'll be made of information received from 

occupational health and safety officers, the information will not 

be used to set assessments. It's available to the board for any 

other purpose but not for setting assessments. So I want to 

point out that one needs to treat that area with care because it 

was something the business community were very concerned 

about. 

 

This is something also the business community has been 

concerned about. And we're going to improve the 

accountability of the board in a variety of ways. And the board 

has long been . . . Muir described this problem and it has 

become a problem with the board which has . . . just needs to 

be addressed, should be laid at nobody's door in particular. 

 

The board has long had sort of a judicial independence with 

individual claims and thus nobody, including the minister, 

should be able to go to the board and say, you know Smith's 

been a good supporter and I wouldn't mind if you'd just speed 

up his claim and give him an extra break. The board should be 

independent and is independent and will remain independent 

with respect to handling of individual claims. 

 

But where it respects general policy, the accountability for 

money they spend for administration, for staff, all business 

groups have told me that the board needs to be more 

accountable. They're spending their money. And I've assured 

the board that those mechanisms are going to be put in place. 

And I hope before this session adjourns to be making some 

more announcements to the House with respect to improving 

the accountability of the board to this Assembly for matters 

other than the handling of individual claims. 

 

With those comments, Mr. Speaker, I can imagine the 

opposition, not having had the Price Waterhouse report as I 

promised and not having had Muir's interim report as I 

promised, I would expect they may want to adjourn this and 

that's fine. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I'll move second reading of the 

amendments to The Worker's Compensation Act. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at first 

glance and how cooperative the minister had been all evening, 

we were almost prepared to move this into committee. But after 

listening to the minister for a few minutes I thought maybe it'd 

be more appropriate that we actually take a little more time to 

review some of the concerns that were raised. 

 

And I want to thank the Minister for assuring us that he will 

pass over, or send over, as soon as he has them available, 

copies of the reports by Judge Muir and Price Waterhouse. And 

as well, Mr. Speaker, we have had a few other organizations 

and individuals raise some concerns with us and would like . . . 

and we're, based on whether there's any further issues raised at 

the present time, we're going to call for adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 56 — An Act respecting Occupational Health and 

Safety 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Once again I'm not going to take an 

enormously long time on this. This is a companion Bill to the 

The Workers' Compensation Act. Occupational health and 

safety is preventative in nature. If it worked perfectly, we 

wouldn't need a workers' compensation scheme. But of course 

nothing works perfectly. 

 

The occupational health and safety scheme was pioneered by 

this province in the early '70s and was actually quite successful 

in driving down the accident rate. 

 

I have spoken to well-attended meetings of business people and 

well-attended meetings of workers in every city in the province 

in the last month with respect to these two Bills. The basic 

message . . . And it's an interesting phenomena because you 

speak to the business people . . . The best time to meet with the 

business people is breakfast meetings at 7:30; that's your best 

time. You get more out in the morning than you will at any 

other time. The workers you speak to at night. You will go to 

the union hall at 7:30 at night. You go to the hotel for the 

breakfast for the chamber of commerce at 7:30 in the morning. 

 

Notwithstanding the fact that these groups spend the whole day 

with each other, they never talk to each other, and you could, if 

you wanted, give an entirely different speech. You could say 

one thing in the morning and one thing in the evening and I 

suspect they'd never know. 

 

In fact I have made the same speech, I have made the same 

speech morning and night. The speech to them both is as 

follows. The speech to them both is that what the folks in the 

morning want, when you ask them what labour legislation 

accomplished, they say it should promote economic 

development, more successful businesses, a better and stronger 

economy. That's what they say. 

 

You go to the union hall in the evening; you say, what should 

this do? Well you know what we want is more jobs. They're 

saying the same thing; it's just different language. But they 

want exactly the same thing. 

 

I've made this point to both groups, that the goal of labour 

legislation should be to promote partnerships. It should be to 

set a framework within which management and employees can 

resolve their own problems without the intervention of a 

department. What I have urged upon everyone is partnerships 

— partnerships between management and labour so that, in 

essence, we are not involved, and they resolve their own 

problems. 

 

It's nowhere better illustrated than in The 



1350 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1993 

Occupational Health and Safety Act this commonality of 

interest. What workers want . . . There are no doubt, Mr. 

Speaker, some workers who would just as soon not go back to 

work, who'd just as soon sit at home. Those however are the 

exceptions. Most workers want to go back to work; it's a matter 

of pride, if nothing else. It's also a matter of income, but it's 

also a matter of pride. We are what we work at; it's how we 

define ourselves. And few want to define yourself as good for 

nothing. 

 

Most workers want to go back to work, and they don't want to 

be injured. What do employers want? Almost . . . most of them 

care about the employees; they don't want them injured. But 

they also want to keep the costs down. That is done by 

preventing accidents in both cases. Here, as in so many cases, 

workers and the employers have the same interest, if they'd 

only recognize it. They have the same interest in making this 

work. My discussions with the business people and the 

working people throughout this province all during the month 

of April when I met was this very message; you've got the 

same interest; I think this Bill promotes it. 

 

What does the Bill do? It sets up a committee in the workplace 

where management and employees sit down together to try to 

prevent problems. Workers will know where the safety 

problems are. It's a guard which is not on a moving chain, or 

it's a floor which is perpetually got oil on it and is therefore 

slippery. The workers know this. The management, being the 

sort of the organizers, will know who to resolve it, how to 

ensure that this guard is always on that chain or how to ensure 

that the oil is wiped of the floor quickly so nobody falls on it. 

 

This legislation sets up a committee within which management 

and employees can meet and prevent problems. They both have 

an interest in that. 

 

It extends the traditional area a little further, some areas which 

are very important but have not received much comment. It 

extends it into the area of toxic chemicals and so on which 

have become far more of a problem now than they were 20 

years ago when this Act was last revised. 

 

It includes one area which is highly topical, and that is the area 

of harassment. It's very interesting, Mr. Speaker, when you 

speak to groups of people about harassment. Men and women 

react very differently. As I start to make the argument in favour 

of including harassment, women's heads start to nod very 

slowly. Men's heads start to shake very slowly. It's unconscious 

movement. But women and men divide up on this thing pretty 

much by gender. And since most employers, most of the 7:30 

a.m. crowd are men, and many of the 7:30 p.m. crowd are 

women, you get a different reaction on this one. I've little 

difficulty persuading workers that harassment ought to be 

included. I have a little more trouble with the morning crowd. 

 

My argument — and I'll make it to members opposite for you 

to weigh and respond — my argument is that 

the polls done by reputable polling firms, not by us, suggest 

this is a very widespread problem. I don't have my notes with 

me but I believe it was 40 per cent of women in the workforce 

complained of harassment which affected their health. The 

existing mechanism for resolving that is the Human Rights 

Commission. Only an extremely tiny fraction of those people 

ever get to the Human Rights Commission. Why? Because it is 

very difficult to go back to work after you've laid a complaint. 

You can't be dismissed — that's the law — but the atmosphere 

often makes it very difficult. So not many complain because 

not many can afford to lose their job. 

 

Obviously workers have an interest in seeing this resolved in 

the privacy of the workplace at the committee. They can say to 

their representative on the committee: you know Smith, who's 

the foreman, doesn't seem to realize that the year is 1993 and 

not 1933; somebody ought to go have a talk to him about how 

he relates to the female employees in this plant. And it could be 

handled, and it could be handled decently and the problems 

resolved without anyone getting fired and out of the glare of 

publicity. 

 

I say to the 7:30 a.m. crowd, the employers in the morning, 

how do you want to handle this? Do you want to handle it as 

the Dairy Producers did — if I may just to use an example — 

in the full glare of public publicity before the Human Rights 

Commission? Or do you want to handle it in the privacy of the 

shop or the plant or the office, depending on who the employer 

is? 

 

Surely you want to . . . you people do not want your 

supervisors, your management people, behaving in this fashion; 

I know you don't. Surely you want to resolve these problems in 

the privacy of the committee. And thus I argue again, there's a 

commonality of interest. Workers and management have the 

same interests. They both want the business to succeed. Again 

you've got the same interests. It's a partnership. That's what this 

attempts to provide. 

 

I'm going to, Mr. Speaker, before I conclude, give a . . . there's 

one other thing I want to mention as well. It gave the 

employers some cause for concern, and we tried to focus the 

language here. 

 

But at the end of the day, this was an interesting commentary 

on how this legislature works. This Bill, almost as it was, was 

tabled last spring. It was available to everybody. There was no 

comment upon it. I then took and I gave . . . and we circulated 

it again. There was no comment on it, and there was never any 

interest in it. But there was a lot of interest in the workers' 

compensation scheme for the reasons mentioned by the 

member from Kindersley, and that is a concern that the 

assessments would go through the ceiling. Again they 

misunderstood what we were doing. 

 

I told the business community, who were concerned about this, 

you don't get to veto this. There's only 66 people get to veto a 

Bill, and they have a membership in this Chamber. But I think 

you do have a right to 



April 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1351 

know what it's going to cost you, and I'll give it you before I 

introduce it in the House. 

 

In keeping that commitment, it became necessary to give them 

something which looked very light, the draft Bill. I didn't give 

them a draft Bill because that violates our convention of 

legislature, but I gave then a very complete description of it — 

the sort of the second-from-last draft, if you want to put it that 

way. 

 

I decided at the same time to give them The Occupational 

Health and Safety Act. For the first time, they read it. What 

happened, they were very concerned about the language, 

sweeping powers of officials. In fact I told them that the 

sweeping powers have always been there; they were in the old 

Act. That doesn't change. They were in the Act that was tabled 

last year. 

 

What has changed is finally someone beyond the officials has 

read the legislation which this place passes. And I said that 

somewhat facetiously; we have gone a long way towards — 

typing up the legislation — towards ensuring that the officials' 

powers are no broader than they need to be. And we've put in 

place quite an extensive appeal mechanism to ensure that if 

there are officious officials — if you'll pardon the alliteration 

— in that, there's a right of appeal to independent tribunal, 

independent of a department, and that there is a right of appeal 

to a court to ensure that everybody's . . . that the whole thing 

works in a fair-minded fashion. 

 

So we've tried to deal with it. And I think it's a legitimate 

complaint. I think it's also an interesting commentary on 

legislation and how few people actually sit down and read a 

Bill from end to end. 

 

With that, I would just make some commentary, Mr. Speaker, 

on the more specific provisions. The new provisions in this Act 

phase in a requirement that certain employers, starting with 

larger firms in high-risk industries, develop and implement an 

occupational health and safety program. 

 

New provisions in this Act provide for the establishment of 

occupational health committees or the designation of worker 

representatives in certain workplaces where occupational 

health committees are not now required; encourage worker 

participation by enhancing access to health and safety 

information; promote employer-worker consultations and 

extend the worker's protection against discriminatory action; 

clarify the occupational health officer's power to stop work 

where a violation of the Act involves a serious risk to the 

health and safety of a worker; establish four categories of 

offences with a new range of penalties to better reflect the 

serious consequences of non-compliance; extend the right to 

appeal decisions of a director of the occupational health and 

safety officer to an adjudicator appointed pursuant to the Act 

— we discussed that a moment ago; impose conditions to be 

met before unusually dangerous work refused by a worker can 

be reassigned to another worker; allow the occupational health 

and safety council to give advice to the minister concerning 

unique health and safety concerns of farmers and farm workers. 

 

(2130) 

 

I'd knot that into the whole area of farm workers. I just say, Mr. 

Speaker, that if the accident record of the agricultural industry 

were the accident record of any other industry, it would be an 

international scandal. The accident record in agriculture is 

extremely high and it is much higher than it needs to be. 

 

I say to members opposite, how many farms do you think you 

can go into with every one of the covers on the live power 

take-offs and all those things? Most of them, I think if you . . . 

if there was actually a law passed that you had to have them on, 

most of them would have to go find them. The accident record 

of farms is extremely high. Farmers are paying a very heavy 

price because society is neglecting the problem. 

 

Having said that, nobody picked any wanted assistance out of 

Department of Labour in resolving the problem, and we've 

largely set it aside. There is a farm safety council but it's an 

advisory only, and we will not be passing occupational health 

and safety regulations that apply to farmers. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I will move this Bill be given second 

reading. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

minister raised a number of observations as he was kind of 

giving us a run-down of what the Bill is actually going to do 

and the objectives of the Bill. 

 

I would like to add that it's certainly important that groups 

work together rather than always pull against each other. And 

one of the areas that we certainly would be asking and seeking 

reassurances from the government is that they've taken the time 

to converse with all the interested parties out there. And the 

minister's indicated that he's been at 7:30 meetings in the 

morning and 7:30 meetings in the evenings, and kind of met 

both groups. And maybe he could have met them together in 

the same room. It might have helped to facilitate some of the 

process. But he's indicating by shaking his head that that's not 

always possible. 

 

The minister also talked about the safety record in the farm 

community. And I think a lot of times certainly some of the 

accidental factors that arise can arise due to maybe possibly 

faulty equipment or people not specifically maintaining 

protective shields on their equipment. But a lot of the accidents 

that tend to take place — and even on the roads, Mr. Speaker 

— a lot of times are due to human error, not necessarily 

equipment. 

 

And some of the process and problems could be resolved by 

just encouraging people to be a little more careful, take a little 

more time. I think when it comes to the farm the stress level 

that is on the farm right now — with the difficulties they find 

in trying to finance 



1352 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1993 

their operations and looking forward to trying to make 

decisions as to how they maintain their operation, and then as 

you get into the heavy seasons, the spring seed season and the 

fall season of harvest, many times just the rush at the time, 

under stress and duress — may leave individuals in the position 

where they don't give adequate thought to what they're doing. 

 

And that's probably one of the major reasons for accidents. 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, I think it's appropriate that we review 

the legislation. And I guess our major concern is the fact that 

everyone is involved. And those are some of the areas that we 

will be following up with as we further peruse the Bill. And 

therefore at this time I move adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 54 — An Act respecting the Department of 

Economic Development 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

The minister was kind enough to provide me with his 

comments and I will read them for the benefit of members 

opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are pleased today to present to this House for 

second reading, The Department of Economic Development 

Act, 1993. Revitalizing our economy affects, and will be 

affected by, literally everyone in this province. There are no 

bystanders. Even those who choose to merely sit on the 

sidelines and complain will have an effect although it may well 

be a negative effect. 

 

Individuals and interest groups often tend to take a single-issue 

approach to economic development, Mr. Speaker, but a narrow 

approach won't do in today's global market-place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after province-wide consultation, the Minister of 

Economic Development announced Partnership for Renewal. 

It's an economic blueprint not necessarily designed for any 

quick fixes but designed to take this province into the 21st 

century and develop a strong economy in so doing. 

 

It was designed in a partnership process between government 

and stakeholders from all walks of life. The strategy has 

received support on an unprecedented basis. The member from 

Moosomin urged me to meet business and labour in the same 

room. Actually it is my goal as Minister of Labour to get to the 

point where I can meet them both in the same room at the same 

time, but I cannot accomplish that right now. 

 

With respect to this paper, however, it did receive support from 

both business and labour. The strategy, which outlines 31 

initiatives, will also depend on partnership to be successful. 

The strategy aims to provide and create a positive business 

climate, to secure and build on our strengths, and seek full 

employment. 

 

The Provincial Action Committee on the Economy, 

PACE, announced December 2, 1992, and targeted in the 

Partnership for Renewal strategy was established to advise and 

assist the Minister of Economic and Development and the 

Government of Saskatchewan in implementing a long-term 

economic strategy for the province based on effective, 

cooperative partnerships among business, labour, government, 

the public, private organizations, and communities. 

 

Twenty-four members were chosen from key opportunity 

sectors and for their extensive backgrounds and demonstrated 

commitment to Saskatchewan. The members receive no pay. 

Secretary support is provided from existing resources within 

the Department of Economic Development. The provincial 

action committee has made an important contribution to the 

budget process. Now we have introduced a plan to eliminate 

the deficit and reduce the province's crippling debt load, 

actions that are fundamental to taking control of our economic 

development. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the public-spirited volunteers on PACE have 

provided invaluable advice on the three R's of adapting to 

competition. The three R's are restructure, refocus, and 

re-engineer. Securing our future will not be accomplished 

through tinkering and band-aid solutions, but through a 

fundamental restructuring, refocusing, and re-engineering of all 

sectors of the economy. 

 

Communities, government, business, and labour must all be 

partners in this restructuring. Mr. Speaker, it says very clearly 

in the budget speech, jobs will be our first priority. With the 

restructuring of government and the fiscal plan in place, we 

must focus all of our efforts on economic development and job 

creation. 

 

We can already point to a considerable record of 

accomplishments in this area. Mr. Speaker, you may recall that 

last year this government introduced legislation to strengthen 

the community bonds program, the labour-sponsored venture 

capital program, an Act which I may say is back again this 

year. 

 

During the past year amendments to The Saskoil Act were 

enacted to broaden the corporation's investment base and create 

jobs. The new energy and conservation development authority 

was formed to provide active economic development 

evaluating all energy options available to the province to assist 

the business opportunities associated with each. 

 

A major highlight of the past year was the tremendous success 

of the first-ever Saskatchewan savings bonds. This popular 

initiative will continue to give us a means of keeping our own 

capital working here for us at home. Mr. Speaker, we rolled up 

our sleeves and worked with the aboriginal people of 

Saskatchewan to come up with landmark agreements for the 

co-management of natural resources and land settlements. 

 

This government applied for membership in the international 

registration plan to help promote 



April 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1353 

Saskatchewan's economic development by reducing the cost of 

doing business both in Canada and the U.S. (United States) for 

Saskatchewan and non-resident truckers. We made a 

commitment to analyse all the deals initiated by the former 

government ensuring accountability and the best value for 

Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 

To date, renegotiated projects include the Atomic Energy of 

Canada Ltd., Crown Life Insurance building, Bi-Provincial 

upgrader and Weyerhaeuser Canada agreement. The most 

recent was the renegotiation of the Canadian Western 

agreement successfully concluded in February. 

 

Sears announced plans to locate its western Canada call centre 

to Regina with a total employment of 900 expected by 1995. A 

$20 million agreement between Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd. 

and the province was announced December 21 bringing 140 

high-quality research and development jobs. The 

government-wide policy has been created to actively source 

Saskatchewan firms in procurement opportunities, Mr. 

Speaker. The first report on the McArthur River underground 

exploration was positive for uranium development and the 

province has given approval to this $35 million project. 

 

To give the business and public a better opportunity to address 

issues of economic impact and fairness and equity in new 

regulation and regulations, Saskatchewan has recently 

approved and implemented a new regulatory system. It will 

include a regulatory code of conduct with procedures and 

criteria for developing and changing policies, regulations, and 

legislation that have an impact on our economy. The code will 

be applied to all legislation planned for the fall session and for 

all regulations commencing April 1. 

 

I may say, Mr. Speaker, that this has been warmly welcomed 

by everyone, and on those rare occasions when we have fallen 

short of the regulatory code of conduct, the community out 

there, both business and labour, have been very quick to bring 

that shortcoming to our attention. They appreciate it and they 

are very vigilant in wanting us to follow it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the new Department of Economic Development 

has been restructured and refocused and re-engineered to 

manage the provincial economic strategy Partnership for 

Renewal. The three R's . . . Mr. Speaker, it's time to get back to 

the fundamentals of economic development. Currently the 

Department of Economic Development is responsible for 

legislation under 11 different Acts. This is a result of repetitive 

reorganization of economic development portfolios without 

corresponding legislative changes. Legislative authority for 

departmental activities is widely dispersed. 

 

I talked, Mr. Speaker, to one official who'd been there 15 years 

and had seen the department reorganized 11 times. That has 

produced a rather . . . a department which has grown like 

Topsy. It's imperative and 

appropriate that a Department of Economic Development Act 

be established to clearly identify the government's role, its 

responsibilities in economic development, and to provide a 

proper and comprehensible legislative framework. 

 

Consolidating the authorities of the minister into a new Act is 

the overall major change. It improves both the focus and the 

accountability of the efforts. Mr. Speaker, with the repeal of the 

industry and commerce Act, all incentives in support of 

development will need regulations for cabinet approval. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of changes. There are generic 

changes from The Government Organization Act. I draw 

members' attention to sections 8 and 9, establishing the 

department and authorities. Section 10 expands the authority to 

establish agreements with the Government of Canada and other 

governments. Section 13 allows the economic trade and 

development to provide services to those needing support for 

economic development. 

 

Existing legislation will be repealed — members can read this 

for themselves in the Act — the Department of Science and 

Technology, industry and commerce Act, The Trade and 

Investment Act, the industrial incentives Act. Mr. Speaker, 

with that we'll look forward to questions with comments which 

members might have, questions in Committee of the Whole. I 

now, Mr. Speaker, move second reading of The Department of 

Economic Development Act, 1993. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(2145) 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, having 

listened to the minister for the last 10 minutes, it took him a 

fair while to present his economic report to this Assembly and I 

would think it would be appropriate for us to take the time to 

really peruse the Bill. Therefore I move the adjournment of 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 35 — An Act to amend The Certified Nursing 

Assistants Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of the second-reading remarks, this Act 

essentially involves changing the name of the health 

professionals now known as certified nursing assistants to 

licensed practical nurses. We believe this change will better 

reflect their present role in the health system and be more 

consistent with other provinces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at present British Columbia, Alberta, and 

Manitoba refer to these professionals, in legislation, as licensed 

practical nurses or LPNs. In Ontario, terms registered practical 

nurse, RPN, and practical nurse, PN, are used to refer to this 

profession. However, here in Saskatchewan we have also 

registered psychiatric nurses who use the initials RPN, which 

Ontario does 



1354 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1993 

not, and therefore in our context the RPN acronym cannot be 

used. Provincial nursing assistant associations in the Maritimes 

are also pursuing the LPN designation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this Act which is before us will simply delete 

the reference to certified nursing assistant and replace the term 

with licensed practical nurse. 

 

To ensure protection of the public and a gradual change to the 

LPN title by both public and employers, protection of the title 

certified nursing assistant and nursing assistant will continue. 

This means that these professionals will be able to call 

themselves either an LPN or CNA (certified nursing assistant) 

for a period of three years after the proclamation of this Act. 

And this will allow the time for employers to change titles in 

their workplace, such as in job descriptions and so on. After the 

three-year period, members will or should only refer to 

themselves then as LPNs, licensed practical nurses. 

 

However, in the interim, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that another 

group or individual does not take on the CNA (certified nursing 

assistant) title and therefore create confusion in our health 

system, the CNA title will be restricted to prevent others from 

referring to it. 

 

The Act, Mr. Speaker, is consistent with provisions in The 

Registered Nurses Act. LPNs, licensed practical nurses, would 

continue to work under the direction of registered nurses, 

registered psychiatric nurses, or physicians. The Act will 

therefore not have any impact on service to the public. 

 

The Saskatchewan Association of Certified Nursing Assistants 

and the Canadian association of licensed practical nurses and 

nursing assistants are fully supportive of these amendments. 

The Saskatchewan Registered Nurses' Association, the 

Saskatchewan Psychiatric Nurses' Association, and the College 

of Physicians and Surgeons have also been consulted on the 

title change and do not oppose it. 

 

There is, Mr. Speaker, one other very minor change within the 

Act. It specifies a term for the public representative appointed 

to the association's council by the minister. The standard term 

of two years was omitted in the original Act. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to note that the 

Saskatchewan Association of Certified Nursing Assistants has 

now prepared a plan to ensure that the public, its own 

members, and health employers, are advised of the name 

change. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe this public awareness program will be of 

assistance in facilitating this change in the title. Therefore, Mr. 

Speaker, I'm very pleased to move second reading of The 

Certified Nursing Assistants Amendment Act, 1993. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I move adjournment of debate on 

this Bill. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

Bill No. 36 — An Act to amend The Registered Nurses Act, 

1988 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased, very pleased, 

to be bringing these short remarks to this The Registered 

Nurses Amendment Act, 1993 second reading. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this Act is simply to allow 

registered nurses and the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses' 

Association, the SRNA, to appeal Court of Queen's Bench 

decisions on disciplinary matters to the Court of Appeal on a 

point of law. This appeal mechanism is common in several of 

our professional statutes and is not at all considered to be 

controversial. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the SRNA, the registered nurses' association, is 

responsible for investigating public complaints against nurses 

for misconduct or incompetence. To ensure fair treatment, the 

current Act allows a nurse who has been disciplined by the 

SRNA's disciplinary committee to appeal that decision to the 

Court of Queen's Bench. This is relatively standard provisions 

in professional legislation. 

 

However, if the nurse or the SRNA believe there was an error 

in law made by the Court of Queen's Bench judge, there is now 

currently no further avenue of appeal. Some of our professional 

statutes in the province, such as that governing physicians, 

contain a specific clause allowing for appeals to the Court of 

Appeal on points of law. While this type of clause is not used 

very frequently, it does provide a further avenue of appeal for 

the professional and the professional association. 

 

The other amendment, Mr. Speaker, contained in this Act is 

minor and is intended simply to correct an error in the current 

Act. The council was indirectly identified as the body that 

makes the decision on discipline matters. The term "council" 

by this amendment will be changed to discipline committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses' Association 

and its membership are fully supportive of these two minor 

changes, and we believe there are no public implications to this 

change. And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move 

second reading of The Registered Nurses Amendment Act, 

1993. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I won't 

take a lot of time tonight as well to speak to the Bill before us, 

but I know there has been a fair bit of discussion that has taken 

place over the past number of years regarding the Act. And 

once we've perused it, we'll get into a more in-depth study and 

review. And therefore at this time, I'll move adjournment of 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:53 p.m. 

 

 


