




















































Hansard: March 24, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 571 

 March 24, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 

Friday next ask the government the following question: 

 

 Regarding the Department of Health and recent changes to 

the prescription drug plan: (1) why is the eligibility for 

benefits under the new plan based on gross income rather 

than net income; (2) how many farm families in rural 

Saskatchewan whose gross incomes are much larger than 

their net incomes will now be denied benefits under the new 

plan; and (3) did the minister do any study to determine how 

many people might be negatively affected by basing the plan 

on gross rather than net income? 

 

Thank you. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Scott: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

Assembly, two guests in the west gallery, Mr. and Mrs. Tony 

Deck of Vibank, very good friends. And I ask the members join 

with me and us in welcoming them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

introduce to you and through you, Mr. Speaker, today two 

gentlemen sitting in your gallery. We have with us Randy 

Taylor and Herb Gerger. They are agricultural employment 

service managers from Swift Current and Weyburn 

respectively. And I would be sure that the member from 

Weyburn would like to join with us in welcoming these 

gentlemen. Please welcome them to the Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to introduce 

to you and to the rest of the members of the Assembly my 

constituency assistant, Jeff Ritter, who's sitting in the east 

gallery. He's down here today and he'll be watching question 

period. And I'd just like everybody to welcome Jeff to the 

Assembly this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, in your gallery there is a 

group of 18 public servants who are here. You will recall, Mr. 

Speaker, about two weeks ago we had a previous group 

similarly spending the day in the legislature, learning what it is 

we do here and what services are available. And I'd like to 

introduce this 

group to you and through you to members of the legislature and 

ask that we welcome them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you and to this 

Assembly Alec Adel and Klarissa Kormarnicki, business 

people from the city of Hafford in Redberry constituency, in 

the west gallery. I'd like to have you welcome them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wormsbecker: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce one of 

my constituents to you and through you to the Assembly, one 

of my constituents from Weyburn, a long-time friend of mine, 

Mr. Herb Gerger. He's sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

Welcome, Herb. And everybody please join in. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Education Department Lay-offs 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct my 

question to the Minister of Education. Madam Minister, you 

recently fired 20 senior officials in the Department of 

Education. The people who have the collective expertise to 

deliver what you've told this House is your education plan is 

now gone. And now that the dust has settled it appears that the 

experts are gone but the positions remain. Can you explain to 

the taxpayers of Saskatchewan why these individuals were 

fired? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. member 

for that question. First of all, I want to say that our commitment 

to the strategic plan for the K to 12 system, Directions, is not 

going to be compromised, that we are committed to that vision. 

 

Then I want to say that ever since we became aware that the 

amount for funding education in this province would have to 

decline due to the waste and mismanagement and the running 

into the ground of our economy by the members of the 

opposition, we have stated again and again that we wish that as 

little money as possible will be spent on administration so that 

scarce dollars can find their way into the classroom, which is 

the only place in this province where education happens. It 

doesn't happen in administrations. 

 

We have set an example by reducing the administration in the 

Department of Education by 12 per cent last year and by 10 per 

cent again this year. And I think if we're to carry out the 

objective of having scarce dollars reach the classroom, then we 

have to trim the size of our administrations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Madam Minister, the experts who 



572 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1993 

have lost their jobs were hired by the Public Service 

Commission, through the Public Service Commission. They 

were trained and improved their level of expertise at the 

expense of Saskatchewan taxpayers. They are educators, they 

are professionals, and they in fact very recently received 

superior ratings for their work. 

 

Now they are considered an asset to the province of 

Saskatchewan. With a stroke of a pen you've eliminated them. 

Now you say you're committed to the core curriculum. But the 

corporate memory now of the Department of Education is 

about three days old, thanks to this decision. 

 

Now is this not an admission that you do not value the 

collective expertise of these people that you fired? Or can you 

promise that you can replace these people -- the only people 

with the expertise in core curriculum -- with others who have 

better qualifications, and do so with less money? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, I am wondering if the 

member opposite has had some kind of a conversion on the 

road to Damascus. I think we were being encouraged by the 

independent member from Greystone to cut deeper. 

 

We have reduced our administration. We cannot reduce the 

cost of administration in a department by 22 per cent, 

unfortunately, without affecting some people's jobs. And we 

have no question about . . . in terms of competence; it is simply 

a reorganization and a downsizing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 

I talked about starting at the top in government -- in 

government -- in places like your department, in places like the 

Premier's department, and his speech-writers and all these other 

kinds of individuals who are paid a pretty good price. 

 

Now the people of Saskatchewan are very prepared to make 

sacrifices, but they are not prepared to put up with irrational 

decisions for political reasons. The budget was about making 

choices. It appears that this is a perfect example of the failure 

to set education of Saskatchewan children as a priority. And to 

deliver quality programs, one needs experience, we need 

expertise, we need continuity, and we need an understanding of 

the plan. 

 

And once you get rid of this, what's the worth of a system? 

Why would any top-line people come to this province and 

work for this government when they see what happened under 

the Conservatives in 1987 come all over again in 1993? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to reiterate for the 

benefit of the hon. member that there is nothing political about 

the reorganization of a department. We are downsizing. We 

have followed a model for many years where the Department 

of Education was very small and when there was a job to 

do like curriculum development, teachers -- creative, 

competent teachers from the field -- were seconded, did the 

job, and then went back to their school division. 

 

The Department of Education has increased in size to an 

establishment of 457. Twenty-four people is really a very small 

proportion of that establishment. We are reorganizing and we 

are downsizing. There is expertise and creativity throughout the 

12,000 teachers in this province and we will be able to have 

support to meet our vision in education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 

the point is this: you have fired people; you have not eliminated 

positions. And I think that you're misleading the people of this 

province, because if you look at your new organizational 

structure, if you look at the organizational structure, you have 

not eliminated positions. 

 

And what you're saying is that you're downsizing 

administration. You've replaced these talented people with one 

person who was fired in the shake-up in 1987; you've replaced 

him with some people whose great credit is that they worked 

for you and your colleagues on Executive Council. 

 

How, Madam Minister, is getting rid of the expertise in the 

Department of Education going to serve the children and the 

taxpayers of our province? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, if the hon. member will 

refer to the budget book, to the Estimates, she will see that the 

amount for administration in the Department of Education that 

is budgeted for the upcoming year . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. I would like to just ask the 

member from Morse to please stop interrupting. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, In the budget 

book you will note that there is a reduction of $585,000 

allocated for administrative salaries in the upcoming year. 

 

I also want to say, with respect to the vision and the plan, that 

the K to 12 system in this province is the only part of the 

education system at the moment that does have a strategic plan, 

called Directions, which was developed in a very public 

process of great involvement by all stakeholders in the 

education community, and we are committed to carry out that 

plan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 

you have fired the assistant deputy minister of Education, the 

executive director of evaluation, the executive director of 

curriculum and instruction, the director of finance and 

operations, the director of Indian and Metis education branch. 

And the list goes on. 



March 24, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 573 

All of these individuals are considered in the province of 

Saskatchewan to be the experts in core curriculum -- the 

experts. And what you've done is to act as though human 

resources don't have any value. You are the people who stood 

up and yelled and screamed about what was going to be lost 

with the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan when it was sold 

at a loss. This is equally significant. We are talking about the 

fact of losing strength and expertise in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I ask you: please, have you fired these people -- they would 

like to know -- have you fired these people because they 

disagree with your plan? Have you fired them because you 

have someone better to replace them with? Or have you fired 

them simply to save money, when you haven't even eliminated 

the positions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to make the 

observation for the benefit of the member, that there is still an 

establishment, even with 24 less people, of 433 staff in the 

Department of Education, so that we do have adequate 

resources to carry out our plan. 

 

It's unfortunate in downsizing and in reducing expenses that 

jobs have to be affected, and I regret that. But I think the hon. 

member who poses the question is the one who wants us to cut 

deeper. Again I say, where is the consistency? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Health Care Funding Cuts 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The question is to 

the Minister of Health. Madam Minister, Saskatchewan people 

are now starting to see the hurt that your budget is going to 

cause. People are starting to realize that what they saw last 

Thursday, as brutal as it was, was only the tip of the iceberg. 

And that is, Madam Minister, what I'm going to suggest, that 

indeed this is the iceberg budget. 

 

It's cold. It's hard. It's worse than it appears at first glance. And 

90 per cent of the hurt is hidden below the surface, where you 

want to keep it hidden so that the people would not be aware of 

the pain that you are inflicting. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, the details of your iceberg budget are 

starting to float to the surface. And the very people who voted 

for you, who counted on you to help them, they are starting to 

realize the extent to which they have been betrayed. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, your party promised to restore funding 

to the Myers House and keep it open if you were elected. This 

morning it was reported that you have broken this promise, that 

Myers House is slated for closure by your government. 

Madam Minister, don't duck the question. Can you confirm that 

you have broken your word, that Myers House will indeed be a 

casualty of your iceberg budget, and that you have betrayed the 

people who counted on you? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

will confirm that as a result of this very difficult budget the 

funding for Myers House has been eliminated. But I want to be, 

I want the member to be, very clear about commitments made. 

 

A year ago discussions were held with those folks involved 

with Myers House and it was made very clear at that time that 

the entire situation regarding addiction services in Regina 

would be reviewed and no guarantees were made in terms of 

ongoing funding. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I asked Madam 

Minister to please not duck the question, but she chose to. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I say to you that your member there from 

Regina made a very, very clear commitment that there would 

absolutely be no closing of that house and the folks at Myers 

House were counting on you as a government to maintain it, a 

very decisive, clear commitment. Don't duck. Don't try to 

renege on that type of promise. 

 

And, Madam Minister of Health, I say to you again, Mr. 

Speaker, the full extent of the pain caused by your iceberg 

budget is beginning to surface. Employees at the Souris Valley 

Regional Care facility have been told that the facility will be 

closed within five years -- another hidden casualty of your 

iceberg budget, Madam Minister. 

 

Our office received a call yesterday from a young woman 

employee at the facility, an NDP (New Democratic Party) 

supporter by her own admission, who wanted to know why you 

had betrayed her. But, she says, you would not even return her 

call. 

 

Will you confirm, Madam Minister, your intention to close this 

facility, to abandon the people who need the special treatment 

this facility provides, and to end 400 jobs in Weyburn? Can 

you confirm your intention to close this facility, Madam 

Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I do not accept on face 

value what the members opposite say about telephone calls 

because I've had them make these allegations before and when 

I check it out, there has been no personal telephone call placed 

to me. So I don't accept what they say on face value in that 

regard. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. You simply have to 



574 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1993 

allow the minister to answer the question. We can't have these 

constant interruptions. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The members opposite, Mr. Speaker, 

don't want to hear the information because their interest isn't in 

information, it's in politics and misinformation as opposed to 

information. 

 

And if we want to talk about icebergs, let's talk about the $15 

billion iceberg that you created over a period of 10 years -- $15 

billion iceberg. If there is hurt in this province, Mr. Speaker, it 

is because of what the members opposite did when they 

betrayed the people of Saskatchewan by making wrong 

decisions, misguided decisions, and wasting money in a very 

ridiculous and terrible manner. That's the hurt that's been 

created in this province. 

 

With respect to Souris Valley, Mr. Speaker, what is occurring 

in Souris Valley is that there is a funding reduction in order to 

reduce the number of bed ratios. We have put out an 

institutional package that sets out the bed ratio target in the 

province. The reduction in funding that will take place this year 

and in subsequent years is going to move the Weyburn area 

closer towards bed targets. The facility will be managed by the 

district board in the final analysis. And the district board will 

be making a decision as to what is to happen with Souris 

Valley. I cannot say at this time, Mr. Speaker, whether that 

would result in this facility being closed or not. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want the public to 

be very cognizant of the minister's answer. She said both things 

that we have been accusing you of. Number one, she said, we 

will decrease funding so the facility can no longer maintain 

itself; and secondly, the decision to close will not be mine, it 

will be the health board's. 

 

Madam Minister, that's the problem with your plan -- 

underfunding and then blaming the health boards, and take 

your dirty work and do the dirty work for you. That's the 

nutshell. And it's clear now, Madam Minister, that your iceberg 

budget contains many more of these casualties, of these 

betrayals hidden below the surface, Madam Minister, where 

you are hoping that the people of the province will not find 

them. 

 

Will at least, Madam Minister, you have now the decency to 

table the complete list of facilities that your iceberg plan plans 

to sink over the next couple of years? Will you have that 

decency, Madam Minister? Do you plan to close Whitespruce? 

Do you plan to close the Saskatchewan Hospital in North 

Battleford? Bring the rest of your iceberg budget to the surface 

so that the people of the province can see to what extent you 

are prepared to betray them. 

 

Can you do that, Madam Minister? Once and for all, come 

clean. Come into the sunlight; get out of the shadows. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the only betrayal in this 

province is the betrayal that took place in the last 10 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- That is a betrayal of enormous 

proportions with those members pretending that there wasn't a 

financial crisis and misleading everybody in the province and 

spending money like drunken sailors. That was a betrayal of 

the Saskatchewan people. What we have done in Saskatchewan 

is we've set out a plan. We've indicated clearly that we want 

communities and workers and facilities involved in the 

consultation. We have also very openly -- something the 

members opposite would never have the courage to do -- put 

out an institutional package and set bed targets for districts. 

 

When the district boards are in place -- and I believe this is the 

only logical way to do it and the only fair way to do it -- they 

will do a needs assessment within their district. They will move 

their institutional sector towards the bed targets that we have 

upfront and straightforward put out for the Saskatchewan 

people. And the decisions will be made in the context of a 

district by people from the local communities, with direct 

guidelines and direct instructions from the Department of 

Health in terms of bed targets. That's rational, that's fair, it's 

logical, and it's open with respect to the people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Madam 

Minister accuses us of being drunken sailors, Mr. Speaker. 

Well I'm glad to see that she is sober today. Obviously we're 

not getting much of a response from the Madam Minister of 

Health, so I'm going to turn to another part of the iceberg 

budget, if I can make myself heard over the catcalls. And 

another minister I would like to turn my attention to, who also 

has clearly betrayed her word to the people that she was elected 

to help, and that is the Minister, Mr. Speaker, responsible for 

Seniors. 

 

Madam Minister, I know that you of all people must have had 

the hardest time stomaching the betrayal of Saskatchewan 

seniors contained in this budget. These are the people who 

supported you and counted on you to support them. And what 

did they get in return? Lurking below the surface of your 

iceberg budget is the biggest single attack on Saskatchewan 

seniors in the history of this province, Mr. Speaker. Your 

government's devastation of the drug plan and cancellation of 

the heritage program are a complete betrayal of the people who 

built this province and I daresay many of the people who 

helped build your party. Do you really support the hurt that 

your government has inflicted on seniors, and if so, how do 

your justify this betrayal? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 24, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 575 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

want to thank the member for that question. Mr. Member, 

there's no question that the difficult decisions that had to be 

made by the government members caused us some distress. 

There's no question about that. 

 

And I find your question interesting because I would like to 

know where you were for the past 10 years. I would like to 

know where you were in 1989 and 1990 when your 

government spent $350,000 on glossy budget documents. I'd 

like to know where you were when your government spent 

$400,000 on new stripes on the STC (Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company) buses. 

 

Because of your waste and mismanagement, Mr. Member, we 

have had to make some difficult choices. Had you been 

anywhere in the last 10 years, those choices wouldn't have to 

be made today. So I think, Mr. Member, you need to think 

about what you did for 10 years. Look in the mirror, Mr. 

Member. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To the 

same member, and unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, time does not 

permit me to outline the advantages that the seniors have had 

over the last 10 years. Suffice it to say that we did have the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan, we did have the Saskatchewan 

heritage program, we did have a drug plan, we did have 

interest-rate protection for these seniors, and we did not have a 

six-year moratorium on the construction of nursing homes, 

Madam Minister. That's what we did for seniors. And your own 

people now . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Your own people -- I say to the Premier and 

to the Minister of Finance, Minister of Health, and you, Madam 

Minister, as the Minister of Seniors -- your own people are 

condemning the hurt and the suffering that you are inflicting on 

seniors in this province. 

 

A former NDP cabinet minister says that he hasn't talked to a 

single senior citizen who has a favourable review of the budget. 

When the Deputy Premier here, the minister who is in charge 

of polling and advertising, gets an increase of $800,000 in his 

personal operating budget, the people are saying . . . and 

shaking their heads and they are saying, what's going on? So 

this NDP former cabinet minister says that the people who put 

this budget together had mud for brains -- mud for brains, a 

former NDP cabinet minister . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. Order, order. The member has 

gone on for a considerable time. Does he have a question? I 

want the member to put his question now. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- When the NDP cabinet minister said that the 

people responsible for this project, this budget, had mud for 

brains, I ask, I ask: how can you 

justify the hurt that you have inflicted on seniors when a former 

NDP cabinet minister can't find one single senior who thinks 

that this budget is the right thing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 

member for that question. Mr. Speaker, my grandparents came 

to this province in 1903, along with many other grandparents. 

They saved, Mr. Speaker. They said, a penny saved is a penny 

earned. They saved for their children and grandchildren's 

future. Today we are faced with a horrendous situation. We 

have a $15 billion debt. We spend $750 million on interest -- 

interest that wasn't there in 1982, Mr. Member. 

 

Now I will say this to you. You can stand in this House and 

you can lecture us and you can talk about senior citizens, but 

senior citizens are asking you this: where were you when you 

put $500,000 into High R Doors and the money was lost? 

Where were you when you spent close to $400,000 on 60,000 

square feet at the Ramada Renaissance. 

 

Those kinds of decisions, those kinds of decisions have led to 

the kind of decisions we've made today. I don't particularly 

want to talk about the past, but the historical fact is that your 

waste and mismanagement has caused us to do the kinds of 

things that were brought in on the budget on March 18. We 

have no apologies, but you certainly should have, Mr. Member. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- My question is to the Minister responsible for 

Seniors. Madam Minister, I want to remind you that when you 

were in opposition and seniors were asked to pay a modest 

amount for prescription drugs, you said seniors will now have 

to choose between groceries and prescription drugs. That's 

what you said when you were here. 

 

Now we see the betrayal of seniors in terms of all kinds of cost 

increases where former NDP cabinet members will say, this is 

without precedent, the dumbest thing that they've ever seen. 

The people must've had mud for brains when they put this 

together. The NDP will not be re-elected unless they turn this 

thing around. 

 

What do you say to seniors today after a budget like that when 

you said, when we had it fully covered, that they will have to 

choose between groceries and prescription drugs? What do you 

say to them now, Madam Minister, given your budget 

decisions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I want to thank the former premier for 

that question. Mr. Premier . . . or, Mr. Minister from Estevan, 

member from Estevan, in October of this past year we 

increased the senior income plan by $10 to seniors in this 

province -- $10 per month. 



576 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1993 

We have a prescription drug security program so that no senior 

in this province will go without . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. Will the members in the 

opposition please come to order. We can't have constant 

interruptions. I can't even hear the minister speak. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- To recap, Mr. Speaker, we increased 

the Saskatchewan Income Plan by $10 per month in October, 

1992. We have a safety net program in this province so that no 

person that requires prescription drugs and can't pay for them 

will go without. We have made that commitment to the most 

vulnerable people in our province. 

 

But I guess I have to ask that former premier, I really have to 

ask him, where was he, where was he when he spent $700,000 

to Rothschild & Sons for advice on privatization, plus $3,000 a 

day. I have to ask him, where was he when he gave $300,000 

. . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd ask for leave to 

introduce some guests. 

 

The Speaker: -- Does the member have leave to introduce 

guests? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, in the Speaker's gallery 

are two people that I would like to introduce to this House. One 

is Alvin Hewitt who is the former president of the New 

Democratic Party of Saskatchewan and also from the 

constituency of Biggar. I want to welcome him to the 

legislature. He has known my family for a good number of 

years. He and my father were involved in a number of events in 

this province. So I welcome him. 

 

The second person I'd like to introduce is Elaine Driver who is 

presently the president of the Saskatchewan New Democratic 

Party. I've known Elaine for a number of years. We too have 

had some experience in some special political activity in this 

province over the past 20 years. And I want to welcome her to 

the legislature as well. 

 

So I'd ask all members to join me in welcoming these two 

guests. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Membership of the Standing Committee on the 

Environment 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave of the 

Assembly, I would move, seconded by the 

member for Saskatoon Greystone: 

 

 That the name of Ms. Haverstock be removed from the list of 

members on the Standing Committee on the Environment. 

 

I so move. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

                     

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that the Assembly resolve 

itself into the Committee of Finance, and the amendment 

thereto moved by Mr. Neudorf. 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 

conclude my remarks this day, the remarks I started last 

evening about this historic budget that we're addressing in the 

legislature today. Briefly, what I covered yesterday was about 

this budget being one of securing our future and how proud I 

am to stand and support this particular budget as we secure our 

future and turn the corner for all Saskatchewan people. 

 

I outlined . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. Order. Could we please cut the 

noise a bit? Order. 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I was talking 

about some of the frustration that we all feel about the budget 

-- a frustration that all too often is tied up in a misconception 

that is partly our own doing. Because as government members, 

we try and be as open and honest and accountable as we 

possibly can be, and we take some considerable pride in 

pointing out that the measures we have taken since coming to 

government, since becoming the government in 1991, the 

measures we have taken have reduced the annual deficit by 

nearly $900 million. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: -- The frustration is that despite those best efforts, 

in the year 1992-93 -- in other words the year that is just ending 

-- we still spent $592 million more than we had income. 

 

We deficit financed to the tune of $592 million last year. And 

as you are aware in the budget that was presented the other day, 

we are reducing the annual deficit to $296 million for this 

coming year. 

 

Now that still means we have a shortfall position. It 



March 24, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 577 

still means we are spending . . . to stimulate the economy we 

are spending money that we do not have, and that must at some 

point come to an end for a number of reasons that I will outline 

a little better further in my speech. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since I was on my feet late last night, the interest 

on the accumulated $15 billion debt that was run up over the 

past decade by the former government, since I was speaking, 

the interest on the debt has been over one and a quarter million 

dollars. The interest on that $15 billion is growing at a rate of 

$1,400 a minute. I only wish that I could be paid that for a few 

minutes. 

 

And I say that with some sincerity in that not so much that I 

personally would like the $1,400 a minute, but let me tell you, 

this government could move mountains if we had an additional 

$1,400 a minute at our disposal to spend. But thanks to the 

former government, that $1,400 a minute just keeps racking up 

and racking up and racking up, and that money is gone to the 

moneylenders -- $1,400 a minute because of their decisions 

over the past decade. And that, as I pointed out last night, is the 

hand that this government was dealt. 

 

We could not change the debt that was owed by the province. 

We can deal with what we inherited when we formed 

government. We can make our best efforts to come to grips 

with it in a fair and compassion manner. We are doing our best. 

I say that without fail, of all of my colleagues on the 

government side of the Legislative Assembly. We are all doing 

our very best to represent our constituencies and the people of 

Saskatchewan. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, we're succeeding. I 

believe that the government is succeeding in its efforts. 

 

There's two things I want to make note of right now in the 

budget. I think they're particularly worthy of note. One is I've 

heard some people say, well they eliminated the prescription 

drug plan. And the question that comes to mind then is why is 

there a budget item for the prescription drug plan of $57 

million in this year? Fifty-seven million dollars to see that the 

low income people have access to prescription drugs. There is 

an additional safety net program that is designed to prevent 

people from falling through the cracks. Is this program perfect? 

No. It is easily the very best effort that we could collectively 

come up with given that very poor hand that was dealt to us by 

the former government. 

 

The other item, and it's a much smaller monetary item but one 

that I am very, very proud of, Mr. Speaker, in this budget 

there's new $1 million that is earmarked to promote single 

parents staying in school; single parents getting their education; 

single parents being able to help themselves and their little 

children, who will grow up to a better future -- a future, Mr. 

Speaker, that this budget is all about. I want to say that I 

received not a single call asking for that money to be spent, but 

I can tell you that I have a very great amount of pride in the 

Minister of Finance for putting that million dollars in to help 

single parents get an 

education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Mr. Speaker, I've talked about the $15 billion 

debt. I've talked about the $760 million annual interest 

payments. I've talked about the fact that we had, last year, a 

deficit of $592 million . . . pardon me, 596. This year 392 

million is what we're projecting. And I've talked about the 

moneylenders and our credit rating being so incredibly low. 

 

So what could we do upon forming government? It seems to 

me that there was two choices that we could have made. One, 

we could have ignored the debt problem and spent the 

much-needed dollars on social programs or whatever. The list 

is literally endless on programs that are worthy and needing 

money to be spent. The list is endless. Those choices would 

have been very, very easy to make in the short term. 

 

The second choice we had, instead of ignoring the debt 

problem, would be to deal with our fiscal problems in a 

planned manner. And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what has 

happened. The former Finance minister introduced a budget 

last year that took some very large strides in correcting and 

getting at hand the fiscal situation of our province. This budget 

takes the next major step towards again having control of our 

finances here in Saskatchewan. 

 

If we had taken the first choice, that of ignoring the debt 

problem, Mr. Speaker, I believe that we could have ignored the 

problem for one, maybe two, maybe three years. And then 

when the moneylenders stopped lending money, when 

Saskatchewan's credit rating was so low we were a junk issue, 

we would have had to make an incredible adjustment all at 

once. In effect we would be on cash immediately. 

 

The other thing that would have happened, I believe, is that the 

federal government may well have stepped in and taken over. 

We're determined that's not going to happen and I am very 

confident that the measures taken in last year's budget, 

reinforced and taken further in this year's budget, are going to 

deal with those problems and Saskatchewan people will again 

control our own destiny. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Just before I leave the matter of credit rating 

there's one thought, I think, that sums it up best for me. We 

know that our credit rating is one step from a B credit rating. In 

fact a couple of . . . two out of four bond-rating agencies have 

rated our credit rating in the B category and two of them are 

maintaining it in the A. We cannot afford one more drop in our 

credit rating and still expect to have any ability to borrow 

money. 

 

Given that scenario, Mr. Speaker, I don't know how any 

Saskatchewan citizen in their right mind would dare propose 

that we take any risk at all of a further 



578 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1993 

credit rating drop. You can take some risk once you're up a 

notch or two, but when you are just teetering on the brink, it 

seems to me, this is not the time to pretend that you want to 

offend some drunken sailors by spending recklessly. Indeed, 

tough choices have had to be made. 

 

We are taking back control of Saskatchewan's finances for 

Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, we're not in New York; 

this is Saskatchewan, and I'm proud of it. I'm proud of it. Why? 

Let me give you a quick example. Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, 

which was my former employer, has put out a news release 

March 11, titled "Pool's cash payout to members passes 

half-billion (dollar) mark." And it goes on: since 1924, 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool has paid dividends based on the 

amount of grain delivered and farm supplies purchased and 

livestock delivered to the Pool facilities, paid a dividend based 

on the handle (if I can describe it that way) in excess of half a 

billion dollars. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is the Saskatchewan way. That is what my 

grandfather was, one of the original people who went out and 

signed up as many of his neighbours as he could into the Wheat 

Pool concept form. Saskatchewan Wheat Pool has returned a 

half a billion dollars to the farmers. No private grain company 

can boast the same thing or anything close because they pay 

their dividends only to their shareholders. 

 

I'm proud of that Saskatchewan example. There are many other 

cooperatives that are very worthy of note. To my knowledge, 

the Wheat Pool is the only one that has hit a half a billion 

dollars. 

 

I know that there are measures taken in this budget that do not 

meet with unanimous approval, Mr. Speaker, to put it mildly. 

There are some measures in this budget that people find 

offensive. There's measures that, frankly, we find offensive, but 

had to take. I genuinely regret that some individuals may not be 

able to forgive me or may not be able to forgive the 

government for taking the steps and the measures that we did. 

 

I am sincerely sorry if that's what happens, but I cannot do 

anything about that. I have to continue with my life. I have to 

represent my constituents to the best of my ability. And I know, 

Mr. Speaker, that I would not, nor could I, forgive myself if, on 

the basis of all of the information that has been shared very 

generously with the government caucus, if we didn't support 

steps to address the fiscal situation, steps to address the job 

creation necessity, steps to address tax fairness, steps that were 

taken in this budget -- I couldn't forgive myself if we did not 

take those steps. 

 

I'm about to close, Mr. Speaker, but I want to tell you again 

how proud I am of this budget which is about securing our 

future. It's about taking back our collective destiny, control of 

our destiny. It is saying that Saskatchewan people are able, 

willing, and even anxious to get on with the job. 

 

I want to close by congratulating my colleagues for 

caring and sharing, and yes, challenging each other in our 

budget preparation. I want to with delight thank the Premier 

and the cabinet for being as open and honest with us in the 

sharing of information and in the discussions that have taken 

place and I know will continue to take place. 

 

And I want to end by saying how proud I am, Mr. Speaker, to 

take my place on behalf of the constituency of Regina Albert 

North and Saskatchewan people and support this budget, this 

turning-point budget, this budget that is all about securing our 

future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Certainly it's an 

honour and a great privilege to address the Assembly and the 

people of Saskatchewan. And needless to say, I rise here and 

strongly support the budget, Mr. Speaker, because this is a 

budget based on the knowledge of what has already been 

accomplished in 17 short months by this government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: -- A knowledge, I might add, Mr. Speaker, 

that has enabled us to develop a clear vision of how to secure 

our financial future and the welfare of our people. When all is 

said and done, budgets are about people -- their dreams, their 

aspirations, their hope for a better tomorrow. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to speak about the people of 

Quill Lakes in relationship to the budget for a few moments. 

 

I've been honoured to represent the people of Quill Lakes 

constituency for over 17 years. And during the course of those 

years, many things have changed in the province. Yet the 

people of Quill Lakes have maintained their trust in the New 

Democratic Party and in this government. 

 

I want to say that in the 1970s there was expanded 

development in potash, oil, and uranium. And the issue at the 

time was how to keep those profits at home and working for 

the people that live here in the province. The then premier of 

the province, Allan Blakeney, responded with the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan Mining 

Development Corporation, Saskoil, and I want to say that a 

large portion of those profits remained in the province and the 

province benefited. 

 

And I say, Mr. Speaker, my constituents in Quill Lakes agreed 

with the government. And they worked hard to see that 

prosperity was indeed maintained. But then, Mr. Speaker, the 

1980s came, and with the 1980s came the scourge of 

Conservative governments. 

 

Here in Saskatchewan we saw a Conservative government 

elected whose leaders dreamed of another time and another era. 

They governed by simplistic slogans and dogma. Open for 

business --  



March 24, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 579 

you recall that. Privatization. Deregulation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Conservatives very nearly destroyed this 

province. They violated the public trust, they pillaged the 

purse, and they squabbled among themselves as they picked 

over the bones of the economy that at the beginning of the 

1980s had been among the strongest and the best in the land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Quill Lakes remember the 

Conservative legacy. And, Mr. Speaker, they have been 

consistent in supporting this government because they know 

they can trust us to restore their dignity as individuals and the 

financial integrity of their communities. 

 

This budget begins the process of restoration -- restoring 

common sense and competence to our financial affairs so we 

can secure the future for our children. And I know, Mr. 

Speaker, the people of Quill Lakes are ready to stand with their 

government in the challenges it faces in securing that future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, underlying this budget is a strong base. The base 

was outlined in the throne speech. As the throne speech clearly 

indicated, this government has set out four goals: restore 

common sense and competence to the fiscal management of the 

province's affairs; restore public faith; give hope to our people; 

and bring people together again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when this government took office we were finally 

able to actually see the depth of the mess that we had inherited. 

And I want to say, it was disheartening. The extent of the 

Conservative incompetence didn't make sense. People, as I 

said, had lost faith in their leaders. A feeling of hopelessness 

was what they brought. People were divided against each other. 

And at that time, Mr. Speaker, many of us thought we should 

adopt this slogan: be realistic, attempt the impossible. Because, 

Mr. Speaker, we were left with a financial mess that seemed 

nigh impossible to clean up. 

 

In a graphic sense our feelings were much the same, I suspect, 

as those that viewed the disastrous results of the Exxon 

Valdez, oil spilled in the coast of Alaska. That oil spill 

devastated everything in its wake, and the slick dealings of the 

Conservative government all but destroyed the social and 

economic environment of this province. 

 

But I want to say that this government faced up to the 

challenge. This government was and is prepared to extend the 

boundaries of what might be possible in the future. This budget 

spells out a plan to secure our future. It marks a beginning for 

Saskatchewan and its people. It is a budget that reflects the 

spirit of progress; a budget that challenges those who would 

keep things the way they are; a budget, Mr. Speaker, that calls 

for just changes to deal with the challenges which appear to lie 

beyond the future, a budget to secure our future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget is a benchmark. It recognizes and 

supports the needs and aspirations of people, not just the 

privileged few. It spells out with precision and 

clarity and common sense an important thing about budgets 

and finances, namely that just as the level of taxation is 

important to the people, so too is how their government spends 

their money. And this government proposes to spend smarter. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, while the level of taxation matters, it is 

also critical that the government spending is effectively 

targeted. This budget recognizes that important fact, Mr. 

Speaker. What form government spending takes has a big 

impact on the economic performance, and that's why the 

reorientation of spending in this budget is vital to get the most 

growth out of our tax dollars. 

 

And the budget sets out a clear path to ensure that growth by 

creating jobs and strengthening our economy, controlling 

government spending, more efficient and effective deliverance 

of services, balancing the budget in four years, ensuring that 

those who need help are not forgotten. Creating jobs and 

strengthening the economy is at the top of the list. 

 

This budget takes aim at the critical challenge facing us in 

securing our future, that of developing an environment and 

incentive to our people working again . . . to get our people 

working again. And we have done that. We have taken 

measures, like the reduction of the small business corporate 

income tax by 20 per cent; introducing the manufacturing and 

processing tax credit for Saskatchewan co-ops and small 

business; phasing out the E&H (education and health) tax on 

direct agents used in manufacturing and processing. 

 

This government supports those who create jobs in 

Saskatchewan. They are small business and they're the 

cooperative movements. We're giving them the facilitation to 

do the job that they do best, and that is creating jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget also recognizes the crucial need to 

have new investment, promote value added processing, pursue 

new growth industries, improve infrastructure, enhance our 

highly skilled workforce. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the budget outlines a number of measures, like 

investment of $51 million in research development; $320 

million in support of agriculture; investment in the hopes and 

dreams of the people of this province. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, at this time I'd like to turn now to one aspect 

of the budget that demonstrates how plans of this budget takes 

shape in one government department, namely the Department 

of Highways and Transportation for which I am responsible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the budget outlines spending of some $162 

million to upgrade Saskatchewan's infrastructure through 

construction of highways, bridges, roads, schools, and health 

care facilities. A significant portion of that amount is 

designated in highways. 

 

(1500) 



580 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1993 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to report to this Assembly that the 

Department of Highways and Transportation has 

enthusiastically and energetically endorsed the common-sense 

vision of the government by implementing a number of 

positive policies and programs designed to flesh out the real 

significance of this budget for our people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my department has undergone a thorough 

value-for-money audit, recognizing the people of the province 

are concerned and justly so, about whether they are getting 

value for money spent on building and maintaining and 

regulating the province's highway system. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the audit report was good. The audit report 

demonstrates both the dedication and the commitment of the 

Department of Highways and Transportation staff to 

excellence, and the support of this government for the policies 

and programs that promote competence and common sense. 

 

Two of the most important aspects of this audit were, the 

maintenance assessment processes of highways' needs are 

being improved and to get the job done. And the audit showed 

that there is excellent contract management in place to ensure 

the best value for dollar spent. Two ways -- you build a good 

highway system, Mr. Speaker, two more ways you can help 

secure the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, consider our highway system that contains some 

26,000 kilometres of highway. That's the largest per capita 

highway system in North America. Consider also the critical 

issues that impact upon that system. Increased use of highways 

as grain and railway companies changed their operations -- an 

overall traffic volume increase of 17 in the last decade; an 

ageing highway system that requires careful planning to make 

sure we have approximate mix of maintenance and rebuilding 

to make optimum use of the remaining surface life of our 

highway. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to report that my department has 

responded in a significant way to the task of helping to restore 

financial health to our province. In 1992-93 one of the biggest 

challenges facing the Department of Highways and 

Transportation was to meet a budgetary reduction of slightly 

more than 13 per cent, or approximately $27 million. This was 

not an easy challenge, yet the department was able to ensure 

that the $6 billion investment that we have in highways was in 

fact maintained. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm proud to say that these savings to the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan by my department have not been 

achieved at the expense of the taxpayers. The Department of 

Highways and Transportation continues to have a strong record 

of labour relations initiatives. And, Mr. Speaker, we're building 

on this future. 

 

Here are a few of the most recent initiatives. We have set up a 

union-management advisory committee to ensure that 

front-line workers, as well as all levels of 

management, have a role to play in shaping important decisions 

-- decisions about service levels and quality, budget issues, 

efficiency improvements, long-term strategy and direction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a department-wide strategic planning process for 

the department of occupational health and safety has been 

created. We are one of the few government agencies who have 

developed a curriculum course on industrial relations, which is 

co-presented by the union and management for all shop 

stewards and management in the department. 

 

A new program was developed to train operators in winter 

safety procedures. Training and retraining play a major role in 

the department. And we believe the department is the 

leading-edge organization in caring for its staff and the quality 

of services it provides. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, restoring common sense and competence is 

happening in both a budgetary sense and in the lives of the 

people who work in the Department of Highways and 

Transportation. It's a record to be proud of, and one that will 

assist this government in achieving its vision for a better future. 

Rationalizing the delivery of the services is also being 

achieved. Providing greater efficiency, improving customer 

service, and making policy development a priority will enhance 

these qualities. 

 

A major reorganization took place in the Department of 

Highways and Transportation to create a more efficient 

departmental structure. Mr. Speaker, five divisions have been 

combined into two; 21 branches have been reduced to 12, 

including several new branches established to meet specific 

needs. And among the new branches is the transportation 

economic development branch. This branch will focus on 

issues dealing with the rural freight and passengers, the 

enhancement of Saskatchewan as a distribution and 

transportation centre. 

 

Another new branch, Mr. Speaker, is aviation and northern 

transportation, established to deal with the accessibility, 

tourism, and economic development issues in the North. 

Another major step in securing our future in my department is 

the amalgamation of roads, bridges, ferries branches from 

Rural Development with Highways and Transportation. 

 

And I want to welcome all of the transferred employees from 

Rural Development to the department. And I am confident this 

amalgamation will prove highly successful in providing quality 

transportation service at the local level. 

 

Controlling spending is an ongoing goal to the department. 

And I'm pleased that this year the Highways and Transportation 

budget contains a number of measures that will save money 

without sacrificing services that the department provides. 

 

Fleet reduction and other cost-saving measures have reduced 

the cost of operating expenditures by $2.1 million annually. 

But, Mr. Speaker, the department did not reduce these costs by 

reducing services. They 



March 24, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 581 

used innovation. For example, some trucks have been modified 

to accept an oil distributor tank and a truck box. This 

eliminates the need to purchase two trucks when the modified 

one can do both jobs. 

 

The department has equipped its field labs to serve a dual 

purpose. And this, Mr. Speaker, reduced the total number of 

labs by 15 and helped to bring the fleet inventory down. Mr. 

Speaker, these are only a few examples of fleet reduction. 

 

The department has also employed a new technology to recycle 

asphalt surface roads and reduce costs. Rotating bits attached to 

the grader blades allows the department to recycle 100,000 

tonnes of asphalt and save $1.5 million annually. Mr. Speaker, 

what could be a better mix -- recycling and saving money. 

Controlling costs is important to the Saskatchewan taxpayer 

and the Department of Highways and Transportation is leading 

the way in this regard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the budget in the Department of Highways and 

Transportation contains more than $75 million for road 

construction and $82 million for maintenance. The highway 

budget reflects the realities of the province's current financial 

situation but still provides quality highway maintenance and 

construction funding. It includes for 1993-94 estimated 20 

grading contracts, some 56 surfacing and resurfacing contracts, 

20 bridge projects. Mr. Speaker, these projects will improve 

something in the neighbourhood of 830 kilometres of highway 

system. 

 

Currently the government is in the process of negotiating an 

agreement with the federal government for funding of 

improvements to the major interprovincial highways. The 

proposal that the federal government has offered to the 

province of Saskatchewan is a $35 million funding over a 

period of five years, to be matched 50/50 by the province. 

Shortly we hope to be able to sign the agreement with the 

federal government and to get on with further construction in 

the province this year. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that this federal funding will allow, 

as I said, the department to substantially increase the 

construction program this year. What we have been negotiating 

with the federal government is to pay this out on the basis of 11 

million the first year, $8 million the second year, and 6 the 

following year, and 4 million on the final year. 

 

Shortly I will be putting out the schedule of highway 

construction to be done during the current year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want also to turn to another aspect that's under 

my jurisdiction to indicate that an effective and efficient 

determination by the civil servants and the government can 

make a difference. And I want to say that in this budget it 

shows us, as I said, a better way. 

 

And I say this budget includes compassion as a fundamental 

component. Compassion for our children by providing almost 

18 million to fund programs that directly benefit Saskatchewan 

children 

such as child care, children's hunger programs, and a revised 

dental program targeted to children in low income families. 

That's just one example. 

 

And there's another example where the steps to this the 

government has taken have greatly enhanced the ability of the 

public service workers to work with dignity and independence. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I'm talking about the Saskatchewan 

transportation corporation for which I'm responsible. This 

corporation and its employees were literally deliberately and 

with forethought attacked by the former administration. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that Tory government set out I believe to 

deliberately destroy and dismantle STC. But, Mr. Speaker, 

under this government, STC is being restored to its rightful 

place as a significant contributor to the transportation system of 

this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Speaker, once more the employees 

and management of STC can be justly proud of the 

contributions they make to the province's well-being. Consider 

the situation they faced. When the Conservative government 

took power in 1982, the corporation had a surplus of almost $1 

million. And through the mismanagement and neglect, that loss 

had grown by 1992 to $36 million. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that corporation is being turned around. The 

operating loss at STC for the fiscal year ending October 31, '92, 

was 4.9 million compared to 6.5 million the year before, a 23 

per cent improvement. Improved timeliness of billing and 

collection practices enabled the company to reduce its 

investment in accounts receivables by $1.2 million during the 

fiscal year '92 from 2.9 million to 1.7 million. 

 

We have embarked on a number of new initiatives which will 

enable the corporation to achieve fiscal and service viability. 

These initiatives will be with the full consultation of STC 

workers and the public. Employees will play a major role in the 

process. 

 

I am also pleased to announce that most of the Provincial 

Auditor's findings with regard to waste and mismanagement at 

STC, as reported in his March 1991 report to the legislature, 

have been addressed. Restoring the customer and employee 

confidence is important, Mr. Speaker. Controlling spending is 

also important. At STC this government has been doing both. 

And we're doing more, Mr. Speaker, we've been improving 

service delivery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, STC has taken a number of measures to address 

the challenge of improving ridership, and a few of these 

measures I want to comment on. 

 

First of all, they introduced the student bus pass program which 

provided unlimited travel to students for 30 days anywhere 

STC operates at a cost of $59.95. To date this has generated 

$37,000 in revenue. 



582 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1993 

Improved seniors' travel program: it now provides a 15 per cent 

discount to seniors seven days a week. This is the most 

lucrative offer of any transportation company to seniors. This 

came after extensive consultation with the seniors. 

 

A third program that was introduced, Mr. Speaker, was the 

medical travel pass. The pass cost $59.95 and provides 

unlimited travel over a period of 30 days on STC schedules for 

medical purposes. And it's available to all, including seniors. 

 

(1515) 

 

Fourthly, STC introduced a business and government program. 

This is the pre-purchase ticket program introduced primarily in 

February of this year. To date over $7,000 in revenue has been 

generated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this time I'm also pleased to announce that a 

contract to prepare the designs for a new bus depot in Prince 

Albert has now been awarded. And I want to say at this time 

that we commend Prince Albert City Council for their 

cooperation in this process. 

 

Also, in respect to the city of Moose Jaw, we have let out a 

lease proposal for new premises for a new bus depot in that 

city. And again, we have been working closely in consultation 

with city officials and elected people in Moose Jaw. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these measures and more to improve services at 

STC have had good results. And they are changes made after 

consultations with those concerned -- workers, customers, and 

consumers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the brief outline I have provided here of the 

measures taken by the Department of Highways and 

Transportation and the Saskatchewan transportation 

corporation reflect the overall direction of the government to 

secure our future. 

 

This government does not ask the people any more than the 

people should expect from the government. Mr. Speaker, this 

government is going to balance the budget within four years. 

Securing the future of our province demands that we do just 

that. 

 

After nearly 10 long years of government Conservative regime 

that totally disregarded fiscal integrity, the budget will be 

balanced. After nearly a decade of total Conservative 

irresponsibility and lack of intent to balance the budget, this 

NDP government is leading the way -- leading by example. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people remember the Conservative 

government which, in 1986 on the eve of the election, 

introduced a budget in this House with a small deficit, and at 

the end of the election it was revealed that there was a $1.2 

billion deficit. 

 

And those Conservative members laughed about it, Mr. 

Speaker. They laughed and said: what can you expect? There's 

an election on. I want to say, Mr. 

Speaker, this NDP government has what it takes to do the right 

thing -- to save dollars, to restore public faith, and to rebuild 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today I've talked about a vision contained in the 

details of the budget that will help secure the future of our 

people, a comprehensive plan that will balance the budget 

within four years without any further major tax increases or 

cuts in services, a plan already at work in the departments and 

agencies of government which I am responsible for. 

 

Within our plan, Mr. Speaker, we have not lost sight of the 

most vulnerable in our society. Compassion is a part of this 

budget. Compassion is a fundamental part of the philosophy of 

this government. 

 

There is no denying that this is a tough budget. But once again 

it is an NDP government that is pioneering financial reform, so 

that we can rebuild our province, so that we can prosper and 

rebuild our social structure. 

 

The long night of Conservative waste and misspending is over. 

And I say, now the people of Saskatchewan can echo the words 

of Martin Luther King: Thank God, we're free at last. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too am quite 

pleased to take my place in the House today and respond to the 

budget. As a representative of the people from the Wilkie 

constituency, I'm pleased, Mr. Speaker, to join in this budget 

debate because, Mr. Speaker, sometimes it takes an old man 

from the country to put things in their proper perspective. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am also pleased to note that the member from 

Melfort set the tone for me when she likened PC opposition to 

animals. More specifically, wolverines, Mr. Speaker. She goes 

on to describe them . . . Mr. Speaker, I describe this budget as a 

dog and the reason, Mr. Speaker . . . maybe I should say a 

muddy dog. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to go back to Hansard just for a minute to 

put what I have to say in perspective. The member from 

Melfort said -- she used these words to describe wolverines and 

I will just quote part of it: 

 

 . . . and here are the characteristics of a wolverine: it's a very 

intelligent but very crafty and cunning animal. It's very 

aggressive, very greedy, extremely destructive. It has low 

social values; it's not a social animal at all; in fact it provides 

minimum care for its young and for its elderly. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what the member forgot to do was finish 

the description of a wolverine. Mr. Speaker, I can see 

wolverines in the people in the opposition because the other 

thing that a wolverine will do, Mr. Speaker, is follow a trapline 

and destroy everything that the trapper has done. Now that's 

exactly what these people are doing. Everything that the 

previous 



March 24, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 583 

government done, Mr. Speaker, they're trying to tear it down 

and destroy. 

 

So having said that, Mr. Speaker, I think I will maybe make a 

few remarks about this dog of a budget. Mr. Speaker, the 

reason I say this budget is likened to a muddy dog is because 

we have heard from no less than a previous cabinet minister 

that in his opinion it was put together by people who had mud 

for brains. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this budget needs a lot of light, a lot of light 

because, Mr. Speaker, right now it's hidden in the shadows. 

Most of the hurt of this budget will show up later. It's like 

working in the dark, Mr. Speaker, and having a dog come up 

and bite you. You know the dog bit you but you can't see the 

dog because it's hiding in the dark. So you get your lamp, you 

find the dog, and you deal with it. You must deal with it 

because the dog could be infected with rabies and, unless dealt 

with, rabies can be fatal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, every person in this province will feel the bite of 

this dirty, muddy dog of a budget. It bites deep. But, Mr. 

Speaker, the dog is hiding in the dark cast by the leader, cast by 

the Leader of the NDP. And I hope with this speech to shine a 

little light on the dog and deal with it. 

 

My colleagues, Mr. Speaker, and a great many of the people of 

Saskatchewan are talking about the deception of this 

government. And the deception is not only in the most obvious 

things, Mr. Speaker, things like the Premier promising never to 

increase taxes and to keep within a 4.5 billion spending and so 

on; the deception, Mr. Speaker, runs much deeper than that. 

 

This Premier and this NDP government says that when they 

opposed the former government's spending controls, they did 

so out of ignorance. Mr. Speaker, that is the first great 

deception. They didn't know that their promises could not be 

kept, given the financial condition of the province. That is what 

they're saying now. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I want to take you back, back to the budget 

debate of 1990. In that budget debate, the NDP opposition led 

by the now Premier launched a vicious, nasty, mean-spirited 

campaign against the PC (Progressive Conservative) 

government and its attempt to control the deficit. They stood up 

in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, led by the member from 

Riversdale and they promised the moon. And the old man from 

Wilkie, Mr. Speaker, had had enough then and he's had enough 

now. 

 

So what I did, you may recall, Mr. Speaker, what I did was to 

add up all the NDP promises, and I refer you to April 4, 1990, 

in Hansard. If you go through the remarks I delivered in this 

Assembly on that date, Mr. Speaker, I took the members 

through an NDP budget based on the promises of the Leader of 

the NDP, took them through them item by item, and it resulted 

in a minimum of $1 billion deficit year in, year out, growing 

with the interest payments. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, how can the member from Riversdale now 

claim that he never knew he could not afford to keep his 

promises, especially while I'm still in this Assembly. I told him 

with very simple arithmetic that his promises were unrealistic, 

they were too expensive, and could not be kept without 

bankrupting the province. I told him that in 1990. I'm still here, 

Mr. Speaker, and I know that is what I said in this Assembly. 

The member from Riversdale cannot pretend that it was not 

said. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you go back you will find I even allowed him 

his outrageous claims about the potential for revenues from 

hiking oil revenues. We cautioned them at that time. We told 

them they weren't there. 

 

I allowed him the complete elimination of four departments. I 

allowed him the total elimination of advertising, Mr. Speaker, 

totally wiped it out. And even after all of those fantasy savings 

and revenue raisings, add in the NDP promises and the 

province would be bankrupt. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you to relax. I'm not going to 

recount the whole speech. It is on the record for anyone there 

who is interested in reading it. I know that most of the 

back-benchers won't read it, Mr. Speaker, because they don't 

want to be disillusioned with their Premier and the Finance 

minister. They don't want to know the truth. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the dog should get out of the shadows and 

own up to the fact that not only was he told by a back-bencher 

from Wilkie that his promises were absolutely unrealistic, he 

was told by the Minister of Finance time and time again. He 

knew he could not keep those promises, and that is why he very 

slyly had his little card made up to eliminate specific references 

to his promises -- slyly, very slyly and cunningly. I think of the 

word wolverine. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the people he made the promises to, those 

people knew what they were told, and they frankly don't care 

what the little card says that the Premier waves around in this 

House. His is a government that was won on deception and is 

feeding on despair. And only, Mr. Speaker, the most blind of 

the NDP followers do not acknowledge that fact. They do not 

acknowledge the fact. And I refer you again to the hon. 

member from Melfort who says, accept your own 

responsibility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I remind you and those in the Assembly that in 

my reply to the throne speech I acknowledged, I acknowledged 

for our people on this side, $6 billion responsibility in the debt. 

My colleagues have not chastised me about it. I've had nobody 

from the other side refute my numbers. So I guess they accept 

the $8 billion as their responsibility, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, a little more of the darkness that needs to be 

shed has to do with the letter, the famous letter that the Premier 

waves and talks about from the previous Finance minister. He 

likes to wave it around, Mr. Speaker, as some kind of a 

cover-up for his own failures as a leader of his party and of the 

people of 



584 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1993 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to offer a challenge to the Premier. I want 

to offer a challenge to the Premier of Saskatchewan to claim 

that that letter said harmonization would be cancelled. The 

letter was based clearly on the continuance of tax 

harmonization. And this lawyer from Riversdale knows that. 

He knows that very well. 

 

(1530) 

 

But he did not proceed with harmonization, so he lost $200 

million in revenues. He said he didn't need that money to 

balance the books. He didn't have to have any more taxes, no 

more money, and he could do it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me point out the letter was based on 

implementing the policies of the former government including 

the privatization of SaskEnergy and SGI (Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance) commercial. Now, Mr. Speaker, the 

NDP leader knows that, but he continues to hide behind that 

letter as if those things were not true. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, and I'll say this to the member from 

Riversdale: you should hang your head in shame, sir, hang your 

head in shame at the extremes that he is going in denying fair 

and truthful information to the people. I say, sir, shame on you. 

Shame on you, Mr. Premier . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And 

also to the member from Churchill Downs, seeing as how he 

has finally woke up. I was expecting a little more chorus, so it 

helps me keep going. Thank you, sir. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are even deeper shadows in which this dog 

of a budget hides. What about the write-offs to get the deficit 

so high? What about those shadows? I say to the NDP, and I 

respectfully say to the media: use your heads. If the capital 

expenditures of schools and hospitals is proper to be written off 

against the debt in 1992, then is it proper for the same capital to 

be written off in 1982? 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's fair, that's accepting responsibility. Are they 

prepared to accept that responsibility and use the same 

accounting procedures that was used in 1992? Use that in 

1982? Is that not fair? Is that not accepting your responsibility? 

 

Let me say that again. If it's right to write off all the schools 

and hospitals in 1992, then it must be right to write off all the 

schools and hospitals in 1982. There's fairness there; there's 

responsibility there. And with all due respect, Mr. Speaker, to 

the media, a proper analysis is not being done in providing 

balanced information for the people of . . . and the government. 

 

Let me say that again. A proper analysis is not being done in 

providing balanced information for the people, and this 

government is exploiting the fact to reign terror over the 

taxpayers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if you are familiar with my records at all in 

this place, you will know that I am deeply concerned about the 

deficit and the debt of the 

province. One of the reasons I'm here in this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, is because I knew, I knew back in 1970 that the boom 

could not continue and that we had to do something about it. 

They are serious, Mr. Speaker, very important challenges for 

our people to face up to. 

 

I believed that then; I have believed it all of my political life, 

Mr. Speaker. But I also know that honesty and balance are the 

most important ingredients in dealing with the province's 

finances, and we are getting neither from this government. 

 

I would like to explain that a little further, Mr. Speaker. If we 

do use the exact same rules to figure out the debt in 1982 as we 

have been using here to figure out the debt in 1992 and 1993, 

you will find that in current dollars the debt was in excess of $8 

billion in 1982. Now what's more fair than that? Isn't that fair? 

Isn't that accepting your fair responsibility? 

 

We're accepting $6 billion. And I ask you to put the value on 

the 6 billion that you got from us in the very worst years we've 

had in 50 against what you got in the 10 years in the '70s, in the 

very best times that Saskatchewan ever had. 

 

Isabel Anderson says that the debt rose the fastest in the 1970s. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that does not include the unfunded pension 

liabilities because they're not being included in this budget 

either. We accept that. There's about $5 billion in underfunded 

liabilities that you cannot blame us for. We weren't here. That 

started back in the '30s. Now wouldn't that be fair? Wouldn't it 

be fair to use that? I think so. 

 

We're accepting our responsibilities for 6 billion in the toughest 

times we've ever seen. I think it's fair the members opposite 

accept their responsibilities. But to use the exact same rules, 

you will find, Mr. Speaker, there was an enormous debt in 

1982 as well. 

 

Now the question should be this. Should there be panic? I don't 

think so. I think that the size of the debt should only be valued 

as the . . . in terms of your ability to pay that debt. 

 

Should the government of 1982 apply these 1992 rules and 

instil panic in the population about the fiscal situation? Or 

should we instead inform the people that the primary change 

that has happened is one of how the debt is reported - 

_ how it's reported. What system of reporting did we use? That 

there had been no unexpected explosion in the debt but that the 

honest truth is that the government has chosen a new way to 

report its financial operations. 

 

All right we'll accept that. But do it the same for our people. 

Isn't that fair? 

 

Fairness and balance, Mr. Speaker, is what we're talking about 

here. Responsibility -- different members of ours have told you, 

told this audience, told this House, we accept the fact that we 

made some mistakes. One of our members suggested that you, 

the opposition, could learn from our mistakes, the same 



March 24, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 585 

as we should learn from yours. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, if they didn't choose the new way, that would 

not be in the best partisan interest of the NDP. So they sold fear 

and despair. And, Mr. Speaker, I find that is despicable, really. 

 

I look to the press gallery and I wonder, with all due respect, 

sir, how can you people believe you are doing your jobs when 

you're allowing these people to so distort the truth. Yes, the 

Premier had a letter, the Premier had a letter. He waves it every 

day. And do you know what that letter was based on, Mr. 

Speaker? That letter was based on proceeding with 

harmonization and privatization. 

 

All other countries that had socialist governments are 

recognizing they have to get rid of their Crowns. Great Britain, 

New Zealand come to mind as two countries. You also know 

that if you use the same rules for 1982 as are being used today, 

the debt would be dramatic. Dramatic, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the press gallery, they know these things but 

somehow they allow the government to go on, on this agenda 

of fear and distortion. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, again I say this. Does that not mean that 

deficit is not serious? Does that mean it is not serious? No. On 

the contrary it's very serious. 

 

And it's a joke, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier shouts absolutely, 

absolutely shouts misinformation about the deficit day after 

day. Take for example, Mr. Speaker, the NDP leader's line 

about having a surplus on the operating side. Well if you use 

the same kind of logic, if you done the same kind of logic, the 

average person would say, if I don't include my mortgage 

payments, I can have a massive surplus of cash. Yes. 

 

So I got a massive . . . well it's silly, Mr. Speaker, it's very silly. 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, the payments on this debt must be 

made, just as they had to be made under the previous 

government. We made payments on your debt. We paid interest 

on their debt. There's no trick, Mr. Speaker. Paying your debt is 

part of paying your bills. And when you're spending more than 

you're earning, you have to cut back on your spending. 

 

Now this government says it has done the job and has done it 

because there's no choice. Well more dogs hiding in the dark, 

Mr. Speaker, and dogs that bite with rabies. Mr. Speaker, this 

government did have choices. We're arguing, Mr. Speaker, 

with the choices they chose. We're not arguing that there wasn't 

problems -- that's what governments are elected for is to make 

tough decisions. That's what they're there . . . 

 

First, Mr. Speaker, the sane course of action would not to be 

jacking up the taxes on the sales tax on a narrow base, on a 

very narrow base on the economy. The sane, non-partisan 

course would have been to move immediately to harmonization 

of the sales tax. Harmonization would provide the revenues and 

at the same time give major stimulus to investment and 

productivity in business and in agriculture. 

Mr. Speaker, the government has other choices. It could choose 

to privatize SaskEnergy, clearing that Crown debt, and adding 

half a billion dollars to the coffers to retire debt. It could 

choose to have the courage of the Premier of Newfoundland, 

Mr. Speaker, where they are cutting public salaries and 

downsizing in a very real way. You know, Mr. Speaker, this 

very government says that every 1 per cent of public salaries is 

worth $25 million. For a 5 per cent roll-back, the province 

would net $125 million. Now, Mr. Speaker, that is more money 

than this government is raising by jacking up the sales tax to 9 

per cent, Mr. Speaker. And in return for a 5 per cent roll-back, 

government employees could be provided with a measure of 

job security that simply is not possible right now. There was 

400 jobs lost just the day before the budget. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you something else. While 

SGEU (Saskatchewan Government Employees' Union) would 

not agree with a 5 per cent roll-back, I have talked to many 

public employees -- some right in this very building, Mr. 

Speaker -- and they tell me that if it was a choice between 

saying five of them are to be fired or they take a 5 per cent hit, 

they tell me they would take the hit. 

 

And I want to refer you to something I read in The Calgary 

Sun. Paul Jackson, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Right. Yes. I hear the noise from the peanut gallery already. 

 

Now Mr. Paul Jackson is not necessarily loved in 

Saskatchewan, but here's what he says in his article: praise 

these unions, praise them. And I'm not going to read the whole 

thing. But what happened here, Mr. Speaker, is that the united 

food and commercial workers, and bakery, confectionery, and 

tobacco workers have voted to take some $40 million in pay 

cuts in order to get their company out of the red and save their 

jobs. Now, Mr. Speaker, that's a lot of money -- 40 million. 

 

Mr. Jackson, who sometimes upsets people, is being fair. He 

says, praise, praise these unions for doing that. He said this: 

 

 They went along with the advice from their union reps just 

the same even though their leaders told them not to do it. And 

as hard as it is to face up to bad news, we have to recognize 

we live in a different era today. 

 

He goes on to say: 

 

 Rather than capitulating to management, as the Bob Whites 

and Darryl Beans of this world might well charge, Safeway 

employees, Safeway employees have worked out a 

compromise to save their jobs and provide security for their 

families. Does that not deserve praise? 

 

I say also, praise the unions. Here's another, Diane Francis, The 

Calgary Sun. She says this: democracy is 



586 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1993 

finally coming to some union locals. 

 

That is why, Mr. Speaker, I bring up the $125 million at a 5 per 

cent roll-back. Have we approached the unions to save their 

jobs? Will they do that? I think they will. 

 

(1545) 

 

Now closer to home, Mr. Speaker, but on the same topic, I 

want to point out to you what is happening. And here we have 

a reply to what is called, here's what I have to say. And it's 

mailed to me: 

 

 What taxes do to employment: 

 

 Before the March 18, 1993 budget, we signed a contract to 

operate oil wells and battery facilities on a 24-hour basis, 

hiring three employees. The increase in fuel tax of 2 cents a 

litre has put our small company in a no-profit situation. Three 

employees laid off. 

 

And he explains it this way: 250 kilometres per day cost him 

$437 a month extra cost in gasoline. Increase in tax at this time 

kills small business. No incentive to operate a business in 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, this is Hillside Contracting Ltd. 

out in my country. That's the point I want to make, Mr. 

Speaker. Taxes does not encourage jobs. 

 

I want to tell you one more thing, and this is where I agree with 

the unions and the workers, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

believe it is simply obscene that under three successive 

governments, including my own, that there are people who 

have worked for the government for years and years and still 

remain classified as temporary employees. Mr. Speaker, this is 

a serious wrong and it should be corrected. 

 

I know of one case under the previous government, of which I 

was a part, where a woman had been employed for 11 years 

and was still classified as temporary. Mr. Speaker, I was 

amazed that the union at that time was not willing to agree to a 

blanket order converting all those temporary people into 

permanent classification. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I frankly do not believe the union 

leadership has the main interest of the workers at heart. It is a 

political outfit that uses the members' dues to further interests 

of the union bosses. 

 

Regardless, the union is now asking that these temporary 

positions be converted. And let me tell you, sir, I agree with 

them. I agree totally that they should be converted into 

permanent jobs. Just imagine this, Mr. Speaker: you cannot get 

a mortgage, you cannot get a car loan, you cannot get a credit 

card if you're classified temporary; that's the position these 

long-term employees are being put to. And, Mr. Speaker, that's 

wrong. 

 

But that is an aside to my main point, Mr. Speaker, which is 

that the government does have honest choices available to it 

and is refusing to make them. 

As I said, a 5 per cent wage roll-back in the public sector, 

according to the Premier's own numbers, would yield $125 

million. But instead this government has the following record. 

It has increased income tax 10 per cent; it has increased sales 

tax 29 per cent over two years from 7 per cent to 9 per cent; it 

has increased utility rates multiple times, up 33 per cent in 

some cases. It has imposed user fees on basic medical care; it 

has jacked up fees charged to the elderly in need of long-term 

care; it has removed totally some services from medicare 

altogether. Chiropractic treatment, that's gone; eye care 

coverage, that's gone; insulin coverage, that's gone; oxygen 

coverage, gone; prescription drug plan, gone; dental program 

for children, gone; regional cooperative health service, gone. 

Seniors' heritage grant, gone; rural service centres, gone; 

pension plan, gone. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there's others -- there's others. Hundreds of 

people put on the street so that this man from Riversdale can 

put his friends in their high-paying places. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government had choices. It had choices in 

presenting the budget; it had a lot of choices. Mr. Speaker, 

what they've chose to do is break faith with their own people, 

not only our people, the people of Saskatchewan, the people 

that worked very, very hard to make sure that we didn't get 

re-elected and that they did. Now those people, Mr. Speaker, I 

don't think will forget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they have chosen to mount a campaign of despair 

and deception so large that it is almost beyond the ability of 

Saskatchewan people to resist. But, Mr. Speaker, I predict they 

will resist. We will resist. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a bad budget; it's a shameful budget. It's a 

muddy dog of a budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I look at the members of the NDP sitting in this 

Assembly and I wonder sincerely, how can they look 

themselves in the mirror? And I don't want you to give me any 

tripe about the terrible debt that you inherited. You made 

promises when you knew what the debt was. And perhaps the 

most damnable promise you made was to get rid of the 

harmonization and end privatization. Because, Mr. Speaker, 

those are the two promises that the Premier kept. He did keep 

those two promises. And those two are the two promises that 

are crippling this province. 

 

But you did not keep the promises that went along with those 

two. There was two other promises that went with that. You 

promised no new taxes. You didn't keep that promise. You did 

not keep the promise of open the books. Open and honest 

government. Another broken promise. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, on that one it is simply stunning to see the 

member from Regina Victoria -- a member for whom I must 

say I have historically had a lot of respect for -- but to see him 

now stand in this Assembly and 



March 24, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 587 

defend the government, government measures designed to 

basically filibuster the efforts of the Provincial Auditor, Mr. 

Speaker, that's not something that I can respect. 

 

The Provincial Auditor reports that . . . that to serve 

accountability on all profits from the Crowns should be paid 

directly into general revenues -- that's what he says -- to serve 

accountability. Open and accountable. To serve accountability 

all profits from Crowns should be paid directly into general 

revenues. 

 

And the member from Regina Victoria gets on the Premier's 

bandwagon and says no, we must study that idea. And the 

government has already given an outright no to that part of the 

auditor's report. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yet this same government says to the charities 

who manage the lottery funds, this Premier says to them: well 

the Provincial Auditor says all revenues should go into general 

revenues, so we are going to take the lottery funds and put 

them in our own bank account. What a breathtaking hypocrisy. 

What astounding contradiction. 

 

And I asked the Premier, Mr. Speaker, I asked the Premier this. 

If it's proper to treat the charities in this way, then how can you 

say it's not proper to treat the Crowns the same way? Where is 

the fairness? Where is the balance? I don't know. Where's the 

justice? 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's simply another example of this government's 

list of double standards. It is in fact a government of double 

standards. A wrong-headed dog biting at the people from the 

darkness. That's what this dog of a budget is, that muddy dog. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I mentioned early the double standard about how 

they measure the debt. It's okay for them to count the hospitals 

and schools as a debt in 1992, but it's not right to do that for the 

1982 year. Why? Well in any language that I know, Mr. 

Speaker, that's a double standard. 

 

Is it right for the NDP leader in opposition to rant and rave 

about the inadequate funding for health and education, but 

when he's Premier, he takes a red swath to the budgets. That, 

Mr. Speaker, is a double standard. And it's accounting, and it 

is, Mr. Speaker -- funny accounting -- according to the NDP 

leader, right, Mr. Speaker, it is according to him, right that the 

money of the charities be taken and put in general revenues, 

but not the profits of the Crown corporations. What a double 

standard. 

 

And it is a double standard that this Premier will not hide in the 

dark. We will expose that double standard. Mr. Speaker, the 

people have stronger words than double standard when talking 

about this government. Mr. Speaker, let us shine a bit more 

light onto the dark shadows of this iceberg budget where you 

only see 10 per cent of the whole thing. 

 

We have heard the MLA (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) after MLA and the Premier himself stand up and 

say there was over $300 million spent on 

Saskferco. Nothing could be further from the truth, Mr. 

Speaker. The total was $60 million for a 50 per cent equity -- 

49 per cent, I think it was. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me use the dictionary to characterize that 

claim. I'm using The Concise Oxford Dictionary, sixth 

edition. And on the page of 625 that dictionary under the L's is 

the word described as claimed. Now, Mr. Speaker, there are 

four different definitions of the word, so I choose the one 

which I know is in fact parliamentary so that the NDP members 

may get their dictionary and understand what it is their 

government is engaging in when they say over $300 million 

was spent on Saskferco. 

 

The definition of this particular L-word is as follows: having 

one's body resting in a more or less horizontal position along 

the ground surface. So I say to the Premier: Mr. Premier, you 

are resting horizontally on the ground. And, Mr. Speaker, that 

is the truth. The truth is that less than $60 million in cash was 

actually used to obtain the equity position. And the remainder 

was . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. Order. I want to draw the member's 

attention to Beauchesne's, paragraph 463(3): 

 

 There are few words that have been judged to be 

unparliamentary consistently, and any list of unparliamentary 

words is only a compilation of words that at some time have 

been found to cause disorder in the House. 

 

I want him to refer to Beauchesne's 487, however: 

 

 (2) Words may not be used hypothetically or conditionally, if 

they are plainly intended to convey a direct imputation. 

 

What the member is attempting to do indirectly, what he can't 

do directly, is unparliamentary, and therefore I ask the member 

to withdraw those words and the imputation that he has made 

in this House. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will certainly 

abide by your ruling. I will withdraw whatever upset you, sir. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. Order. I just want to remind the 

member it's not whether the words upset the Speaker, it's 

whether or not the words are parliamentary or not. 

Beauchesne's is very clear. In paragraph 487, Beauchesne's is 

very clear that you may not do indirectly what you cannot do 

directly. And what the member is doing at this particular time 

is trying to do something indirectly which Beauchesne's says 

very clearly that you can't do. And that is the point that I was 

trying to make to the member. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said, I will 

withdraw the remarks. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, let us say it this way. The Premier said that 

we spent $300 million in Saskferco. The truth is less than $60 

million was spent and in spending that 



588 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1993 

$60 million, Mr. Speaker, they gained an equity position. The 

remainder was a commercial guarantee for which the 

government continues to receive a commercial fee. Now they 

attempt to pretend that loan guarantees . . . they have to pay 

interest on loan guarantees. That again, Mr. Speaker, is not the 

true facts. 

 

(1600) 

 

Now further to that, Mr. Speaker, the government has the right 

to sell its interest to recoup its $60 million, and with the way 

that company is going, a very healthy profit at any time. Now 

that is the truth, Mr. Speaker, and the Premier should quit 

trying to imply otherwise. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also in question period it has also shown this 

Premier and this government rests on misrepresentation, not 

telling it exactly as it is. Mr. Speaker, we recently had a request 

in question period for the government to table documents 

proving that they had due diligence in creating a partnership 

with an American gambling corporation that is under suspicion 

across the United States and Australia. This government 

refused to table those documents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government goes into business in gambling 

with an organization where there are allegations of corruption 

and criminality and then refuses to provide the background 

checks and due diligence that was done to refute the allegations 

all over the world against those new NDP partners. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when the Premier ran on a platform of open 

government, he promised that such studies and background 

checks would in fact be tabled if he became premier -- a double 

standard; not telling it like it is. I suggest to him now, quit 

misrepresenting the truth in this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on for quite a while, but I do not want 

to take up too much more of the time. But I want to close with 

a couple more observations. I have seen in the documents 

presented in the budget that while insulin coverage is gone, 

funding for the arts group is up 500 per cent. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, that's not a question of I'm not agreeing with the arts 

group, it's not a matter of causing division between artists and 

diabetics, Mr. Speaker, it is a legitimate question of priorities 

and choices. 

 

I would suggest to you, sir, and all the members opposite, that 

anyone in the arts group, if they knew or felt that someone who 

was a diabetic was suffering because they couldn't afford their 

insulin, they would gladly give up some of the 500 per cent 

increase in their funding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have an additional 5 million for arts and we 

have nothing for those who need oxygen to sustain them. This 

is a legitimate question of priorities and choices, not to say 

anything in a derogatory manner, Mr. Speaker, to the arts and 

sciences. 

 

The NDP had more money for Women's Secretariat. 

And you know what, Mr. Speaker? You know what the people 

of this province tell me? They tell me they would rather have 

the funds go to insuring children having dental care or their 

parents having access to special care homes or even, Mr. 

Speaker, many women when shown the increase in funding for 

the Women's Secretariat have told me they would rather the 

money was simply used to reduce the deficit. There again we're 

talking, Mr. Speaker, simply of choices that the government 

did have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has a political agenda that they 

feel is well served by borrowing money to spend on this 

secretariat which has done not a thing for the women of the 

Wilkie constituency. Most of them do not even know it exists. 

They don't know it's there. And if that's not division, Mr. 

Speaker, it is a question. It is not a division; it's a question of 

priorities. And I tell the Premier this: the women of this 

province themselves have much different priorities than he 

does. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are hundreds of millions that could be 

trimmed from this budget, hundreds of millions of dollars in 

bad priorities. But this government has made its choices. And I 

suggest, sir, they will be judged by them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to cover one more thing before I take my 

place. We have several of the members opposite getting on 

their feet and they talk about the great job they done when they 

reduced the deficit by half. Well, Mr. Speaker, we have to take 

a look at how the $517 million deficit was achieved, Mr. 

Speaker, some of the things they done to blow up the deficit to, 

I think one of the members said 1.2 billion. Well they first 

announced it at 858 million. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, first of all they gave up 200 million. They 

did not take 250 million out of the Crowns, which was in the 

budget of the previous government. Mr. Speaker, they wrote 

off schools and hospitals to blow up the budget. They also 

wrote off, Mr. Speaker, 900 million of Crown-sector 

investment. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, they've done their fancy work with their 

fancy pencil and they reduced this hoax, this hoax to 517 

million which was nothing but wind. Then, Mr. Speaker, they 

reduced that again this year to 292 million or something and 

said, look, look, what good boys we are. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it's like poking a balloon with a pin. All you 

let out is a bunch of wind. And that's what they did to reduce 

the budget. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I sincerely believe that they are 

putting a whole bunch of money in the Crowns and when it 

comes around to be election time, they're going to pull that 

money all back out and they're going to say, look what good 

boys we are; here's what we have done. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the people are not going to buy it. They're 

not buying it now. I'm getting phone calls and letters asking me 

to explain how they did that. And, 



March 24, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 589 

Mr. Speaker, I'm moving that out to them. 

 

So I will say in closing, Mr. Speaker, I will be voting against 

this budget because I think they used the wrong choices. There 

were choices, there were hard choices, we accept that. They did 

not take the responsibility in making the right choices, Mr. 

Speaker, and I will, as I said, be voting against it. And I thank 

you for your time, sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I must say 

that I enter this debate with some trepidation after listening to 

the speech of the member from Wilkie and also the inane 

babblings from the member from Kindersley over there who 

has just shown his intelligence level. That is probably the most 

cogent thing he's said here during this whole budget debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the kind of choices and 

priorities that this government was forced to make in drawing 

this budget. Let me say, first of all, that to this Assembly and to 

everybody who may be watching in television today that I can't 

think of one member on this side who was very happy about 

the kind of choices that we were forced to make in drawing up 

this budget. I can't think of one person on this side of the 

House, Mr. Speaker, who was overjoyed with the kind of mess 

that was left them, to try to pick through this pile of rotten 

potage left by the former government. That, Mr. Speaker -- and 

I say potage as opposed to potash -- I'll get into that a little 

later. 

 

There was nobody, Mr. Speaker, least of all the member from 

Rosemont -- right? -- who was really pleased at what we had to 

do and what the government was forced to do in making this 

budget and drawing it up. But I must say, Mr. Speaker, given 

the choice that the government made, which was to engage in a 

budget-cutting exercise because of the lack of government 

revenue -- because of the lack of government revenue because 

of the actions of the former government -- that I must 

congratulate the Minister of Finance on her choice of . . . 

intelligent choices that she did make in the cuts that she made 

in this budget. 

 

But I'll get into that a little later, as I said. I want to, first of all, 

Mr. Speaker, put this budget in the context of the global 

economic situation that we here in Saskatchewan face. 

Because, Mr. Speaker, as you have seen in the past few days, 

other political jurisdictions have made other choices because of 

the fiscal situation that they found themselves in. And I predict, 

Mr. Speaker, that come the next federal election, whoever 

forms the government, whoever forms the government -- with 

the exception of course of the New Democratic Party -- but 

Liberal or Tory, should they form the next federal government, 

that the choices they make will be the same choices that they've 

made in the past, whether it's Liberal or it's Tory, which will be 

to engage in policies, fiscal and economic, which attacks the 

living standard and attacks the rights of working people. 

Mr. Speaker, we heard today a perfect example of that by the 

member from Wilkie, who went on in most of his speech -- an 

address which one would characterize as less than inspiring -- 

but in most of his speech spent his time attacking the rights of 

working people to a decent life. In fact what he was doing was 

congratulating organizations like Safeway, congratulating 

organizations like Western Grocers, for forcing working people 

to take a reduction in their take-home pay, to forcing working 

people to take a reduction in their standard of living. 

 

Because that, Mr. Speaker, is the real legacy of Liberals and 

Conservatives in this country, and particularly in Saskatchewan 

in the last 10 years. The real legacy has been a reduction in the 

standard of living of working people, whether they work in the 

city or whether they work on the farm. That's their legacy, Mr. 

Speaker, and the people of Saskatchewan will never forgive 

them for that legacy. It will be at least 50 years before they're 

able to poke up their political heads in this province again, to 

try to make an attempt to go to . . . to gain power through the 

ballot. 

 

And let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, that come the next election, 

come the next election there will not be any members of the 

Conservative Party sitting in this legislature, you can bet your 

bottom dollar on that, because they will become an extinct 

species in this province. They are dinosaurs now; they will be 

extinct dinosaurs come the next election. 

 

I won't say the same about the Liberal Party because we 

already know that the Tory base is now . . . part of that Tory 

base is now moving over to the Liberal Party. It's the same old 

group, right, of free-enterprisers flip-flopping, flip-flopping, 

the black cats and the white cats going back. 

 

While the member from Saskatoon Greystone may take some 

comfort in that, let me tell you the member from Morse or the 

member from Thunder Creek or whoever else decides to run 

for the leadership of this moribund organization better not take 

any solace in the fact that they are on their way out as a 

political entity. Because the people of Saskatchewan will never 

ever, ever, ever forgive them for what they have done, for the 

kind of mountain and legacy of debt and the legacy of broken 

dreams that has been laid on the people of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they are only part, I say this, only part of an 

overall attack that's been carried out against the people of 

Canada, against the people of Saskatchewan because of the 

large corporate agenda of the Liberals and the Tories, the 

agenda that the Liberals and the Tories have been following. 

 

And I want to put that into some kind of overall economic 

context, Mr. Speaker. First of all I want to deal with the 

international situation that has led this government to do what 

it had to do during the budget. We all have heard globalization 

and that local buzz-word, the buzz-word of the economists, the 

buzz-word of the right, that globalization has now 



590 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1993 

changed things so that we have to do things differently. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there is some truth to that. There has been 

an increased globalization in economic affairs. Well let's take a 

look at what that globalization consists of. 

 

I would submit, Mr. Speaker, that most of all it means the 

globalization of capital pools which are now become used as 

speculative investment, not for productive purposes on this 

globe, but for straight, outright, quick-buck -- the kind of 

quick-buck methodology that has been used by the Tories 

before. 

 

What has happened, Mr. Speaker, is that over the last 15 years, 

particularly through the introduction of technologies like 

computer or the running of markets day and night whether it's 

in Hong Kong or London or Tokyo or Toronto or New York, 

that capital has no longer a national home. And I think it was 

Paul Hill, Mr. Paul Hill from Regina, who put it best and said 

that capital has no nationality. It has no heart; it has no 

conscience; it has no allegiance; it has no soul. It has one 

motive, and that motive is profit. 

 

(1615) 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that describes what's happened in 

terms of globalization of the economy is that the capital pools 

-- and I'll get to what I mean by capital pools in a minute -- but 

those capital pools have lost any allegiance to national or 

provincial development. 

 

That's what's happened is that we see the pension funds, the 

insurance funds, or those large pots of money that basically are 

built up by the effort of working people in Canada or around 

the world, that those capital pools have lost any kind of 

semblance of national control, or to put it in other ways, that 

governments no longer control the ability to make investment 

decisions nationally, that they have lost that ability because of 

the transnational character, the character without country. This 

is capital without country and capital without soul. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what has happened in the globe in terms of 

globalization is that there are people who sit at computer banks 

in stock trading companies and in bond rating agencies in 

Zrich and in Tokyo and in Hong Kong, in Toronto, pressing 

numbers, engaging in speculative investment, whether it's 

speculating against the lira, whether it's speculating against the 

Canadian dollar, whether it's speculating that this land value 

will increase more than that land value, that the large capital 

that is needed for investment has lost any kind of national 

character and has lost any kind of controllability. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the global context that we find 

ourselves in. Economists call it the crisis of capital 

accumulation. Because you can no longer accumulate capital at 

the local level to make the kind of investment that's needed to 

put people to work, to pay for health care, to pay for education. 

That what we 

have here, what we have here is much like, at one level, the 

crisis of the 1930s, but at another level has a new character 

because it involves the technology that's been introduced since 

that period of time. 

 

We have an inability as a government provincially and 

federally to control those kind of investment decisions. Not 

totally, Mr. Speaker. I'm not trying to say that this is total lack 

of control, but to a great degree we have. 

 

And how has that been reflected over the last 10 years on the 

national level? Well since 1984, since 1984 the national 

government of this country, a Conservative national 

government, has engaged in the policy of tight money and high 

interest rates. On the one hand they've done it in order to attract 

capital investment within Canada, but on the other hand they 

have done it in order to fill the pockets of their corporate 

backers, their primary corporate backers which are the banks, 

the insurance companies, the large financial institutions which 

back the Tory and Liberal parties. 

 

You have representatives like Mr. John Crow, the governor of 

the Bank of Canada, who defends to the death the high interest 

rate policy. So we've engaged in a period of time over the year 

where interest upon interest has been compounded on public 

spending. Right? The artificially and historically high interest 

rates have contributed to the spot that we find ourselves here in 

Saskatchewan, but not only in Saskatchewan -- in Nova Scotia, 

in Newfoundland, in Ontario, in British Columbia, in Quebec. 

 

All provincial political jurisdictions have been assaulted by the 

high interest rate policy of the federal government and have led 

to near bankruptcy -- I'll withdraw that statement -- not near 

bankruptcy but to a situation where no longer can the revenues 

that come to provincial governments meet the needs of 

provincial citizens. That's the situation, Mr. Speaker, that we 

find ourselves. 

 

The fiscal policy, the right-wing fiscal policy of the the 

Conservatives -- high interest rates, historically high interest 

rates . . . You know, Mr. Speaker, for the two decades prior to 

1984, the interest rates, the average rate of interest in Canada in 

terms of financing of federal and provincial governments, 

roughly, was around two and a half to three per cent. That's the 

historic interest rate pattern. 

 

In 1984, with the introduction of the tight money policies of the 

Conservatives and prior to that the introduction of the tight 

money policies of the Liberals -- about 1975 was the first 

indication that this was going to happen -- we've seen interest 

rates well above the historic high, three and four times higher 

than the historic interest rates. That has impacted on every 

provincial jurisdiction and also on the federal government. Mr. 

Speaker, those kind of interest rate policies have wrought 

devastation to the people of Canada. 

 

It hasn't wrought devastation to the banks because if you look 

at the profit statement of the banks since 



March 24, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 591 

1975, year after year after year of record profits accruing to the 

banks. Right? Because the money that you and I and the 

working people of this country earn day in and day out have 

been sucked out when we want to buy our cars, when we want 

to buy our houses, when we want to buy food, we want to buy 

clothes, and we want to put our kids through university. We 

pay more and more when we go to the banks to borrow our 

own money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's the root cause, one of the major root causes 

of the fiscal crisis that we find ourselves in. Right? And it's a 

policy which has not been haphazard. It is a policy which did 

not occur out of the blue or because of chance or because of 

coincidence. It was a policy deliberately pursued by successive 

Liberal and Conservative governments, a high interest rate 

policy designed to do one thing, that is to fill the corporate 

coffers of the banks and the bond dealers and the large 

transnational corporations who provide them and who fill their 

pockets as politicians. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is the situation we find ourselves in, 

because we are now at the end of that period. We're at the end 

of that period. All the chickens are coming home to roost. Or I 

should say in the context of the Bank of Canada, all the crows 

are coming home to roost. Right? Because the crows . . . John 

Crow and his cronies have picked our pockets clean; have 

picked the provincial coffers clean not only here in 

Saskatchewan, but have picked clean the coffers of every 

provincial government across this country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- And the other, Mr. Speaker, the other 

consequence of that policy has been competition on a global 

level for the acquisition of capital, is that we have historically 

high interest rates because we're trying to compete with other 

countries who want capital to come into their country to invest. 

 

You see you can't control capital investment any more because 

the capital investment is controlled by the moneylenders and 

the money-changers of Zrich and Tokyo and Hong Kong. 

Right? Those people who sit behind their computer screens to 

speculate on investment. So the only way you attract that 

capital is to raise interest rates. So while here in Canada, we're 

competing against capital investment in the United States or 

France or Italy or countries like Chile. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, 18 months ago the interest rate for 

American dollars in Chile was 3.2 per cent per month. That's 

what an investor could get investing in a bank in Chile in a 

savings account -- 3.2 per cent per month. Why? Why? When 

you think about the money that was going to flow out in 

interest is because in order to attract capital investment in that 

particular country -- and the same would apply for Argentina 

and Brazil or any of the other countries of Latin America -- 

those artificially high interest rates were used to attract that 

kind of capital investment, so that people could work and that 

people could eat. 

 

And that's the kind of . . . that's the other side of this 

equation, this competition for capital, Mr. Speaker. And in that 

competition for capital guess who the losers were? Was it the 

Royal Bank? Was it the Bank of Nova Scotia? Was it, you 

know, was it Royal Trust? You know, was it Canadian Imperial 

Bank of Commerce? No. You bet your bottom they weren't the 

losers, Mr. Speaker. They were the winners. 

 

The real losers in that competitive war, that great competition 

that the Tories like to talk about, that competitive environment, 

that competitive economic situation, the real losers of that were 

the working people in Saskatchewan and in Ontario and British 

Columbia, and in Chile and in Argentina. In fact in every 

country around the world, that kind of competition for capital 

has meant nothing more than a decline in their living standards, 

misery, poverty, and an increase in the kind of barbarism that 

we see going on in the world today. 

 

That's the kind of economic system, Mr. Speaker, that's the 

kind of economic system that the Tories that sit across the floor 

of this House defend. That's the kind of economic system that 

the member from Wilkie was going on and praising about. 

When he says look at those unions, they took roll-backs, what 

he's saying is it's great for working people to take a cut in their 

living standards. 

 

And I say, Mr. Speaker, that's their agenda. That has been their 

agenda since 1982. That was the agenda that was imposed on 

the people of Saskatchewan. It was that agenda that's left us the 

kind of mess that we're in. And the people of Saskatchewan 

didn't take it any more, come 1991. And they're not ever going 

to take it again because the people of this province are not 

going to stand by and let their living standards be slashed and 

cut and hacked and rolled back for ever. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1991 . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- In 1991 the people of Saskatchewan said things 

are going to change. They said we're not going to put this . . . 

we're not going to take this kind of thing any more. 

 

We know. We, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province knew 

the kind of flimflam financial accounting done by the Tories. 

Absolute flimflammery, Mr. Speaker. Nothing to do with 

reality. 

 

We've seen the Houdini act economics of Gary Lane. One 

minute it's, how much was the . . . 200 million, make 400 

million? One day it was 400 million, the next day it was 1.2 

billion. Flimflammery, the kind of voodoo economics engaged 

in by right-wing parties everywhere when they try to pull 

things over on the people. And they tried to pull the wool over 

people's eyes. 

 

For whose benefit? For whose benefit? It's certainly not the 

little people. It's certainly not the people in my constituency 

that I have the honour to represent. No, 



592 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1993 

the kind of flimflammery that benefit only the multinationals, 

the financial institutions, those who walked away with the 

wealth that was produced in this province over that 10-year 

period of time, Mr. Speaker. Right? Deliberate economic 

policy of scorched earth, that's all it was. People in this 

province in 1991 reject it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it didn't only happen in Saskatchewan. The 

situation we find ourselves here in Saskatchewan is replicated, 

whether it's Newfoundland, whether it's British Columbia, 

whether it's Ontario, whether it's Manitoba, whether it's 

Alberta. 

 

And I say this to people of Alberta. Wait till Ralph Klein, if he 

gets a chance to introduce a new budget, wait till that bowling 

ball, the bowling ball Premier, right, from Calgary, wait till he 

gets a chance to go chopping at the people of Alberta. You will 

see a budget of cruelty unparalleled in the history of Alberta, 

because Alberta is on the edge of a fiscal crisis unprecedented 

in their history, Mr. Speaker. You just watch, if Ralph Klein 

gets his chance. Right? 

 

But we have seen we're all in the same boat as people across 

this country, as people who are citizens of provinces. Because 

all political parties of all political stripes are faced with that 

fiscal crisis because of both the international situation and the 

national situation. 

 

So I suggest, Mr. Speaker, I suggest, and I want to compliment 

and I want to congratulate the Premier of this province for 

having the courage to raise the question of debt and to put it on 

the national agenda. The Premier and the Minister of Finance 

have both begun to speak out in a plain straightforward way to 

the people of Canada, saying unless we deal with this debt 

now, unless we find ways of cooperatively developing a 

solution to the debt, then the continuation of cuts, the 

continuation of trying to squeeze every last nickel out of 

taxpayers' dollars to provide the kind of services that Canadians 

have come to expect, unless we're able to do that, unless we're 

able to deal with that debt, what we see now will be child's play 

compared to what will come down the road five and ten years 

from now. 

 

Because the question of raising the question of debt and putting 

it on the national agenda forces Canadians, I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, and forces the New Democratic Party into coming to 

grips with some realities that quite frankly I don't think have 

come into the public consciousness. 

 

I want to quote, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Howard Pawley, the former 

premier of the province of Manitoba, the former NDP premier. 

I want to quote from today's Leader-Post. It says, and I quote: 

 

 Howard Pawley, NDP premier of Manitoba from 1981 to 

1987, said New Democrat governments are making a mistake 

in moving toward the centre of the political spectrum. 

 

 They need to take a step back and think of ways 

to keep spending under control (to keep spending under 

control) without alienating the party loyalists (or those who 

have come to support them) . . . 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Speaker, what does that mean in our context here? It 

means, as the Premier of the province has said, we've got to 

develop a cooperative plan to deal with provincial debt. 

 

And why? Well, Mr. Speaker, during the heydays of the '60s 

and '70s -- and I don't think it's any coincidence -- but during 

the heydays of the '60s and '70s about 25 per cent of all 

provincial debt, and in fact of all federal debt, was what was 

called monetized. 

 

That is the government, through its fiscal policy of increasing 

M2, the money supply, was able to keep the debt under control, 

was able to keep the debt being transferred not into the pockets 

of taxpayers, but in fact was able to do it basically through the 

erosion of the value of debt. I know it sounds like kind of 

economists' voodoo or mumbo-jumbo, but it's not. That's 

basically what was happening. Twenty-five per cent of all 

public debt during the '60s and '70s was monetized up until 

1975 when the Liberals began to introduce the tight money 

policy that was pursued much more vigorously by the Tories. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, on a national scale only 6 per cent, only 6 

per cent of public debt is monetized. That's why we have the 

crisis of government revenue. We have on the one hand the 

debt spiral that economists talk about, the compounding of 

interest; and on the other hand, the federal government 

offloading its debt, offloading its debt onto the provinces. Now 

we've talked about offloading in this House many times before 

in terms of cutting real dollars for spending programs, for 

education and for health and for social services and for what 

have you. But the other side of that offloading has been the 

offloading of the debt through the tight money policy. Only 6 

per cent, only 6 per cent of all public debt is now taken on by 

the Bank of Canada. 

 

Twenty-five per cent, the economy was booming, people had 

jobs, there were social programs and an expansion of social 

programs like the dental plan. Right? Because at that point in 

time, at that point in time there was an understanding that fiscal 

policy and that a policy of reasonable credit was going to 

expand the economy and keep things rolling. 

 

It didn't make big profits for the banks, because when you take 

away 25 per cent, you monetize 25 per cent, you increase the 

money supply by that much. Bank profits don't rise because 

they're eroded through inflation, they're eroded, the bank 

profits are eroded through people have got money in their 

pockets to pay back their debts. They don't make the big bucks 

when you have a monetized money supply of about 25 per 

cent. 



March 24, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 593 

But since the introduction of the tight money policy, and 

anybody that does any kind of economic tracking can tell you 

that since 1975 each and every year the profits of the large 

financial institutions of this country have risen in direct 

proportion to the cut in the money supply. Fiscal policy 

pursued by the Liberals and Tories means big profit for banks, 

it means cuts in services for you and I, Mr. Speaker. Right? 

 

So that's the context, Mr. Speaker. That's the context that we 

find ourselves in putting forward this budget. And as I said 

earlier, nobody on this side of the House is really happy about 

this. 

 

I want to, Mr. Speaker, talk about some of the solutions. As I 

said, the Premier of this province has called for a national debt 

-- the question of cooperative doing away of the national debt 

to be put on the political agenda in this country. And I support 

that call, Mr. Speaker. I think that everybody in this House 

probably supports that call. 

 

I can tell you, the premiers of Nova Scotia and the premiers of 

Newfoundland and the premiers of British Columbia and 

Ontario are going to be supporting that call for putting the 

cooperative solution to the debt problem on the political 

agenda. Because with the kind of economic situation they're 

faced with, Mr. Speaker, they have got no other solution than 

to band together to deal with this problem. 

 

And I want to make some suggestions if I can, Mr. Speaker, in 

terms of what I see are some of the solutions to the national 

debt, to that cooperative approach. 

 

Well I think the first step in that of course is to build a united 

front of the provinces. To get the provinces together to say: we 

can no longer live under a regime of tight money; we can no 

longer live with John Crow; we can no longer live with the 

kind of fiscal policies pursued by the Tories or by the Liberal 

Party. We've got to change the fiscal priorities of this country. 

 

And we as the premiers who represent, just from the NDP point 

of view, more than 50 per cent of the population of this 

country, that that united front has got to demand the removal of 

John Crow as a symbol to the end of the tight money policies 

which are starving the people of Saskatchewan and which are 

starving the people of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, John Crow must go, and I know that everybody 

on this side of the House supports that call. Okay? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- The second, Mr. Speaker, once we've decided to 

do away with that kind of fiscal policy, is the question of how 

we renegotiate or restructure the debt. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, there's some very simple 

technical answers to that, answers which 

we saw during the '60s and/or in the '70s, answers which 

stimulate the economy, which provide jobs for people, which 

will provide for an increase in the money supply to be able to 

put people to work, to be able to ensure the adequate care in 

health care or in education, be able to provide the student loan 

base, for example, so that students aren't left holding the bag 

when they graduate from university. They did it, Mr. Speaker, 

25 per cent during the '60s and '70s; they can do it today. 

 

But there are other ways because Saskatchewan is in a fiscal 

situation where we need some fiscal breathing space. I don't 

think that there's anybody in this province who realizes that we 

need some fiscal breathing space to be able to have the kind of 

time to put our province back on track and to make the kind of 

structural adjustments that are needed in education and in 

health, in social services, and in terms of building the kind of 

province that we want. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the federal government through the Bank of 

Canada can very easily provide that kind of fiscal breathing 

space for all provinces, not just Saskatchewan, by agreeing to 

buy a percentage of Saskatchewan savings bonds, Manitoba 

savings bonds, British Columbia savings bonds, Ontario 

savings bonds, at a rate at historically . . . that the historical 

interest rate of the '60s and the '70s, the two and a half, 3 per 

cent -- to be able to provide that so that we don't end up paying 

$800 million every year to the bankers and the bond dealers 

around this country; so that we cut the interest costs; so that we 

get that fiscal breathing space; so that we can reduce our 

overall debt; so that we can get Saskatchewan back on the road 

to economic recovery. 

 

So that the money that we save, instead of it going out to 

Zrich or Geneva or Tokyo or New York or Bay Street in 

Toronto, instead of the money flowing out there, we can use 

that money for investment in Saskatchewan to build the kind of 

industrial base that we need in this province to put people to 

work, to put people in school, and to provide the kind of life 

that we here in this province want to have, Mr. Speaker. Right? 

I believe that that is . . . that's essential. And that is part of the 

call for cooperative fiscal arrangements that is part of putting 

debt on the public agenda; that the right to renegotiate and 

restructure the public debt, Mr. Speaker, must be responded to 

in a favourable way by the federal government. 

 

Of course, Mr. Speaker, there are several other things that need 

to be done. There's the question of tax reform. We've seen 

during the years from the mid-'70s onward the shifting, each 

and every year, each and every budget, the shifting of tax 

burdens away from those who can afford to pay the most onto 

the backs of those who can afford to pay the least. 

 

In 1953 in this country, Mr. Speaker, corporations paid 50 per 

cent of all taxes accruing to the federal government. 

Individuals paid the other 50 per cent. By 1990 corporations 

paid 17 per cent, Mr. Speaker, 17 per cent. Individuals paid 83 

per cent of all tax revenue accruing to the federal government. 

We have seen that, Mr. Speaker. There is something wrong 



594 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1993 

there. 

 

Where's the fairness in that kind of tax system? Tax loophole 

after tax break after deferred tax program for corporations. One 

after the other, successive Liberal and Conservative 

governments have given their big-business friends the tax 

breaks -- right? -- while they're breaking the backs of ordinary 

working Canadians; ordinary people in Saskatchewan -- right? 

-- who don't get those kind of tax breaks, don't get those kind of 

tax deferrals, don't get those kind of tax advantages that the 

rich, the powerful, and the corporate elite get. And I don't mean 

just as individuals. I'm talking about as corporate organizations. 

 

We all know the story, Mr. Speaker, of the teller at the Royal 

Bank who paid more in income tax in 1990 than the whole 

Royal Bank did, despite the hundreds of millions of dollars in 

profit made by the Royal Bank in that year. Right? That's what 

I'm talking about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There is no tax fairness in this country. And until we get a 

government in Ottawa committed to tax fairness, the same kind 

of flimflammery at the fiscal front will be continued and will 

go on. We need to get rid of those who provide tax loopholes 

for the rich and put in place those who provide tax fairness for 

all Canadians, Mr. Speaker. And that's another part. That's 

another part. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- That, Mr. Speaker, is another part of a program 

for dealing with the fiscal crisis that we face. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to finish up by saying that as another 

-- this is a personal viewpoint and observation that I put 

forward -- that as another integral part, in terms of trying to 

deal with the fiscal crisis and the economic situation that we 

face in Saskatchewan, that we've got to begin to look and 

re-examine the notion of public ownership in this province. 

 

It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that there's no coincidence 

between the privatizing of our public assets, whether it be 

potash or oil, the privatizing of those natural resources, sodium 

sulphate on the one hand, and the increase in the debt load on 

the treasury of the people of Saskatchewan, on the treasury of 

this province on the other. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, I would argue, and I have done at some 

length prior to this day in this legislature, that when it comes to 

natural resources the people of Saskatchewan have a right to a 

fair return. And I take the position, Mr. Speaker, that that fair 

return can only accrue to the people of Saskatchewan through 

the instrument of social ownership. And I will debate, I'm 

certainly willing to debate anyone in this legislature on that 

point, that the profits made from potash should be going to pay 

for health care, not for Chuck Childers 700 or 800 or 900,000 a 

year golf lessons, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- That the money, the profits from the oil 

companies that operate in this country should be going to pay 

for the children's dental plan, should be going to help students 

go to university, should be going to put people to work rather 

than enriching some fat-cat stockholder, capitalist type so he 

can play golf at an exclusive club in Phoenix, Arizona, Mr. 

Speaker. That's what we're talking about here, right? -- where 

the wealth of this province goes and how it's shared. 

 

And it is my position, Mr. Speaker, as a member of this 

legislature, that in order to get us out of the fiscal problems and 

the economic problems that we find ourselves in, that we have 

to use those resources to develop the second, or I should say 

the third, level of economic development for Saskatchewan. 

And that is investment in industry, in manufacturing in this 

province, based on a planned, an overall developmental plan 

which will have as its goal full employment so that we don't 

have people unemployed in this province, so that we have a 

place for those who graduate from our universities and 

technical schools to go to, that will have as its goal social 

usefulness. 

 

We don't need to set up more toothpick factories or toothpaste 

factories. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Band-aids. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- I think there's band-aid factories. There are 

enough of those elsewhere in the world, but that there are 

things that we here in Saskatchewan can do, whether it's in 

agricultural biotechnology or in freezer technology or in 

manufacturing technology, and that, Mr. Speaker, that in terms 

of the harmonious development of our economy, that we mesh 

it with the agricultural base of Saskatchewan. 

 

I would submit, Mr. Speaker, that as a vision for the future, that 

we have got to look as our roles as citizens of the world and 

citizens of this country, that as part of our vision for the future 

we should be looking at our role in life as to feed the hungry -- 

not only the food, Mr. Speaker, but the technology and the 

knowledge that those who are less fortunate than us, not only in 

Saskatchewan but globally, should benefit at our labours. 

 

Mr. Speaker, perhaps that's utopian. Perhaps that doesn't fit in 

with the kind of pragmatism that the Tories like to talk about or 

that the member from Saskatoon Greystone likes to talk about. 

But that there is a purpose, Mr. Speaker; there is a purpose for 

what we do here in this province and the labours that we 

engage in; and that that purpose be there is a higher order and a 

higher purpose other than grubbing for bucks; and that the 

higher purpose should be to build the brotherhood and 

sisterhood of man, Mr. Speaker; that that is part and parcel of 

our role here in 



March 24, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 595 

Saskatchewan as citizens of this province. 

 

We have seen, Mr. Speaker, we have seen that their way 

doesn't work. Their way doesn't work. It led to greed. It led to 

chaos and greed, disharmony. It led to the kind of society and 

mess that maybe as individuals, members over there, they 

enjoy. Maybe they enjoy bothering their neighbour, Mr. 

Speaker. Maybe they enjoy trying to figure out ways in which 

they can put their neighbour down, maybe steal their 

neighbour's land. Right? Maybe not give them a fair price for 

their labour. Maybe that's what the kind of individual . . . 

maybe that's the kind of individualism, the kind of rotten 

individualism that we have seen for too long in this province. 

Right? 

 

Maybe, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite should really take 

a good look in the mirror to see whether no matter what they 

think is reflected in what they actually do. 

 

Maybe for example, Mr. Speaker, the member from 

Moosomin, the member from Moosomin can justify, can justify 

the actions of their government over the last 10 years when he 

sat on the government side of the House. Maybe he can justify, 

maybe he can justify filling the pockets of the rich and 

powerful at the expense of ordinary people in Saskatchewan. 

Maybe he, when he looks in the mirror, can justify each and 

every action -- the kind of crookedness, the kind of 

crookedness which has led to criminal charges being laid to 

those who worked for the former administration. Maybe he can 

justify that, Mr. Speaker, in his own conscience. I don't think, I 

don't think he could if he took a good look in the mirror. 

 

Or maybe, Mr. Speaker, the fine words that we sometimes hear 

emanating from the other side is nothing more than the kind of 

hypocrisy that has become famous for Tory governments, 

whether they're in Ottawa or in Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm going to support this budget. And I say that, 

and it's hard and heavy on my heart to do so. Yes, it is hard and 

heavy on the heart of every member on this side of the House, 

Mr. Speaker, but we're going to stand together. We're going to 

stand together because we believe that there is a higher order 

and there can be a new day. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I ask all people in Saskatchewan, I ask all 

people in Saskatchewan, join us. Not to blindly follow us. Not 

to give undying allegiance to us or blind allegiance to us, but 

join us as we engage in the kind of constructive dialogue 

needed to build the kind of society that we, the ordinary people 

of this province, want to build. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with that I will . . . I want to say that I enjoin all 

people of Saskatchewan to join us on that road to renewal. And 

I want to thank my colleagues, Mr. Speaker, for the opportunity 

of speaking here today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 

a pleasure for me this afternoon to follow my colleague from 

Regina Rosemont. I'm not sure that I can be quite as inspiring 

as he was, but I certainly enjoyed the speech that he gave here 

this afternoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise today to speak in support of 

this government's 1993-94 budget. I am proud of this budget, 

Mr. Speaker, and I find that the more people know about this 

budget, the more they are willing to support it for what it does 

for Saskatchewan people. 

 

I spent last Friday and also this past weekend at public 

meetings and various functions in the communities of 

Weyburn, Estevan, and in my home constituency of Swift 

Current. I am pleased to report to this House and to the people 

of Saskatchewan and to the members opposite, that people 

generally support this budget. They say it's about time that 

government made some serious effort to tackle the deficit and 

the debt that we have in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget puts forward a credible plan for 

balancing the budget in Saskatchewan. This budget makes 

creating jobs the top priority and takes many positive steps to 

encourage economic growth. And this budget provides 

protection, protects the public services by rationalizing those 

services and by streamlining the delivery of these services. And 

it does all of this, Mr. Speaker, with compassion. 

 

Indeed while the budget is characterized by significant 

restraints, it actually increases the help for the poor and the 

working poor. We are not balancing this budget or financing 

economic development or rationalizing public services on the 

backs of the poor, the sick, or the elderly as the previous 

administration did. That's not the Saskatchewan way and that's 

not the way we're going to do this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The financial problems we face are real and very, very serious. 

In 1991 we inherited a financial boondoggle of truly staggering 

proportions -- a $15 billion debt with annual interest payments 

exceeding 760 million a year and growing. In only 10 years, 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan's financial problem went from one 

of the strongest . . . financial position went from one of the 

strongest in the country to one of the weakest in the country. 

Ten short years of Tory administration, but 10 very long years 

for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now the chickens have come home to roost. The bills are due. 

And we all have to pay for the previous administration's era of 

unrestrained excesses. Let me put our situation into 

perspective, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan is like a household 

with an income of $50,000 and credit card debts of 125,000 

and it's still spending more than it earns each day. Such a 

household would find it very difficult to borrow money. 

Governments are no different. We either learn to live within 

our means or face the prospect of someone else taking over our 

affairs. 

 

It has to start now, Mr. Speaker. Government spending should 

be put . . . should be about programs to help 



596 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1993 

people, not to pay interest charges to people in various parts of 

the world, these faceless investors who have loaned us money 

and are siphoning off the profits of this province. I'd like to see 

this money spent on creating jobs, on building schools and 

health clinics, on income support for farmers, on seniors. 

Frankly, I'd rather see it spent helping families and building 

strong communities than giving it to the investors of the world, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But having the financial freedom to do that demands we get our 

fiscal house in order. This budget contains a plan which will 

put our fiscal house in order while allowing us to protect and 

maintain vital public services. This budget has a plan to secure 

our future and restore our financial freedom, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We believe provincial budgets are much more than just annual, 

one-shot affairs. Each budget builds on the last and leaves the 

groundwork for the next. Wherever possible people ought to 

know what is coming this year and also what is coming next 

year and the year after that. That's what effective financial 

planning is all about. That's how we intend to balance our 

budget within the next four years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I report to you that we will be able to do it because we have 

brought government spending under control. We began that 

task in our first budget by reducing operating expenditures by 4 

per cent and we're reducing operating expenditures again this 

year by a further 3 per cent. That, Mr. Speaker, is 7 per cent 

reduction over two years. No other jurisdiction in North 

America has made such strides in reducing their expenditures. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a number of new expenditure reductions were 

introduced this year. And I'd just like to cite a couple of them. 

Communications expenditures have been cut again, bringing 

the two-year reduction to over 40 per cent. Staff development 

costs have been reduced and leasing costs for office space has 

been cut by $1.5 million. Government itself is being 

reorganized to reduce duplication and provide more accessible, 

streamlined services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, reorganization alone will save taxpayers $5 

million a year. We know full well that every dollar counts. 

Every dollar saved is another step towards financial freedom. 

 

We want a more responsive, effective, and efficient 

government. We know that the people of Saskatchewan want 

this too. We are leading by example, making government more 

effective and more accountable. Together we will secure a 

better future for ourselves and for our children. 

 

As a first step, Mr. Speaker, we have made job creation one of 

our top priorities. But there are limits to what a province can do 

to stimulate growth and create jobs. We are not an economic 

island. We cannot insulate ourselves totally from federal 

policies or from changing world economic conditions. The 

main economic levers -- interest rates, taxation, and trade 

policy -- rest with Ottawa. That's why we're calling 

for a national approach to economic development, one which 

focuses on creating sustainable jobs. 

 

But I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, we will not sit idly by hoping for 

positive action from Ottawa. Past experience in dealing with 

Ottawa makes that a pretty risky strategy at very best. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will do all we can to create jobs now and we 

have a new approach to economic development. In the 1980s 

hundreds of millions of dollars went into megaprojects that 

drained our treasury while creating very few jobs. And the 

previous administration squandered more than a billion dollars 

on credit-robbing loan guarantees which we may have to make 

good on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our economic plan for the 1990s charts a new 

course in partnership with business, labour, and communities. 

And it includes some of the following. It includes giving our 

co-ops and small-business sector an edge. It includes creating 

incentives for new investment, promoting value added 

processing, pursuing new growth and industries, improving our 

infrastructure, and enhancing our highly skilled workforce. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Speaker, we're laying more 

groundwork for that plan in our budget by reducing the small 

business corporation income tax rate by 20 per cent over a 

two-year period. We're improving Saskatchewan's labour 

venture program; we're offering another issue of Saskatchewan 

savings bonds; we're inviting the Saskatchewan people to 

participate in providing revenue for the government's budget. 

We're allowing an 8 per cent manufacturing and processing tax 

credit; a $51 million investment in new growth opportunities; 

and increasing the infrastructure investment by 10 per cent this 

year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, time does not permit listing all the positive 

initiatives in this budget. My colleagues on the other side of the 

House say, we could have done more. They keep saying we 

should have harmonized the E&H tax with the GST (goods and 

services tax). They say that makes more sense than selectively 

adding an additional 1 per cent to the E&H tax. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these deficit dilettantes across the floor lack the 

credibility to give anyone advice, and their own numbers prove 

just how far off the mark they really are. When they planned on 

harmonizing the GST with . . . the PST (provincial sales tax) 

with the GST in 1991, they predicted that they could raise an 

additional $420 million. 

 

Could you imagine, Mr. Speaker, the impact that that kind of 

tax would have on Saskatchewan people and on the 

Saskatchewan economy? Our modest 1 per cent increase in the 

E&H will raise $70 million, and they suggest that the 420 

million they thought they would get from the taxpayers is a 

better deal for the people of Saskatchewan. That's their kind of 

voodoo economics that we hear about. 



March 24, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 597 

Mr. Speaker, we believe this is a fair and even-handed way to 

go. 

 

I want to very briefly discuss the public services and the 

compassion aspect of this budget. Rising costs and federal 

offloading are undermining health care, education, and social 

services. We do not believe people want to give up on 

medicare. They don't want to give up on education or on help 

for the poor and the working poor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we believe people want rationalized services, 

streamlined delivery, and elimination of waste and duplication, 

and that's just exactly what we're doing in this budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1700) 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Once again, Mr. Premier, Saskatchewan 

is pioneering new paths to secure public services for the next 

generations. And I would like to give you some examples. 

 

School boards are sharing services. They're including group 

tendering, payroll accounting, and computer networks. 

Communities are forming partnerships to plan, administer, and 

coordinate local services. And new partnerships are being 

formed to build a second generation of health care based on 

wellness. And, Mr. Speaker, many communities are forming 

their own health districts to take control of the planning and 

delivery of local health services. 

 

We are making public services more responsive by returning 

control of them to our communities and we are protecting those 

services for future generations by making them sustainable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like to just spend a minute on the spirit of this 

year's budget. I say, Mr. Speaker, that this is a budget of hope. 

Our work as a society is measured by how well we protect the 

most vulnerable among us. The most vulnerable in our society 

are children. Far too many live in poverty or unstable home 

situations. 

 

Our budget provides hope and acts to improve the lives of 

children and families, help for the working poor through 

increased payments under the Family Income Plan, and an 

increased social assistance for families with children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget provides $18 million for programs 

that benefit our children, money for child care, hunger 

programs, and a revised dental program targeted to children in 

low income families. Single parent women need special 

support. The budget provides more money for infant care 

centres to encourage single parents to finish their education. 

 

Funding for home care in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, has been 

increased to $43 million. The seniors will receive more benefits 

under the chiropractic and 

optometric services programs and the drug plan. The drug plan 

itself will be made more sensitive to those with low incomes 

and those with high drug costs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is deficit reduction with a difference. There is 

an element of compassion in this budget. It reduces spending 

but at the same time, as I said, it shows compassion. 

 

This budget also signals a new era for the Crown corporations 

sector in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the previous 

administration drained the Crown corporations of their 

financial resources and turned them from productive 

contributors to our economy to being burdens on the public 

purse. We have changed that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Under our government the Crown corporations will once again 

contribute economic growth and job creation to our economy 

by investing $520 million in capital projects over the next year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I've talked about a plan to secure our future, a 

plan to create jobs and strengthen our economy, and a plan that 

will balance the budget within four years. We are on the 

leading edge of financial and social reform in Canada. Our eyes 

are firmly fixed on the future. 

 

Some say we're moving too quickly to balance the budget. But 

in the 1980s the government spent what they did not have and 

left the bills to be paid by our children. I say, Mr. Speaker, that 

era is over for good. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Some say we should not raise taxes. I ask 

those people: how then would you balance the budget without 

eliminating the safety nets that protect our families? Still others 

say that we did not create this deficit, so why should I worry 

about paying for it or sacrifice to eliminate it. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, you and I did not create this deficit but unfortunately 

this deficit now becomes everybody's problem, and that 

includes all of us here and all the people in Saskatchewan. We 

have to work together to overcome it if we hope to secure a 

better future for ourselves and our children. 

 

Bold, decisive action is required and bold, decisive action is 

what we are proposing. Our balanced-budget plan will save 

Saskatchewan, and it will give us the financial freedom to build 

a better future for our children and our grandchildren. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting this budget and I am pleased 

to be part of a government that provides vision, hope, and 

prosperity for this province. This is the right budget for this 

time. In spite of difficult circumstances, this government has 

made the tough decisions required to begin to turn things 

around. The credit-rating agencies of the country and of the 

United States are giving our government full marks for 

bringing in a budget that signals the beginning of a new era, an 

era of hope and prosperity. 



598 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1993 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like to congratulate the Minister of Finance, 

our Premier, my cabinet colleagues and all my caucus 

colleagues for the courage they have shown in presenting this 

bold, decisive plan of action to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am very proud to support this 

budget. Thank you. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:06 p.m. 

 

 


