




















































Hansard: April 27, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1249 

 April 27, 1993 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 3 — An Act respecting Health Districts 

 

Clause 1 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. 

Chair, just as we were wrapping up at supper time, the member 

from Maple Creek, I believe it was, was making all sorts of 

accusations about the need for the government to look in the 

mirror and commenting on the hurt that's being inflicted on 

communities and was asking me a question in that regard. 

 

And I want to say this. The government is fully aware of the 

hurt the budget reductions cause to individuals and to 

communities, and we regret the fact that this hurt is caused to 

individuals and communities. We would much rather not be 

making cuts that result in job loss or that affect communities in 

the manner that some of the budget cuts do. 

 

The fact is, Mr. Chair, we're left with no option. We are facing 

a $15 billion debt in this province, a legacy of debt that was left 

to us by the PC (Progressive Conservative) government in the 

last 10 years, and we have no option if we're going to save 

social programs, if we're going to save medicare for future 

generations, but to make cuts to services that we feel could . . . 

where the money could be spent more wisely in terms of health 

care. 

 

The Minister of Health and the Department of Health have no 

option but to spend an ever-shrinking health care dollar in areas 

where the health care need is the greatest. We must target our 

health care dollar to real needs, not to wants, not to demands, 

but to real health care needs. And that's why I've spoken on the 

issue of health outcomes on numerous occasions. In fact, I 

believe that Dr. Michael Rachlis, who wrote the book on 

Second Opinion, a very renowned book in Canada on health 

care reform, earlier this week, or perhaps last week when he 

was in town, indicated that there is a need for provincial 

governments to start looking at outcomes. And that's what he's 

referring to. That's what we've built into in our utilization 

commission. That's why certain health care cuts have been 

targeted, Mr. Chair. 

 

And I want to say this. The members opposite point their 

fingers at us about the hurt. I think they should look in the 

mirror and they should look at reality. They should look at the 

waste and mismanagement that took place in the 10 years of 

Devine government. They should look at the debt that they've 

created . . . 

 

The Chair: — Order. I'll ask the minister to avoid reference to 

any of the members of the Assembly by name. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.  

And instead of contributing to the problem today they should 

be doing what thousands of people are doing across 

Saskatchewan — contributing to the solution, looking for 

solutions and opportunities and moving ahead. Yes, we're in a 

difficult situation but there is light at the end of the tunnel and 

let us go towards that light and develop a better tomorrow for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

And I want to comment a bit on the member from Greystone 

and the role that she has played throughout this debate. And I 

want to say this. During the election in 1991 she made a 

statement to the effect that there should be role changes in 

hospitals. And then because the political heat was on her, she 

backed off from that statement. And we've watched her 

position throughout this entire debate. And I want the record to 

show that it has been a position of inconsistency, not a position 

of resolve, not a position of looking towards the future, but a 

position of political expediency and inconsistency. 

 

What the member from Greystone did is that she, for example, 

when we were voting on the Bills that the opposition brought 

forward about restoring health care, she abstained from voting 

on a number of these Bills and then decided at some point that, 

oh gee, she should maybe take a position on this, and started to 

vote in favour of them; and then again was abstaining from 

votes. She did not know what she wanted to do. You know 

why? She didn't want to do the right thing; she wanted to do the 

politically expedient thing. 

 

Now I expect that from the members opposite, the Tory 

members. I expect that. But from someone who continues to 

say that she's above politics, I don't expect that. I expect a 

different approach, an approach that rises above politics — if 

that's what she says she does — that rises above politics, and 

that does what is good for the whole of the province rather than 

trying to make some short-term, politically expedient points. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to say this. She was out speaking at 

the rally of people, trying to capitalize on the anger that was 

there and the emotion and the feelings, and yet through another 

side of her mouth she says she supports health reform. And I 

want the record to show that what she has done consistently 

throughout this debate is to try to capitalize on the political 

opportunities but never to really support health reform in a 

fashion that she could have, that would have put her in the 

forefront as truly being above politics. She has shown her true 

colours, Mr. Chair, that of a politically expedient person that's 

prepared to take political opportunity for short-term gain at the 

expense of the benefit of the province as a whole. 

 

Now I expect the Tories to do that. I did not expect someone 

who espouses to be above that to take that kind of a position. 

 

And with respect to the opposition, let's just take a look at what 

the Tory opposition opposes. The Tory 



1250 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1993 

opposition opposes the formation of health districts. They 

oppose what thousands of citizens who have already formed 

health districts believe is the right thing to do. And they want to 

oppose them. They don't want Midwest having their health 

board. They don't want Twin Rivers having their health board. 

They don't want all those planning groups that have out . . . 

been out there working to have their health board. They oppose 

it. 

 

The Tory opposition opposes democratic election of district 

health boards, because that is one of the things that's in the 

legislation, and they're opposing it. They're opposing the 

amalgamation of services to provide for cost efficiencies and 

less expenditure by district health boards, because that is what 

we're proposing, that's one of the directions we want to move, 

and they oppose it. 

 

They oppose the establishment of health districts for 

not-for-profit corporations. That's what's being proposed in the 

legislation; the Tories oppose it. 

 

They oppose the empowering of health boards to determine in 

the future, within global funding, which services are necessary. 

This is a massive decentralization of services from Regina to 

district boards. They will be able to do plans. They will be able 

to put in formulas. They'll be able to come to us in the context 

of their global funding. But that's opposed by the opposition 

because it's an empowering of these health boards in these 

communities. 

 

The Tories also oppose the voluntary funding of district health 

boards by municipalities, Mr. Chair. They oppose that. They 

oppose the hospital revenue tax. They wanted to repeal it, 

which would be an automatic $20 million grab out of the health 

care sector. They just opposed it without thinking of the 

consequences of doing that. They're opposed to public 

meetings because in this legislation district boards will have to 

have two public meetings every year where they will have to 

show their communities that they have a plan, and they will 

have to show what the health status of that community is. 

 

So for once in the first time in our history, at the local level, 

citizens can hear what the health status of their community is 

and urge their elected representatives on a board to develop 

health care planning that improves health status. The Tory 

opposition opposes it. They don't want to see that happen. They 

want the old system to continue that has no accountability of 

this nature to the public, where meetings are held in private, 

where there are no public meetings, where health status doesn't 

matter. That's what they want, is the old system. 

 

What we are offering the public is a new system, Mr. Chair, 

that will make boards more accountable to the public because 

they're elected, that will make boards more accountable 

because the meetings are public, that will make boards more 

accountable because they have to tell the citizens what the 

health status is. And the members . . . 

The Chair: — The member for Rosthern. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. For ten minutes 

now we've been listening to harangue. We have closure upon 

us, we have less than three hours left, Mr. Chairman, and the 

minister chastises us. We want to ask her questions, we don't 

want to listen to her harangue. Had it not been for the closure 

motion, a time allocation, we would have no problem listening 

to her, but we feel that because of the limited length of time 

left, it is the opposition's last opportunity to ask questions of 

this minister. And we would appreciate you ruling that we do 

have that opportunity. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I want to just make 

the point that I find the point of order not to be relevant in light 

of the fact that the leader of the . . . or former premier last night 

spoke for about 25 minutes in what can only be called a 

rambling argument about why he lost the last election. And the 

Chairman obviously allowed that, as well he should, because 

on the first vote on any Bill these kinds of arguments are 

allowed. And I would just urge you to rule against the point of 

order made by the member from Rosthern. 

 

The Chair: — I've listened to the point of order presented by 

the member for . . . hon. member for Rosthern, and the remarks 

for the Hon. Government House Leader. It is not the role of the 

Chair in the rules of our Assembly or committee to determine 

the appropriate length of speech by members. And I find that 

the point of order is not well taken. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. The 

other thing that this legislation does, Mr. Chair, which is really 

important, is the open and accountable funding practices that 

will be a first in the history of this province and that gives 

communities a chance for input. 

 

But the members opposite are opposed to that. They're opposed 

to allowing districts to have an input into how the revenues are 

being spent in a global sense. They're opposed to the 

development of new health care programing in their district 

because that's what this legislation allows to happen. They're 

opposed to freeing up resources for real health care needs. 

They're opposed to the freeing up resources for real health care 

needs that result in improved health care status in a province. 

They're opposed to the development of multidisciplinary health 

professional teams and the development of group medical 

practices in the province because that is what district boards 

will encourage. 

 

They will encourage the development of group medical 

practices. They will encourage the development of 

multidisciplinary health care professional teams in the province 

over a period of time. The Department of Health will be 

working with them to do that. 

 

The members opposite are opposed to that because that's what 

they're opposing in this legislation. They're opposed to 

enhanced ambulance services 



April 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1251 

because we are working with boards and with planning groups 

and with the Department of Health to develop an enhanced 

ambulance and communication system in the province. That's 

what we'll be able to do when we get our district boards in 

place and the members opposite are opposed to that. 

 

They are opposed in short, Mr. Speaker, to saving medicare, to 

enhancing medicare, and to moving on with future 

developments in the health care area that are so essential if we 

are going to improve the health status of Saskatchewan people, 

save medicare, and maintain it. The members opposite are 

opposing that when they oppose this district board legislation. 

 

And I could go on and on about what the possibilities are in 

this legislation, Mr. Chair, I could go on and on. The fact of the 

matter is, is the members opposite when they stand here and 

say that we have to search our conscience for what we're doing, 

I am proud of the district board legislation. I am proud of the 

changes in health care that are going to enhance health care for 

Saskatchewan people in the long term as we move through 

health reform. 

 

I know it's tough in the transition and it'll be tough. The next 

two or three years will be very, very tough in the health care 

area for Saskatchewan people and for communities. I know 

that. We are left with no option. Had the members opposite not 

saddled the citizens of this province with their wasteful 

spending, their debt of 15 billion, health reform would have 

still taken place but the impacts would have been less because 

it would have taken place over a longer period of time. But 

because the fiscal situation brings an urgency, an urgency to 

reform, we have to move quickly. 

 

And so the hurt is being caused by them, sir, not by the NDP 

(New Democratic Party) government that is reaching for that 

light at the end of the tunnel, to save medicare for future 

generations. Thank you. 

 

(1915) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. And I 

want the public to notice what's going on here. I want to make 

a very, very definitive statement . . . And the minister from 

Quill Lakes has woken up. Mr. Chairman, I want to make a 

point to the public right now. 

 

This government, this government has put in time allocation 

limiting the amount of opportunity that we have to ask 

questions. They've put closure on that time allocation. And 

because we have now two hours — two and a half hours - 

_ till the voting will take place at quarter to ten, that's all we 

have left. And the minister makes a political harangue, makes 

political arguments, tries to make political points on our time. 

And I want the public to be aware of what is going on here 

where she is stifling the opposition, muzzling the opposition 

even further. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, I could go on and harangue here now 

too about that you have no mandate to do what you're doing, 

that you were elected under false 

pretences, false promises, full well knowing what the situation 

is. But I'm going to resist getting into that because I think we 

have some very legitimate concerns that we have to pass on 

from the people of Saskatchewan. It's not us doing this, Madam 

Minister. 

 

Now I'm going to ask some very pertinent questions. One deals 

with the Holy Family Hospital in Prince Albert. I have a letter 

here from Lawrence Zatlyn in response to a request that I sent 

out, could you pass on some of the concerns that you may 

have. And this is the letter that I got, Madam Minister. And this 

afternoon you were, in glowing terms, reciting about how 

beautiful and how wonderful your plan is going on in Prince 

Albert and Saskatoon and Regina. 

 

I want to share this letter with you. It does not indicate that you 

got a copy of this letter. In case you didn't, here is the 

information: Thank you for your letter of April 2, he says. For 

our part, he continues on, we have written to SHCA . . . And 

you're very fond of quoting of how SHA (Saskatchewan 

Health-Care Association) is in favour of everything that you're 

doing. Well, Madam Minister, there are many, many aspects, 

many, many organizations within that organization that do not 

support the stand, the official stand of that organization. 

 

Here's one of them, indicating their position. We've written to 

them, he says, indicating their position does not endorse that of 

Holy Family Hospital and asking SHCA to either withdraw 

their endorsement, or alternately take the courtesy of 

consulting, or at the very least more accurately reflect the 

varying views of its membership. 

 

Now that's a concern that they're expressing. I continue to 

quote: We have had approximately 10 months experience in 

Prince Albert with a health board — all right, Madam Minister, 

10 months experience with a health board — our experience is 

the current model cannot be recommended nor should it be 

encouraged throughout the province as a model. To browbeat 

and to manipulate ought not be laudable objectives of the 

health care rationalization program, Madam Minister. The issue 

before the public is multidimensional and it deserves, and 

indeed needs, thorough public scrutiny. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, that was the response from the hospital 

of . . . the Holy Family Hospital in Prince Albert. Those are 

their statements, those are their concerns, added to, I might 

add, to the concerns that were brought forward in this 

legislature yesterday by myself and my colleagues where letter 

after letter, municipality after municipality, is saying — and as 

we are saying as the opposition, which is contrary to the 

political points that you were trying to score a few moments 

ago — we are not opposed to reform. We are not opposed to 

rationalization, but rather the NDP format of that. 

 

And that is what the folks in rural Saskatchewan in particular 

. . . and not only in rural Saskatchewan, urban Saskatchewan. 

Unless you . . . Look at all the chattering, Mr. Speaker, because 

they don't like to 



1252 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1993 

hear what I'm saying. They don't like to hear what I'm saying. 

 

I'm saying, and I'm reading a letter from the people of 

Saskatchewan, and we have many more letters than we have 

time for but we will table them in the House so you can do that 

at your . . . peruse them at your leisure, Madam Minister. 

 

The point that we're trying to make, that the people are trying 

to make, that the folks on the legislature were trying to make, is 

simply this: there may be lots of good stuff in what you've got 

outlined. There may be lots of good stuff that we could agree 

with, but there are too many issues that are being forced upon 

people where they do not have any say and where they feel 

uncomfortable with the speed that you are going, and they are 

saying, slow up. 

 

I like to respond to correspondence that I get, Madam Minister, 

and I shared this letter with you so that you might give me an 

idea as to how I should respond to the concerns that they are 

bringing up when they are saying that we've had 10 months 

experience. They've had 10 months experience and they're 

saying now that the current model cannot be recommended nor 

should it be encouraged through the province as a model. To 

browbeat and to manipulate ought not be laudable objectives of 

the health care rationalization program. 

 

So, Madam Minister, I'm just begging you not to get off onto a 

political rampage here again, but answer the specific concerns 

that have been raised by the Holy Family Hospital in this case. 

Could you do that? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the 

situation in Prince Albert, I want to say this: that a 

memorandum of understanding respecting the management 

amalgamation of health-related organizations in Prince Albert 

was signed by Holy Family Hospital before a board was put in 

place. So there was an agreement to move in this general 

direction by the people involved in the health care board. 

 

Now as a result of the health care board doing a study, which 

was done by the Prince Albert Health Board with all actors 

knowing that the study was being done and with consultation 

with people in the health care field and outside the health care 

field, the study recommended that they move from two 

hospitals to one, like they are doing in Moose Jaw. Now as a 

result of that, the recommendation was that it should be the 

Victoria Union Hospital that becomes the hospital and not the 

Holy Family Hospital. The recommendation was that long-term 

care, with respect to Mont St. Joseph Home, be reviewed and 

upgraded, and some arrangement be made in that regard. 

 

What is happening now is Holy Family, or at least in the past, 

was taking the position that they wanted to keep Holy Family 

as the acute care facility. So it isn't a question of we don't need 

health reform, it's a question of, should we move from two 

acute care 

facilities to one, and if so, which one. And there probably is a 

consensus that we should move from two to one, in P.A. 

(Prince Albert); the question is, which one? 

 

Now I understand there are discussions taking place in P.A. 

today — or in the days that have just gone by and in the days to 

come — about which facility would be used and what sort of 

upgrade there would be in long-term care. And these are taking 

place in the community. And I think we should let those 

discussions take place and let the community work out these 

problems. And I have every confidence in them, that they will 

be able to come to a cooperative solution and they will be able 

to work together and rise above vested interests in the process, 

and work together for the benefit of that entire community. I 

believe that will happen, and we must give them the time to do 

that, and the process is taking place right now. The Prince 

Albert Health Board will be funded for the provision of 

services within that district. And they will need to come to 

some sort of an arrangement with Holy Family Hospital. 

 

Now in Moose Jaw, they are moving . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . I am going to give you an answer about Moose 

Jaw because there's an analogy. And you're not going to tell me 

to sit down and not finish my answer. 

 

In Moose Jaw they're moving from two acute care facilities to 

one. They are getting an upgrade in their acute care services 

and an upgrade in their long-term care. This comes as a result 

of a community that works together. This comes as a result of a 

community that's prepared to look at the good of the entire 

district and at the health care needs of people. And in fact, in 

the Moose Jaw situation, Sister Muriel had clearly stated, 

which I thought was a very interesting statement from her . . . I 

can't put my fingers on it right now, but her comment was, was 

that what health reform had done, is it made her see the need to 

pay for and allocate funding for health care needs and not 

health care wants. She felt the health reform process had led 

her to those conclusions. 

 

P.A. is in a similar situation. They need an upgrade in acute 

care; they need an upgrade in long-term care, but they should 

move to one acute care facility. So I know the community is 

discussing these matters right now, and I feel confident that 

they'll be able to work it out to the satisfaction of everyone 

involved. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — You notice, Mr. Chairman, again the minister 

goes on and on and on trying to waste time, trying to make 

political points, throwing in curves left and right, talking about 

Moose Jaw. We'll come to Moose Jaw. I'm talking about Prince 

Albert, Madam Minister. And please don't try to manipulate the 

proceedings here tonight as you are manipulating the health 

process throughout the province — and those are not 

necessarily my words, Madam Minister — because you didn't 

answer the question. 

 

The question that is raised in this letter that I quoted to you is: 

that from their 10-year . . . or 10-month 



April 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1253 

experience, they would not recommend this process to anybody 

and it should not be used as a model through the province. 

They say to browbeat and to manipulate ought not to be a 

laudable objective of the health care rationalization program. 

That's the statement I wanted you to address — browbeat and 

manipulate. 

 

Madam Minister, one of their concerns, when the member from 

Prince Albert Northcote or whichever one it is, the Deputy 

House Leader, he said, people should learn to live with the 

decision of the health board. He said, the board calls the shots. 

And that's the concern that these people are expressing, that it's 

an appointed board calling the shots. And they ask you and 

they ask the member from Prince Albert to whoa up and not 

make these important decisions until the board was elected and 

not appointed by you. They wanted a fully elected board to 

handle these. 

 

So, Madam Minister, browbeat and manipulate is the 

impression that the people of Prince Albert, particularly the 

Holy Family Hospital, have. That's the letter I have here. And 

that's what you're supposed to be responding to, and I hesitate 

to sit down because I won't get the floor for another 15 minutes 

while you talk about North Battleford or La Ronge or 

something like that. 

 

I'm asking you to address the question that the Holy Family 

Hospital director . . . I'm not sure, I'm calling him a director 

because he hasn't identified his position, it's a QC (Queen's 

Counsel), a lawyer — who has now written me that letter. And 

this letter was by, for your information, Madam Minister, is 

dated April 21. So that's very, very, recent; very current. Could 

you address those specific concerns, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, I did address the concerns. 

I indicated that this process is a question of which acute care 

facility is going to be maintained and the community is having 

discussions about this matter now. They're ongoing 

discussions. I did answer the question for the minister. 

 

With respect to fully elected boards, I want to say this. Before 

we even appointed the board in Prince Albert, the members, 

including Holy Family, were putting forward their 

recommendations for appointment and were telling us what 

sort of members they wanted on this board. They were 

involved in a process of nomination and consensus that led to 

the members that were on the board. And I had attended the 

signing agreement and there was no question that they were 

disputing. They weren't disputing the positions that had been 

nominated to the board and the individuals who were forming 

the board. And Holy Family was a part of that. 

 

(1930) 

 

Now I don't think it's appropriate for us to sit here in the 

legislature and start arguing about what Holy Family agrees to 

or doesn't agree though. This is a community process taking 

place in Prince Albert, and 

as elected representatives, we should allow that process to take 

place. 

 

With respect to elected boards, I want to say this. The members 

opposite had 10 years to move from appointed boards to 

elected boards. And they chose to do nothing. This government 

has established an intention to move to elected boards in the 

health care system. It's impossible for us to do that overnight; it 

has to be done as a part of the transition. We will deal with 

appointed boards on an interim basis until we've had an 

opportunity to set up all the districts, to set up the wards, to 

have the detailed discussions with the community about the 

election process. Then we will move to fully elected boards. 

But it's not the members opposite . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Fully elected? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — No, I'm sorry. Eight and four. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Oh, just a slip of the tongue. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Well there's two elected boards. The 

four members who are appointed are . . . The reason for — and 

I want to put this on the record — the reason for the four 

appointed members on the board is to ensure that we have a 

broad representation. 

 

For example, if a group comes to us and says they have a 

health care professional in their community that they think 

should sit on the board because they want to round it out with 

some health care expertise, we would be prepared to appoint 

that person, provided they're nominated from within the 

community. Or if there was a large aboriginal population close 

by that were unable to get an elected person on the board, we 

may want to appoint an aboriginal person in order to make sure 

that that board is rounded out. 

 

But most importantly it is to ensure that there is 

cross-pollination between districts. For example, Saskatoon is 

talking about Midwest having a representative on their board. 

We see rural communities saying, can we have some 

cross-reference between our districts and share some 

representation? So the reason for the appointment is to allow 

for situations such as those, Mr. Chair. 

 

The members opposite, however, never did come forward over 

a 10-year period with a proposal to move to elected boards. 

They never did, Mr. Chair. And I think it's important to note 

that the . . . and when they say the people of Prince Albert are 

saying health reform isn't working, they are wrong. The people 

of Prince Albert, in the majority, support health reform. There 

will be some dissenters, as there are throughout Saskatchewan 

and there always are on a major change of this nature. But to 

represent on behalf of the people of Prince Albert, which the 

member from Rosthern was doing, that they oppose health 

reform from one letter — from one letter, from one letter — is 

totally misrepresenting what is taking place in Prince Albert. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Then we'll dig a little deeper, Madam 



1254 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1993 

Minister. You say one letter. Hospital changes spark rally in 

Prince Albert. Here it says, 500 tell the health board to slow 

down — a common request right across this province. Five 

hundred people out in a soaking rain; there would have been 

thousands had it not been for the weather. It says so right in 

here. It's not my words. It's right in the newspaper article, so 

don't tell me that I'm only using one letter that happens to be 

what I think. That's not the case. 

 

What I'm doing is I'm quoting from a letter that was sent to me 

out of concern and I'm right now indicating to you that it's not 

just one individual. There was a big protest, Madam Minister, 

there was a big rally in Prince Albert on this aspect. That's all 

I'm saying. And I'm trying to get from you how I'm supposed to 

react to that situation. And every time I sit down, you take 

another 15 minutes. 

 

I have a different concern — a concern that's a little bit closer 

to home, to my home. I want to bring up a situation dealing 

with Corman Park and a potential health district there. And I 

know the reeve of Corman Park, Dick Friesen, is quoted in the 

paper, and I'm quoting . . . This would be The Village Press, 

Wednesday, April 21: 

 

 Corman Park is the hub of this area and some of these towns 

have services that they want to control. 

 

They want to have real control. 

 

And I heard some of your comments this afternoon that I want 

to pursue about local control. But be that as it may, Madam 

Minister, I think you know where I'm getting at because 

apparently you must have the letter in your possession by now, 

and that is a letter where: 

 

 A resolution was passed (and I'm quoting) to send a letter 

asking Health Minister Louise Simard to extend the August 

17 deadline for the formation of Health Districts in addition 

to asking for more information regarding exactly what 

services will have to be provided. 

 

Madam Minister, this is dated April 21, very current, last week, 

this paper. 

 

So Corman Park, the largest municipality in this province, is 

asking for you to slow down so they know where they are at, in 

addition to the many of the other communities. 

 

 Councillor Ed Hobday said, "You're playing with the entire 

future of the RM with respect to health care and I think 

everyone wants them to defer the deadline". 

 

That's all they're asking. 

 

In the final analysis, maybe what you're planning, maybe what 

you're proposing will in large measure be accepted. But they 

don't know and they are afraid of their future by having it 

forced down them on some kind of artificial deadline, August 

17. 

Now, Madam Minister, I'm just going to go through a few of 

the steps that this municipality is facing and the problems that 

they're facing in trying to meet your deadline. And I think these 

are very legitimate concerns. 

 

First of all, a steering committee has been meeting to obtain 

information to follow the process, to be able to follow the 

process as outlined by the government to introduce health care 

districts. I'm quoting from this magazine article from time to 

time here. 

 

 One of the next steps the group must take before proceeding 

is to find out what direction the public would like to take. 

 

So they have to make their consultative process work within 

their community. Then the steering committee is going to have 

to meet to draw up a questionnaire that each interested council 

would present to its residents. The questionnaire was intended 

to gather public opinion as to whether to pursue a rural health 

district or the only other option they have, which is to join 

Saskatoon. 

 

Now even within the area there are concerns. The town of 

Martensville, for example, the largest town surrounding 

Saskatoon, is saying, well because we have so much empathy 

with Saskatoon, because we have more in common with 

Saskatoon perhaps than the surrounding towns and the 

surrounding rural area, we would be looking at joining 

Saskatoon in spite of what the rural municipality of Corman 

Park may do. 

 

So that's one of the options. But that begs the question for 

them: if Martensville joins the Saskatoon district, what happens 

to the town just north? Martensville will be between, let's say 

for example, Hepburn and Saskatoon. How does that impact on 

the choice that Hepburn may want to make? 

 

There's talk around now that towns as far away as Delisle and 

Perdue also are considering joining either Saskatoon or 

Corman Park. If Corman Park decides to join Saskatoon, does 

that mean that these communities can? But if Corman Park 

decides not to join Saskatoon, what happens to Asquith? What 

happens to Perdue? What happens to these other communities 

that are once removed from Saskatoon — does that limit their 

options? 

 

These are questions that the people are asking. They don't 

know. 

 

 Councillors (I'm quoting) are also unsure how district 

borders may work regarding rural municipalities. 

 

Can you leap-frog like I just indicated? 

 

 Some concerns have been raised that by joining the 

Saskatoon district rural residents might not receive 

adequate representation. 

 

Is that true? They want to know. So after obtaining 



April 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1255 

public input there are still other steps that they will have to 

pursue. 

 

 These include forming a District Health Committee to study 

the existing services and others that are (going to be) 

needed for the area. 

 

And all of those things, Madam Minister, all of these 

machinations have to be pursued and followed, and there's a 

deadline over these people because they know that after August 

17 you're going to wield the mighty stick and say this is how 

it's going to be. 

 

How do I answer Mr. Friesen? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, without getting into 

drawing boundaries in the legislature and dealing with the 

details of each planning group, I want to say this. That in the 

Corman Park area, it's my understanding that they are . . . the 

Department of Health is going to be meeting with them in the 

next week to talk about solutions to some of the problems that 

the member opposite has raised, and to talk about how a district 

could be developed in that particular area and to explore the 

various options in more detail. 

 

It's my understanding that much of this will come together in 

the next three, four, five, six weeks and that communities are 

very active right now in looking at how they are going to form 

a district and what communities they're going to join with to 

form the district. So there's a lot of activity taking place in the 

province at this point in time because of the deadlines that have 

been put on. 

 

I have repeatedly said that the August 17 deadline is a 

necessary deadline. It has given people one year. Now there 

may be some people who don't get organized by August 17, 

and in that case we will have to work very closely with them 

and very intently to get them organized as quickly as possible 

after the August 17 deadline. 

 

The point is, is that we need a deadline, we need a deadline if 

we're going to get district boards in place. People have had a 

year; the deadline has been established. The Department of 

Health is out in the field working with these people on an 

ongoing basis. We will provide them with whatever help that 

we can to get organized. 

 

And we are hoping that a lot of these districts, we are hoping a 

lot of these districts will fall into place within the next few 

weeks coming. And if some don't make the August 17 

deadline, then of course we will have to move the process 

along as quickly as possible. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — As quickly as possible — that seems to be 

your theme. Never mind whether it's done right, never mine 

whether there's really been local input — do it as quickly as 

possible. You have an agenda. You have August 17, and that's 

the birthday of your plan, I guess, is what you're trying to tell 

us; it's one year old then. 

 

I don't think, Madam Minister, that when people read 

your responses in Hansard that they're going to be particularly 

impressed with the answer that you're giving. 

 

I want to go off on a slightly different tangent right now. And 

you may have appropriate answers here, I'm not quite sure. But 

I know that you are coming in with The Health Districts Act as 

if this is a bolt out of the blue, at least that's been my 

impression and you may correct me if I'm wrong, but that this 

is something unique and distinct to Saskatchewan. 

 

Now I just wanted to ask you: what is the relationship between 

this Act and the revised statutes of Saskatchewan Act of 1978, 

which is entitled An Act respecting the Provision of Health 

Services. And particularly there have been here revised 

Saskatchewan statutes going back as far as 1965 — chapter 

252, for example. 

 

Now what is the relationship between the Act that you're 

proposing now and the statutes that exist currently? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — As a result of this legislation and other 

health legislation that will be tabled in the weeks to come, there 

will be amendments to things such as the Act that the member 

opposite mentioned and any other legislation that is impacted 

as a result of the district health Act. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — It seems to me that the normal course of 

events would dictate that those kind of provisions would be 

part of the Act as we're going to be doing them now. 

 

I'm asking you, are there differences that are going to be 

created as a result of this Act as compared . . . or your new Act, 

as compared to the existing Act? Surely you can't have two 

rules on the books at the same time, contrary to each other. 

 

(1945) 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — First of all, The Health Services Act . . . 

what is being developed here is a new structure and it is an 

independent structure of The Health Services Act. The Health 

Services Act is a totally independent structure. 

 

However, because of the broader legislation that we'll be 

bringing in, for example, the amendments to The Public Health 

Act and because of the district board legislation, although they 

are independent structures we're talking about, we will be 

dealing with the health services legislation and any other 

legislation that we feel should be changed as a result of our 

broader legislative package which will include amendments to 

The Public Health Act. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — And you're telling me right now you have no 

idea of the impact of this new Act is going to have on the 

existing Act? Are there going to . . . is there no complication, is 

there no contradiction whatsoever? Is this what you're saying? 

Or are we going to have two sets of rules and it depends on 



1256 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1993 

which Act you want to follow? 

 

I'm not very satisfied with your answer, Madam Minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — The district health Act has no impact on 

The Health Services Act. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Madam Minister, The Health Services Act 

talks about a lot of the things that are also talked about in The 

Health Services Act. We talk . . . I'm looking at the provision of 

health services, An Act respecting the Provision of Health 

Services, and I see such things here as definitions of health 

districts, health regions, health services, health regions again. 

Whole Acts on them, describing how health regions can be set 

up. Surely one is redundant and one is active. And surely there 

must be . . . This is a very comprehensive Act; I would suggest 

to you there is 30-some pages here, dealing specifically with 

how health structures are set up in Saskatchewan. Now you're 

telling me you can have two structures, two health Acts, that 

are not going to have conflict. I find that hard to imagine, 

Madam Minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, The Health Services Act 

will be impacted by The Public Health Act that we will be 

bringing into the legislature and which will be amended. The 

Health Services Act will be amended as a result of the public 

. . . The Public Health Act deals with public health regions. We 

have a number of different regional structures in the province 

in terms of health care. 

 

The district health Act is a totally different structure, separate 

and apart from the structures set up in The Health Services Act. 

The Health Services Act however will be impacted by The 

Public Health Act which will be tabled later, and which will 

result in amendments to the hospital services Act. So The 

Public Health Act will have some impact on it. This particular 

Act does not because it is a structural Act that sets up a new 

structure, and it doesn't affect the structure that's set up by the 

hospital services Act. That will however . . . The Health 

Services Act rather. That will be affected by The Public Health 

Act which will then have . . . provide for some contingent 

amendments. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — So what you're saying then, Madam Minister, 

is communities and constituencies that would . . . health 

constituencies that would prefer to follow whatever is in The 

Health Services Act would have that option, since it's still on 

the books and still legitimate, and still part of the law of the 

land. Is that correct, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, The Health Services Act, 

as a result of amendments that will be coming forward to The 

Public Health Act, will be repealed. And with respect to the 

regional empowerment, it is as well, my understanding, an 

enabling piece of legislation much like the one that we have 

now, the district board Act, which is enabling, allowing 

corporations to come together, for example. And in particular, 

targeted to union hospitals and ambulance corporations and 

other 

health care corporations to come together, amalgamate and 

form a district. 

 

The Health Services Act will, as a result of the public health 

legislation, will be repealed in the legislature. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — I don't see this — what did you call it — the 

public health services Act. Has that been tabled in this House 

already? Has first reading been made on that Act? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — No. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — When could I expect the House Leader to 

give me indication that that Act will in fact be coming forward? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I wasn't listening 

closely, nor do I know the process, if during the debate on this 

Bill the House Leader can become involved in the discussion, 

but my impression is the Bill will be coming . . . 

 

The Chair: — It is the Minister of Health who is responding 

and the question was put to the Minister of Health and I'll ask 

that the response to the question come from the Minister of 

Health. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Fist of all, I want to say that these two 

pieces of legislation do not deal with the same thing. They are 

different pieces of legislation setting up totally different 

structures and they don't deal with the same thing. As to when 

the legislation is coming forward, I can't give you a date or a 

time on that because I don't have that but it will be as soon as 

we possibly can get it in. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Could you indicate, Madam Minister, is that 

going to be this session that we're currently in? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Yes. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — It will be. Now you're all over the board here, 

Madam Minister. One time you told me that we will be making 

the changes where there will be conflicts between The Health 

Districts Act and The Health Services Act. 

 

Your first answer was, we will be making changes as they 

impact. Then you said, there will be no impact so we don't have 

to make any changes. So there were two kinds of answers 

there. Now you're telling me that, whoops — and I think you 

will admit this, Madam Minister . . . Everything is under 

control, Mr. Chairman, I'm just waiting for the minister while 

she is getting the information from her officials. 

 

Thank you, I just wanted you to hear what I was going to say. 

Now in the meantime I've forgotten the point that I was on. 

Doesn't speak well for my memory, Mr. Chairman. But I think 

the basic point that I'm trying to get at here, Madam Minister, 

is that I don't think this is well thought out. 

 

And I think what I've been talking about over the last 



April 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1257 

five, six minutes is an indication of the fact that maybe your 

whole plan, take more time. Like you're telling me right now, 

first one thing, then another. And then you say we have The 

Health Districts Act and we have this other Act here, The 

Health Services Act. We have two Acts here and you're telling 

me that there's no correlation, that there's no impact one to the 

other. At one point you said there was. Now you said there 

wasn't. Yes you did, you said we will make the changes as are 

required because of the impact of one Act upon the other. That 

was your initial statement. Then you told me there will be no 

impact. But then you said just in case there is, we'll chuck the 

one away completely; we'll repeal it. So you're losing me here a 

little bit, Madam Minister. 

 

And I'm suggesting to you that it would be well for you to take 

your breath, take a bit of time, and let's do this thing properly. 

Let's take that August 17 deadline and perhaps we should make 

it March 17, '94. Give ourselves time to do this thing properly. 

Because obviously you've been caught a little bit unawares that 

this Act even existed. 

 

Or why are the two not running parallel? Why are you so bent 

on getting this Health District Act passed and yet you haven't 

even introduced this so-called Public Health Act that you're 

going to be introducing that's going to be repealing the other 

one? I think the two should go in tandem. Is it not normal to 

repeal that one Act at the same time, maybe even have it 

included in The Health Districts Act? That would seem to me 

to be the logical way of handling the issue. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chair, The Health Services Act and 

The Public Health Act will impact on each other, the 

amendments that are coming to The Public Health Act. The 

district-board legislation is separate and it isn't impacted, 

except perhaps to the extent that district boards will have some 

right to provide public health services in the province. 

 

So what is occurring is there will be legislation tabled to deal 

with The Health Services Act and there will be a new Public 

Health Act that comes forward. But the district-board 

legislation stands out separately on its own and we don't need 

amendments to The Health Services Act in order to have the 

district board Act effective. 

 

There is a relationship via The Public Health Act which is what 

I was saying earlier in terms of impact. And we will need 

changes to health legislation as a result of The Public Health 

Act that will be tabled. And those will be made in this session. 

 

(2000) 

 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, I 

would like to develop a couple of questions with you. First of 

all, I would like to respond to something that you said, and that 

is that we were opposing the health changes. We are not; we 

never have. We never have. What we were doing, Madam 

Minister, is reflecting what we found out in the meetings that 

we went to. The people were telling us 

that they wanted a little more time. 

 

And that's all we were doing. We, as a matter of fact, started 

some of the changes in health care ourselves and you 

lambasted us, Madam Minister, when we brought the $125 

minimum on drugs. You remember what you did to us when 

we changed the child dental care. That was some of the things 

we recognized and started to do. 

 

The other thing, Madam Speaker, I would like to draw your 

attention to is a remark you made about, they've had a year. 

Well, Madam Minister, the folks did have a year but I don't 

think you understand that some of those people who are 

working on these, trying to assemble these boards, also have 

jobs and they have businesses to run and they don't have the 

time to spend as maybe your bureaucrats do — that's a 

full-time job for them. Those people in the country have to 

make a living as well. And I'm suggesting to you, Madam, that 

it's not just drop everything and go get the job done for those 

people. And I want you to understand that, and most of it's 

done voluntarily. 

 

So that when you say they've had a year, that would be quite 

fine when you can turn your department loose who have 

nothing . . . I shouldn't say nothing else to do; but that's their 

main focus, they can do that. But when you get out in the 

country these people have jobs and they have businesses to run, 

and they're working on volunteer; they have to coordinate their 

meetings with other towns and villages who also have 

volunteer people. 

 

So it's not fair. I don't think, Madam Minister, it's fair for you 

to say, but they've had a whole year. I think you must temper 

that a little bit with the knowledge of what's going on out there. 

 

Madam Minister, what I'd like to develop with you tonight 

mostly . . . And I just wanted to bring those points to your 

attention because I've been at at least four of these meetings 

and the trend — or the theme, if you will — through every 

meeting I was at has been: give us time, we accept and 

acknowledge and will work towards change. That's all that I 

heard. 

 

The other thing I heard, Madam Minister, was a little bit of a 

problem with what you're saying here and what your people 

say out at the meetings in terms of the appointments and the 

boards. 

 

Madam Minister, I heard you this afternoon say that you didn't 

know what the appointees would be paid. Could I ask you who 

then will be paying those appointed members of those boards? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Would you repeat that question, please? 

 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate your 

attention. The question was, Madam Minister, who will be 

paying these appointed members to the boards? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, the appointed 



1258 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1993 

members will be paid out of the global funding that will be 

allotted to the district in order to run the health care services. 

So funding for the board will come from the funding received 

from the government. 

 

And I want to say this about the volunteers that have been 

working in the communities. We fully appreciate the very fine 

job that they've been doing with dozens and dozens of people 

throughout the province. We know they're doing it, in many 

cases on their own time and at their own expense. Some of 

them may be representing an organization or a board, but many 

of them are doing it at their own expense on their own time, 

and we appreciate the enormous amount of work people in 

Saskatchewan have been doing. 

 

And I believe that that indicates the support that there is for 

reform, and the willingness of these people to put in this kind 

of time and effort is an indication of how they believe that this 

is the right direction to be moving. And although some may 

have problems with this thing or the other, for the most part 

they believe this is the right thing to be doing and they want to 

be part of the process. And we've been giving them a chance to 

do it. 

 

Now unlike other jurisdictions, I might say, we have had 

several months of this process, and it's been a good process. It's 

not without problems but it's been a good process. 

 

Now the question . . . the member opposite is worried about 

deadlines. I've said earlier it's absolutely essential that we have 

deadlines in order to move the process along. There may be 

situations on August 17 that become clear that it was 

impossible for people to get it all finalized by that period of 

time, in which case we'll work very closely with them to get it 

finalized as quickly as we can after the deadline. 

 

And with respect to whether or not they support the legislation, 

I want to say this: that the member from Kindersley had clearly 

indicated that the official opposition — and this was at a 

meeting in, I believe it was at Eatonia — said that Bill No. 3 

must be stopped. That is what the member from Kindersley 

indicated. Bill No. 3 must be stopped. 

 

I think that that is grounds for me to indicate to this legislature 

that all of the good things that are included in this legislation 

are clearly opposed by the member from Kindersley and the 

members of the official opposition. They have said publicly, 

Bill No. 3 must be stopped. We cannot allow this Bill to go 

through, is what the member from Kindersley said. 

 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, I 

heard you say that you understood and realized the volunteer 

part of the work out there. Then my question is to you: why 

won't you listen to them when they ask you for some more 

time? These very people that are asking are the same people 

that we're talking about. 

 

They're not asking . . . And I disagree with you totally 

when you say that we are the only ones that disagree with this. 

The people that I talk to agree with you that changes are 

needed. They may dispute or argue a little bit about what kind. 

And the biggest thing they're asking is, more time. That come 

out at Unity last night again. Your representative there gave 

misleading information again. So people, when they hear what 

you say and they hear what your bureaucrats say, are saying, 

well who's telling the truth here, or who's got it right? 

 

And when you talk about the member from Kindersley saying 

it had to be stopped, we said it had to be stopped until people 

had time to look at it. And the mayors and the council and the 

board people are all saying the same thing. We had a young 

man get up last night and said, I don't know what to vote for 

because I don't know what you want. And if you're going to say 

to me, well he's had a year, well he hasn't had a year because 

last year . . . This was the first meeting they had in a year for 

that young man to attend at a public meeting. And that's all 

they're saying. 

 

I want to get back to the paying of these appointees. Now you 

said the money comes out of the global sum. Does that mean 

that the board will set their own salaries, or who sets their 

salaries? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — The salaries will be set by the 

Department of Health. There will be a standard of . . . it will be 

a per diem, I understand, which will be set by the Department 

of Health and will be paid to board members. 

 

Mr. Britton: — Could you indicate what range that salary 

would be in, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — The per diem will be approximately 

$155 per day for the regional boards; in Regina and Saskatoon 

for a member per diem, it's 300 per day. The Chair is 235 in 

regional and 525 in Regina. 

 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chairman, I 

would like to have the minister table that document for us, 

please. 

 

Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, do you see these appointees 

as being a full-time job? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — No, we don't. Now in the initial stages 

there may be a substantial amount of work as they're getting the 

organization in place. But we don't see that being a full-time 

job on a long-term basis. However, I do expect that in the 

initial stages there will be a lot of work going into getting the 

organization done. 

 

The board members can opt to take less. We have provided you 

with this information, by the way. So we have given this to 

your members already. 

 

For services of less than 5 hours in duration, the per diem rates 

are to be prorated. The amounts that we've talked about are 

maximums and chairs and members may choose to be paid a 

lower rate. There will be a 



April 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1259 

retainer for the chair of 10,000 in Regina and Saskatoon and 

5,000 in the regional, and the boards by vote and resolution 

may set reasonable compensation for chairs or members who 

are assigned additional responsibilities, for example. The 

expenses while travelling would be reimbursed at Public 

Service Commission rates, and board members employed in 

Saskatchewan public service would not be eligible for 

remuneration for time spent on board business during regular 

working hours. 

 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 

with your assurance that we do have that information, we'll just 

leave that for now. 

 

One other thing . . . I had several things, but my colleague 

wants to ask a few questions. Can you tell me how the 

boundaries of the wards within a health care district will be set? 

I was under the impression by John last night that there would 

be a ward system — John Borody said so. And would you 

indicate to us, Madam Minister, how those boundaries will be 

set and by whom. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Those boundaries will be set through a 

consultation process. It may involve public hearings. That 

process hasn't been outlined in detail at this point. But it will be 

through a public consultation process. 

 

It will be done on a geographic basis, although we are looking 

at the concept of perhaps a population, such as an aboriginal 

population, forming a ward with a representative. It may be a 

better way of getting aboriginal representation on the board 

where there's a large aboriginal population. They will be 

designed in a manner to make sure that geographic areas within 

a district have representation on the board. 

 

The concern has been expressed to me on a number of 

occasions that the larger centres, if we go by population, will 

have all of the votes on the board. So the design will have to be 

to balance that off so that there is geographic representation 

with some attention to population; but geographic 

representation to make sure that within the context of a district 

every geographic area has some representation. 

 

How will we define those wards? It may be on municipal 

boundaries, depending on how the districts shape up. But we 

have to wait and see what the boundaries of the district are, and 

then through a process of public consultation, we will set the 

ward boundaries. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam 

Minister, a simple question. When your department people go 

out to the public for these meetings, whom do they represent? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — They would represent the Department of 

Health under the direction of the deputy minister. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. 

When they make a statement at one of these public meetings, is 

that statement then department policy, representative of the 

minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — It depends what the statement is. Well 

the . . . Oh just . . . The member opposite can laugh. It's a silly 

question, I agree with you. It's a silly question. Departmental 

officials can go out, and the hope is that they will put out 

government policy, but they aren't always right on that 

necessarily. Therefore I think that if you have a specific 

statement and you want to know whether it's government 

policy or not, ask us the question. 

 

(2015) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Madam Minister, we received a copy of 

a letter sent out by the Minister of Agriculture last year dealing 

with Crop Insurance people who stated that they were not to 

express any disagreements with government policy on the pain 

of being reprimanded for doing so. When your people go out, 

the department people go out to the public meetings, some of 

them are making certain statements. At some of these meetings 

government representatives are there, in the case of ministers 

or back bench MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly). 

When they make those statements, are they the statements of 

the government, of the department, or are they statements being 

expressed simply by that department official in some other type 

of capacity other than a department official, even though he is 

attending that meeting as a department official? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Department officials do not make 

government policy. The government makes government policy. 

Department officials will have the mandate to go out and 

discuss and interpret and relay government policy to the public. 

They may not always get it right. And let's say this, they do not 

make government policy. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister, 

because I was concerned with a particular Mr. Duncombe who 

seemed to be indicating some direction of government policy. 

Within the Act it states that core areas may be established with 

12,000 people of population. Mr. Duncombe, more than once, 

has attended public meetings in which he says, 40,000 people 

is the proper figure for a health care district. He said this in 

Lampman and he said it in Carievale last week. And the 

Minister of Agriculture and the member from Regina Albert 

North were both present at that time and did not correct him. 

 

At Kipling at a meeting, this same Mr. Duncombe stood up and 

said, no one will be allowed to form a core area with 12 to 

14,000 people. Now, Madam Minister, he was there as your 

department's representative. Therefore I'm to assume that he 

was discussing or interpreting government policy as outlined. 

Is this true then that you are going to have to have 40,000 

people within a health care district? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to what a 

departmental official says or doesn't say, if the 



1260 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1993 

member opposite has a particular concern, my suggestion is: 

speak to the deputy; tell the deputy what the departmental 

official said; we will tell you whether or not it's policy. 

 

Now, with respect to districts of 12,000 or 40,000 or 20,000, 

I've answered that question earlier today. The answer is: 

government policy is that a district can be as small as 12,000 or 

a district could be 40,000. 

 

Some people believe that larger districts provide more options 

and will express that belief. Some people believe that districts 

should be looking at amalgamating with larger centres because 

they will be able to receive access to a broader range of 

services. And there will be departmental officials that believe 

that and may go out and discuss options with communities and 

urge them to look at larger districts. 

 

You will recall that the districts proposed by your government 

were 40 to 80,000. That's the proposal from your government. 

So the fact is, is there will be people in the community and 

departmental people who may feel that groups should look at 

larger districts, and they'll express that and urge them — 

communities — to look at these options. 

 

Government policy is that districts can be as small as 12,000 or 

they can be as large as 40,000, if an area wants to get into a 

district of 40,000. So that's the government policy. 

 

We urge communities to look at districts that will provide the 

best range of services for them. If they decide it should be 12 

or 14 or 15, that's their decision. They may be urged to look at 

other options. That's fine. I think that's wise. I think people 

should explore all options. But the final analysis is, government 

policy is 12,000 or larger. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, I brought 

forward this concern in question period about the bureaucrat 

bringing forward 40,000 as the preferred number. 

 

Am I to understand then, Madam Minister, that you are giving 

your bureaucrats free reign to go out and express their own 

opinions as department officials at public meetings, that they 

have the right to free expression even though that may mean at 

some point in time they may disagree with government policy? 

You're giving them free reign to go out and say, we feel that 

40,000 is the proper number as opposed to 12,000 and that you 

will not be allowed to form a district with 12 to 14,000. 

 

On the reverse side of it, is it permissible for one of your 

bureaucrats to go out and say, I disagree with what the minister 

is doing, at a public meeting? Is free expression allowed on 

both sides of the argument? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, the question posed by the 

member is absolutely ridiculous. It's just silly. The 

departmental officials have an obligation to do what they can to 

advance health reform and government policy. In the context of 

doing that, they 

will have leeway to express an opinion as to whether a smaller 

or larger district is more advantageous. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to pursue 

this line of questioning just a little bit because I'm really 

amazed at the minister's response here. 

 

Madam Minister, you have officials attending public meetings 

representing the Department of Health; representing directly 

then, the Minister of Health; representing directly the Cabinet; 

representing the government. Now don't divorce yourself from 

the role that these members are playing. 

 

These are department officials representing you, Madam 

Minister, representing you because in many instances, you 

haven't had the courage to go out to these small-town meetings. 

You've attended a couple — one perhaps — in an open forum, 

totally open forum, without being orchestrated. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, because . . . and I can see that you can't 

attend every one because there have been a whole host of 

meetings because there are very, very many upset people in this 

province. But, Madam Minister, for you to stand there and say 

that officials can say one thing, then you will turn around and 

say another thing because they did not happen to represent 

government policy, I'm going to put it to you this way, Madam 

Minister. These officials are out at these town hall meetings 

representing you. And the people there are asking these 

officials what does this mean, how does this affect us, what is 

this policy. 

 

And the towns then will rely on the information that your 

officials give them and that's the basis upon which they will be 

making decisions. Now how can you stand there in your place 

and say, well if we happen to agree what the official said then 

we'll do it. But if we don't agree what the official said . . . and 

very often the officials, from the information that we're getting 

back, are saying some mighty weird things, simply to get out of 

town without any feathers on their back. That's the extent of 

these meetings in some cases. 

 

So what are you saying now, Madam Minister, that the 

information that these officials have been representing to the 

towns, the meetings that they've attended, may be valid but 

then on the other hand may not be valid? Can these 

communities have any confidence in the information that these 

officials have given them or is that all subject to change at your 

whim? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — The officials in the Department of 

Health have done a tremendous amount of work, Mr. Chair, 

over the last . . . They have worked day and night on . . . for the 

people of Saskatchewan on health reform — day and night. 

 

They have worked very, very hard and they've been throughout 

this province working with planning groups, working with 

communities, and attending community meetings and 

answering questions to the best of their ability. They have been 

doing that and 



April 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1261 

they should be commended. 

 

Now I want to say this, that if the members opposite have a 

specific concern about a specific position or question that has 

been raised by an official, they should contact the Department 

of Health to get verification with respect to the issue to 

determine whether or not it is government policy. If they think 

there is something that's weird — because the member opposite 

said they have been making weird statements, he said, weird 

things — now if they think there's something weird, then their 

obligation is to touch base with the deputy minister to 

determine what this . . . whether this weird thing is policy. But 

the fact is, is that the officials have been working extremely 

hard. They've been doing a tremendous amount of work. And I 

want to say this. They don't have all the answers to every 

question. 

 

Questions keep arising as we move through health reform. And 

it's important for the officials to say, well they feel the answer 

should be this, but they may not be sure because it may be a 

new problem that has arisen and they'll have to go back and 

determine the policy and ask government what the policy is. So 

this is an ongoing process in that fashion. 

 

And I don't think that it serves the people of Saskatchewan 

well, nor the member opposite, to be attacking officials who 

are out there working and trying to do their best and to be 

trying to undermine them by saying they're saying weird things 

and doing weird things out there when these folks are doing 

what they think their job is and trying to serve the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And we recognize as a government that it's been tough on 

them. And we recognize that they don't have all the answers to 

all the problems that may raise, and they try their best in each 

of these situations. And if planning groups or members, MLAs 

have problems, they should ask us whether or not it's policy 

and we'll provide them with an answer. 

 

But for the . . . And the members opposite laugh from their 

seats, laugh at these people who have been working very hard 

to put health reform in in this province in working with 

planning groups. 

 

And all I can say is if there are weird things being said, ask us 

about the specific thing. We'll tell you whether it's policy. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — I'm very pleased, Madam Minister, that you 

have volunteered to share with us your policy. I would ask you 

then to table your policy in health, your policy booklets, so that 

we can once and for all see exactly what your policy is. I'm 

glad you made that offer, Madam Minister. Would you please 

table that for us so we can have a look at your health policy? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — I think the member opposite knows that 

we have a number of pamphlets that are out. I'm sure he's seen 

them. With policy we have our vision document; we have the 

users' district guide; we 

have a number of different policy pamphlets and policy 

booklets. We have the legislation; we have numerous speeches 

in this House. 

 

And I must say this: there's far more policy that's been 

developed in health care than the members opposite ever did in 

ten years in government — far more policy . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Oh, he sits from his seat in a mocking way and 

says, you won't give it to us. He has it. We will provide the 

House with what we've got. I know the member opposite 

already has access to that information. I know that and I know 

he already has it, but he's playing some kind of game here as 

per usual. 

 

And this isn't the full extent of the policy; there is the district 

Act. Here we have "A Saskatchewan Vision for Health: a 

framework for change." Here we have "A Saskatchewan Vision 

for Health: challenges and opportunities." Here we have a 

"Health District Development Guide." Here we have "Health 

Needs Assessment Guide for Saskatchewan Health Districts." 

Here we have "Planning Guide For Saskatchewan Health 

Districts Part I: Strategic Planning." Here we have "Users' 

Guide to The Health Districts Act." Here we have "Guidelines 

for Pre-Amalgamation Agreements." 

 

And that's not the full extent of it. We have this here tonight. 

It's not the full extent of it. We can table the rest as well. And 

I'm surprised the member opposite hasn't read this before. It's 

been available to the public. He should have been asking us for 

this a long time ago. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Madam Minister, and 

I appreciate your cooperation. And I will be looking forward to 

the rest of your policy. And I take you at your word now, that 

when you supply the rest of your policy documents that what I 

will have in my possession then is the Saskatchewan 

government's health policy — open, close quotation marks. 

 

(2030) 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chair, I have indicated as well that 

we have made speeches in this legislature. There have been a 

number of decisions that have been made with respect to bed 

targets, for example. And I have also indicated — if the 

member would quit chirping from his seat and just listen — I 

have also indicated that as health care reform moves along, 

there are new problems that arise and new issues that arise, and 

we will be dealing with those issues as they arise. And so there 

will be policy developed with respect to those issues. 

 

We are working on a global-funding formula. That will be 

another policy issue. That will become public as soon as we've 

had extensive consultation. The wards haven't been established 

yet. When they are, there will be policy development in that 

regard, as we move through health reform. 

 

So, Mr. Chair, I want to make it perfectly clear that 



1262 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1993 

there is policy being developed in the health care area on an 

ongoing basis. We are working on ambulance, an improved 

ambulance system. There will be policy developed in that 

regard. And of course, this is the way we must proceed as we 

move through health reform. Issues will come up and they'll be 

dealt with as they arise. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm sure that 

the public of Saskatchewan are very pleased to know that 

Saskatchewan's health policy is an accumulation of pamphlets, 

speeches, and probably notes written on the back of napkins 

some place. 

 

The people of Smeaton, Madam Minister, are not impressed 

with your health wellness model. They've sent 25 pages of 

petitions, but unfortunately, Madam Minister, they're not in the 

proper form to be accepted in this House. Therefore what I 

wish to do is to table this as a document tonight so that the 

people of Smeaton do have the opportunity to have their 

expression heard because they're very concerned about what 

you are doing here. 

 

They feel that because they are, in their terms, in an isolated 

position because they are up on the Hanson Lake Road that 

they should be given some special considerations, as many 

areas of this province feel they should be done. And I'm 

surprised that the MLA for the area has not taken it upon 

himself to express these concerns to you. So I would like to 

table these tonight, Madam Minister. 

 

The bureaucrat that I was commenting on, I did bring those 

concerns forward to you, Madam Minister, and at that time you 

did not provide any answers and again this evening you did not 

provide any answer as to whether or not when a bureaucrat 

attends a public meeting and makes an expression, whether or 

not that expression was dealing with direction from the 

department or whether or not he was simply flying off on his 

own, and whether or not those comments were in fact related to 

the health and wellness of this province. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to officials, I 

have clearly replied to that question in this House on not one 

occasion but several occasions. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a number 

of questions that relate to my area of the province and I have 

attended quite a number of meetings in my constituency and 

also to the south of me regarding . . . and the people have a 

great deal of concern in a number of areas. 

 

I will begin by asking some questions so that I get a basis for 

some discussion a little later. One of the questions is: how 

many acute care beds does the city of Swift Current have? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — In Swift Current the ADC (approved 

daily census) level 6 is 78.6. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Madam Minister. If you took the 

community of Swift Current, and the three 

and a half municipalities that comprise the Swift Current Union 

Hospital district, I don't think you would have more than 

20,000 people. Are you planning on reducing the beds in the 

city of Swift Current down to 30 to meet the requirements of 

the one and a half beds per thousand? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — This is a regional hospital and I'm 

advised by the officials that 1.5 doesn't apply to them. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Then, Madam Minister, what number does 

apply to them? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — It would be somewhere within the range 

of two and a half to three, and that would be dependent on 

whether or not they went to that target on what the district 

board identified as secondary services in that area. So it would 

depend on needs. It would depend on the services being 

provided, but the target would be in the two and a half to three 

range. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Well, Madam Minister, they are a unit by 

themselves, as I've seen the area surrounding them has gone 

into a unit called Rolling Hills . . . or a district called Rolling 

Hills. And that comprises the areas of Herbert, Cabri, Gull 

Lake, Vanguard, Ponteix, and Mankota. And that, Madam 

Minister, is a separate unit from the city of Swift Current. If I 

go with 3 beds at your maximum, and I went to the maximum 

on the 20,000, I think that you're likely going to have to cut 18 

beds out of there. 

 

And, Madam Minister, speaking to some of the individuals 

who live in that health region district . . . and I spoke to one 

gentleman who took his wife who is a diabetic, she had to stay 

in the hallways because she couldn't get into a bed till they 

stabilized her diabetic problem. And that, Madam Minister, is 

one of the issues that I think is a serious concern to those 

people in the city of Swift Current. 

 

And I say to you that if you go one and a half beds times the 

20,000, they're going to have to cut 28 beds out of there, and 

you're going to have riots in the street. And that's one of the 

reasons why your planning . . . your district planning 

committee decided they were going to quit, because they didn't 

want to tell the people or the city of Swift Current that they had 

to reduce that by 28 beds. Twenty-eight beds is a very, very 

serious loss in the Swift Current area. And would you mind 

telling us, in the city of Swift Current, what you plan on doing 

with those 28 beds? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, with . . . The members 

opposite want to look at, you know, isolated communities and 

isolated situations. And I have said repeatedly that the bed 

targets . . . I have said repeatedly that the bed targets that we 

are establishing are provincial targets and regional targets. 

 

And what will have to happen is the Swift Current district 

board will have to work in conjunction with their district, and 

because they're a regional hospital, in conjunction with other 

districts to determine what the appropriate bed level is for that 

particular facility. 



April 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1263 

They will have to do needs assessment in order to make that 

determination. 

 

So beyond the standards that are set, there is flexibility for 

boards to take a look at what the needs are within their district 

and whether or not they service a larger district and what their 

bed requirement is. And it'll have to be worked out by those 

boards. 

 

Now if it results in a reduction in beds, there are a number of 

measures that will have to be put in place in order to make sure 

that there are free beds. And we've seen Regina and Saskatoon 

moving in that direction very, very well, through initiatives 

such as more day surgery, through initiatives such as early 

maternity discharge, and so on — very positive initiatives that 

shorten the institutional stay of patients. 

 

And so we will be asking if there is a bed reduction, and if it 

results in the kind of situation the member opposite was talking 

about, for these hospitals to take a look at ways that they can 

discharge people earlier. 

 

There has been substantial funding into the home care sector, in 

the community-based services, to take care of people in their 

homes more quickly than what they have in the past. And this 

is a trend that's occurring right across Canada, and will 

continue to occur across Canada as we proceed on health 

reform — that is a movement from institutions to 

community-based services. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Well, Madam Minister, at your figures on a 

regional hospital you're supposed to have between 25 and 30 

beds, or 2.5 to 3 beds per thousand. And I gave you the district 

that that comprises: Madam Minister, it's three and a half 

municipalities plus the city of Swift Current, which would give 

you 2.5 times 20,000 is 50 beds. And if you go to the extent 

that you go as high as three, then you've got 60 beds. 

 

Now you said there was an ADC of 78.6, that means that there 

is going to have to be a cut in Swift Current of between 18 and 

28 beds. And that is something that I have raised as a concern 

in other places and I will raise as a concern to you, Madam 

Minister, that that is for the city of Swift Current, devastating 

— absolutely, totally devastating. 

 

And, Madam Minister, to compound the problem, to compound 

the problem in the Rolling Hills district which has one, two, 

three, four, five, six acute care facilities today, and a volume 

population of 12,000 people, has five and a half beds — five 

and a half beds for 12,000 people. They should have 18, 

Madam Minister, 18. 

 

And what everyone is absolutely, totally afraid of, Madam 

Minister, is this: that Mankota, Saskatchewan, which has nine 

hospital beds today, is going to have to give their beds up. The 

chairman of the board, Mr. Chuck Loewan, lives 25 miles 

south of Mankota. He is going to have to give up nine hospital 

beds in Mankota so that Swift Current Union Hospital can 

maintain their 78.6 beds. Is that what you're aiming for, Madam 

Minister? 

 

And I'll tell you the people in Gull Lake and in Cabri and in 

Vanguard and in Ponteix and in Kincaid are just as upset as the 

people in Mankota are because you have only prescribed five 

and a half beds to that district; because you said to the member 

from Moosomin that they would in no way be able to bring 

forward acute care beds. And I say to you, Madam Minister, 

there is a very serious concern. 

 

Now if I take and represent the people in my constituency, they 

are a part of the Swift Current health district and of the Rolling 

Hills health district. And, Madam Minister, it is a very, very 

serious concern. In order to have those hospitals dealt with in a 

proper fashion, you are going have to make some unusual 

changes to what you've just talked about right here. Because 

the people there have a very serious concern about what they're 

going to do. And I don't think, I honestly don't think that you 

should be considering this kind of a process without having 

those people understand the dynamics of what you're talking 

about. 

 

And the member from Souris-Cannington raised a very specific 

point, because you cannot . . . I'll put it different — people in 

those districts are being told by Health department officials 

stories that are inconsistent every time they meet. And 

therefore, Madam Minister, it creates a problem. 

 

(2045) 

 

Now I'd like to have you address how you're going to deal with 

those two districts, how you're going to deal with a regional 

hospital in Swift Current which is going to have to have 

services provided from Kyle, where that health care district is, 

to the one on the west side where Maple Creek, Leader, 

Eastend, and Shaunavon are together with the Rolling Hills 

which are the ones that are around the city in that health 

district. Now you tell me what you're going to do with them? 

 

They've applied for their status — I know the Rolling Hills has 

— they have applied for status as a district. And I want to tell 

you something else, Madam Minister, these people who are on 

those boards, these people who are on those boards have a very 

good memory, Madam Minister. They remember Health 

Region No. 1. 

 

And you'd better be careful how you deal with these people 

because number one, they know what went on in Health 

Region No. 1, they understand governance, they understand the 

roles that district boards play, and they have understood it for a 

lot longer than you have. And so when you explain it to me, 

you'd better be prepared to have that same explanation made to 

the people. Because I will give it to them and when they . . . I 

think it's necessary for the people in the city of Swift Current 

and in that surrounding area to understand what you are going 

to do with those people. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chair, rather, I 



1264 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1993 

wish to say this. That it is impossible for us to sit here and talk 

in terms of what might happen if so and so goes into what 

district, and we are not . . . I'm not going to get into a 

discussion as to what will happen if Mankota goes in with 

Swift Current or if Ponteix goes in or doesn't go in. It would be 

unfair to do that. 

 

I can speak in terms of generalities, which is this: that we have 

established bed targets, and they are just that, they're targets; 

they are not carved in stone. There is flexibility involved in it. 

We want communities to come forward as a district, to take a 

look at the services that they provide in that district and to 

people outside of the district in case of some regional centres, 

for example, to provide us with a plan as to what their needs 

are. 

 

But we want them to take a long, hard look at the sort of 

services that are being provided. And if people, for example, 

are being kept in hospital for five days when they could be 

discharged after two days and other more appropriate services 

provided in the community, if there are programs that can be 

put in to effect — earlier discharge out of institutions rather 

than keeping people in the hospital, getting them home earlier 

— we want facilities and district boards and hospitals to take a 

look at that and to move in that general direction. 

 

And so we've set some targets, but they are exactly that: they 

are targets and they're not carved in stone. There is flexibility. 

People's needs will be met. They will be met in the context of 

the availability of community-based services, in the context of 

geography, and in the context of what the needs are of the 

community — and what the needs are. 

 

So we're asking people to do their plans and provide us with 

their plans. The Department of Health will take a look at that. 

We'll urge them to move to more community-based services, 

and we will take it from there. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Well, Madam Minister, from my 

observations of the numbers and your lack of providing me 

with how they're going to be dealt with in the requirements of 

one and a half beds per thousand, it seems to me, Madam 

Minister, that you are going to ask the Swift Current Union 

Hospital district and the Rolling Hills hospital district to 

become one. And that is the only way, Madam Minister, that 

you can get the numbers that you have cited here to anywhere 

come close. 

 

And so, Madam Minister, am I supposed to go to those 

communities and tell the people in those communities that that 

is what you are going to do? Because I will tell them and then 

you will have a very, very serious problem on your hands, and 

the member from Swift Current will have a serious problem on 

his hands. Because what you are doing, as a matter of fact, 

Madam Minister, is you are putting all of the beds into the city 

of Swift Current for the purpose of maintaining that facility and 

robbing people who have to drive 125 miles to get to the 

hospital. 

If they want to go . . . and even taking it a step further, you cut 

out all acute services except one in that region, in that district, 

and they have five and a half beds — five and a half beds for 

12,000 people, Madam Minister. And the furthest distance 

could be anywhere in the range of 110 to 125 miles to get to 

that facility for those people. 

 

If you measure that, they are with less than .4 beds per 

thousand. And that's the reason, Madam Minister, that the 

people in Mankota and Ponteix and in Kincaid and in 

Vanguard are so upset. They've got 50 miles one way to drive 

for health care services — 50 miles is the least. And that's the 

centre that they are in. And it could be far more than that. 

 

And so you don't want to deal with specifics here. Let the 

health district do it. But I want to ask you this question: will 

you allow the region to allow beds to be moved within the 

region, acute care beds? Will you allow the acute care beds that 

could be moved out of Swift Current, will you allow them to be 

moved to Vanguard and Kincaid and Mankota? Will you allow 

that to happen under your global funding? 

 

And if you are, then you better tell the people because what 

Kincaid and Vanguard have is they only have six months from 

April 1, they've only got five months left to make that decision. 

And I want to know for my people in my constituency what 

you're going to do with them. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Well first of all, I want to make this 

point. We do not have a district there yet, and there are still 

discussions going on as to what the district would be. So we do 

not have a district. And so there again I am going to speak in 

general terms. 

 

Will we allow, if Ponteix was in a Swift Current region, for the 

Ponteix in-patient acute care beds to be kept open and taken out 

of Swift Current? And I want to say this to that. I have said 

repeatedly that only under exceptional circumstances would we 

consider a proposal to return to in-patient acute care beds in 

one of the facilities that has been advised in the last two or 

three weeks that their funding for in-patient acute care would 

be removed as of October 1 — only in exceptional 

circumstances where something has come up that the 

Department of Health did not consider. 

 

Now the fact is, is that most of these facilities have not been 

doing acute in-patient services of the nature that is generally 

done in a hospital over the past few years. Surgeries in these 

hospitals are very minor. Deliveries have gone down 

considerably. And so the issue will be, is here, as to whether or 

not there would be beds in Vanguard for example, as you 

mentioned, would depend on an exceptional circumstance that 

the district board may say, gee this makes it essential for us to 

have a bed here. This is something the department has not 

thought about. They would then say to the department, would 

you consider that. Okay? So as to whether or not beds can just 

be moved around and the policy that has been announced in the 

last two or three weeks be reversed, the answer is no. 



April 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1265 

Mr. Martens: — Okay then I will assume that distance has no 

value in determination of the extenuating circumstances. 

Distance has no value. What has value in determining those 

individual criteria that will make exceptional services so the 

district board can deal with that? 

 

And then the second question, Madam Minister, where there 

are no beds . . . Where there are five and a half beds in a 

population base of 12,000, why do you discriminate against 

those people? Why do you discriminate against those people 

against all of the odds in Saskatchewan? You said 1.5. And 

these people are at a .39; .39, Madam Minister, in their health 

district. Five and a half beds for 12,000 people. Do you think 

that that is fair? 

 

And that, Madam Minister, is exactly what happened in that 

area, and I am here defending the people at Cabri, Gull Lake, 

Ponteix, Vanguard, Mankota, and Herbert. All of them have 

five and a half beds; five and a half beds for all of those health 

care districts. And that, Madam Minister, is exactly why I am 

raising the question here. I'm raising it from the perspective of 

you haven't even done what I think is obvious — give those 

people the beds that they require. And I think you deserve a 

very, very, pointed, serious explanation to those people. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — The members opposite know that there 

will be emergency acute care services provided in the facilities 

that are being converted. They know that. He says we never 

told them that before. We've told you that repeatedly. Where 

have you been for the last 10 days — sleeping in your chair? 

We've told you repeatedly, there will be role changes and 

emergency acute care services will be provided in those 

facilities. 

 

So it isn't a question of driving hundreds of miles to get to a 

facility for services. I know you've been saying that throughout 

the province. I know you've been saying that. But it isn't a 

question of doing that. People will still have access to 

emergency acute care in those communities where there's been 

facilities. 

 

Now with respect to whether or not they need in-patient, 

primary acute care, that is a different issue, as opposed to 

emergency acute care. Now does distance make a difference 

there? Well the fact is, we have stated what the policy is with 

respect to these particular facilities and we have stated that the 

decision will not be reviewed unless there are exceptional 

circumstances that the department has not considered. 

 

And the department has looked at distances already with 

respect to primary acute care beds. Now if there is something 

that they have not considered, then a district board should take 

it to their attention, bring it to their attention. But it is 

completely misleading to say that people will have to drive 

hundreds of miles to get emergency acute care because that's 

not the fact. 

 

The fact is it will be available in their facility if they 

choose to convert their facility for that purpose. It will be 

available to them. If they choose not to do that and want to 

provide it in another facility or want to provide it in ambulance 

services, that can happen as well, but the service will still be 

there. 

 

Mr. Martens: — So now the minister has said that emergency 

services will be available in these health care centres. An 

emergency bed will be available. Can you tell me, Madam 

Minister, whether that emergency bed will be available in 

Cabri, whether that emergency bed will be available in Ponteix, 

whether that emergency bed will be available in Mankota, and 

whether that emergency bed will be available in Gull Lake and 

whether that emergency bed will be available in Vanguard? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — We have been talking about emergency 

services. Now there may be an observation bed, but we're 

talking about emergency services. Emergency services are 

when someone has a farm accident and is seriously injured, 

they have to go in, they've got to get stabilized, and they've got 

to get moved on into the city. That's what happens now; that 

will continue to happen. Emergency services will be, if a 

person has a cardiac arrest, we've got to get them into the 

hospital and stabilize them, and get them on to the city. That's 

what happens now; that service will continue to be provided. 

 

The emergency medical services committee has formulated 

guidelines. Stable patients requiring observation for less than 

12 hours may be placed in assessment holding beds. So there 

may be an observation bed. If you're talking about emergency 

beds that are there around the clock for people to stay in the 

hospital, we're not talking about that. We're talking about 

getting patients stabilized and getting them moved on, and 

there may be an observation bed in order to do that. 

 

(2100) 

 

In most situations where emergency acute care is administered, 

patients are sent on to the city as quickly as we can get them 

there; and that service will continue to be applied. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Okay, now we'll just use as an example, the 

Vanguard hospital. You've closed it down in six months. 

You've closed it down, there are no acute care services going to 

be made available to any of the people in that. So they've got to 

shut the hospital down. The budget that they have received for 

the last four months . . . last six months, in relation to the 

statements made by the director of care there, will barely keep 

the heat in the building, Madam Minister. It'll barely keep the 

heat in the building. 

 

And last year, Madam Minister, you put a brand-new X-ray 

machine in that hospital. What did you do that for? If you're 

going to shut it down, what are you going to do that for? Is the 

doctor going to stay for an emergency basis purpose to serve 

that community? You've got another guess coming. He isn't 

going to stay there. 



1266 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1993 

So you've got a doctor in Cabri; you've got a doctor in Gull 

Lake; you've got a doctor in Vanguard; you've got a doctor in 

Ponteix; and one in Mankota. And five of them are going to be 

gone, Madam Minister, because they have no beds. 

 

Are they going to get service into Swift Current, Madam 

Minister? Are they going to get service into Swift Current 

where they're going to have to cut between 18 and 28 beds? 

The doctors there are not going to allow that to happen, Madam 

Minister. You've got five more doctors wanting services in that 

facility. Guess again. 

 

And that, Madam Minister, are the concerns that the people in 

my constituency and the constituency of Swift Current have; 

and they are very, very legitimate, Madam Minister. 

 

Now the emergency service for a bed. Can you tell me what the 

difference is between what would be a stabilizing bed and one 

that would be an acute, that we could at least keep the patient 

there for three days or four days while, Madam Minister . . . 

and I want to point this out, the doctor in Herbert at the 

meeting there said this, and he is accurate. 

 

He said, he said to the individual from the Department of 

Health that was standing there, he said, if you had a heart 

attack right now this very instant, I would have to stabilize you 

in the Herbert hospital until I could get a bed. It would take at 

least a week to get a bed in Regina. Why? Because you don't 

have people with hearts . . . cardiology experience enough in 

Regina and beds enough in Regina to have me deliver that 

patient into Regina. I'd have to keep him there a week, then I 

would have to have time after he's gone to Regina, to have him 

convalesce at home. Or are you going to turn him out to 

pasture? 

 

And that, Madam Minister, is the extent of the problem that 

we've got. And that's why you can't take them away from Swift 

Current and give them to the rural part of the community 

because you're going to need them in Swift Current. And they 

need them in the rural part in order to maintain what Swift 

Current has because Swift Current itself has more requirements 

than you're meeting the need for. 

 

And I want to say to you, Madam Minister, that you are 

creating a very legitimate . . . and I, Madam Minister, have 

used the services in those facilities, in a number of those 

facilities myself. I know that they are very frugal. They have 

their own, the community's, best interest in mind. And I'm 

asking you, why are you destroying that in the kinds of things 

that you're suggesting that they have to do? 

 

They have done needs assessment. They are prepared to work 

with you. As a matter of fact, Madam Minister, you received a 

letter from the director of care in the Cabri hospital. They have 

been talking wellness in the Cabri hospital since 1990. And you 

think you are the first and bright, shining light. Well, Madam 

Minister, they are way ahead of you. 

And in the letter she wrote to you, she copied to me, she said 

this too; she said we have nursing aides do the laundry to keep 

the costs down and efficiencies in this hospital. That is a fact, 

Madam Minister, and to say that these people don't understand 

wellness nor budgetary control is way off the beat, way off. 

And I want to have you give some comfort to the people in 

those areas. 

 

There is only one hospital, one emergency service between 

Leader and Swift Current today and that's a hundred miles, 

Madam Minister, a hundred miles. You can't go north of that 

without crossing the river. And if you want to do that you can 

only do it in wintertime on the ice, and that is highly risky. And 

that, Madam Minister . . . those are facts. On the west side 

you're bound by a border, on the south side you're bound by a 

border, and we have to deal with that there. 

 

And, Madam Minister, what I see you doing is that you are 

going to, as soon as this is done, say to the people in Swift 

Current and Mankota, you're in the same district. And that, 

Madam Minister, is going to create a very, very serious 

problem to the hospitals in my constituency and the member 

from Shaunavon's constituency, and the member from Swift 

Current. And I don't believe you have even begun to 

understand the significance of that. And, Madam Minister, I'd 

like to have some explanation from you because this is what 

those district planning boards have come up against. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chair, I do want to acknowledge the 

work that is being done in hospitals throughout the province 

and the work that is being done by administrators and boards 

and employees in the system. They have been working very 

hard and they have been trying to be innovative and creative 

and I want to commend them for that. 

 

I want to respond to the member opposite who said, what's the 

difference between staying in a bed for three days and having 

an emergency acute care bed. Emergency acute care bed means 

they're stabilized and sent out. If a person's in a bed for three or 

four days, it isn't emergency; it's acute care and requires 

24-hour nursing and requires a greater expenditure in terms of 

dollars if they're in a bed over a period of days. Emergency 

acute care, they're stabilized and sent on to the city. 

 

Well they won't be able to get into the city. That's hogwash. If 

they're an emergency, they will be admitted to a hospital in 

Saskatchewan. If they're an emergency, they will be admitted. 

 

Now the member says, well there's the fracture in Regina. 

There may be an exception that's occurred; that whole thing is 

under review right now. Because if there's an emergency, 

they'll be admitted into the hospital. 

 

To use one case as opposed to hundreds that go in is really very 

unfair to the medical professionals and the 



April 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1267 

people working in that area, to use that as a generalization of 

this happening constantly throughout the province. I think it's 

very unfair to the physicians and the administrators and health 

care people working in those facilities. If there's an emergency 

case, they will be admitted to hospital and taken care of. 

 

Now the question then came to, around to, well what happens 

to these people when they're better, or they're almost better and 

we're going to release them and send them back home? If they 

are well enough to be released, what happens in Regina and 

Saskatoon and the cities is that if they're well enough to be 

released and they go back into the community, if they need 

follow-up care, it's done through community-based services, 

through home care. 

 

That service, we are working to establish that network 

throughout all of our communities so that community-based 

services and home care can, where people are well enough to 

be released, trigger in and help them to continue their 

convalescence in the community. 

 

Now it may be that if they're not well enough to be released 

that they will have to stay in the hospital longer, but they won't 

— and so they will — but they won't, as the member's 

suggesting opposite, be sent out when they're not able to be 

released without any care, because first of all, there will have to 

be a physician that indicates they're well enough to be released; 

and secondly, home care will then follow-up to make sure that 

the remainder of their convalescence is done at home and that 

they are looked after. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Well, Madam Minister, the real world isn't 

round, the real world has lumps and bumps on it. And I will say 

to you, Madam Minister, I've been involved in some of those 

lumps and bumps through my involvement in my community, 

and one of those lumps and bumps is you say that as soon as a 

mother is able to move out of the hospital and go back to her 

home then that's the best thing for her. You're right, Madam 

Minister, that's right. But if that's three blocks from the 

hospital, there's a lot of comfort in that. There is a whole lot of 

comfort in that, being three miles . . . or three blocks away 

from the hospital. 

 

But, Madam Minister, if that mother is sent home from the 

Swift Current Union Hospital and that mother happens to live 

in Mankota or 25 miles south of Mankota, what is she going to 

have for a comfort level in determining what she is going to 

have to go through and the trauma she's going to have to go 

through? Or are you going to have to have a day care centre 

just outside the hospitals to have these people come to the place 

where they're going to have total confidence in what's going 

on? That, Madam Minister, is the concern. 

 

Now I'll put it to you this way, Madam Minister: the town of 

Success is only . . . less than 20 miles outside of the city of 

Swift Current. And a very good friend of mine, a new mother, 

began to hemorrhage and she 

had very, very little time to get to the hospital. She's alive today 

because it was only 20 miles away. 

 

But, Madam Minister, if she was 50 or 75 or 125 miles away, I 

don't care how good your emergency services are, if there isn't 

a person who is able to deal with that in a very, very real way, 

you're going to have a funeral on your hands, Madam Minister. 

That is what you're going to have on your hands and that's the 

concern that I raise to you. Those are the things that don't fit 

into your wellness. Those are the things that don't fit into the 

normal process of the things that you're trying to do here. And I 

want you to respond to that. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chair, with respect to early 

discharge of the patients, physicians are always very much 

aware when they discharge patients where they live and what 

services are available in the community. And we know that 

physicians will continue to take a very responsible position in 

that regard so that if they believe their patient is at some risk 

because of distances, they obviously aren't going to discharge 

them. Or if they believe there aren't adequate home-based 

services there, they will not have early discharge for that 

particular patient. 

 

So the physicians bear these things in mind. They just don't say 

everybody stays in two days — bang you're out — if they've 

had a baby. They consider the circumstances of the individual, 

they consider the circumstances of the community that 

individual would be going back into. And I know that 

physicians will continue to have that consideration. 

 

When the member opposite refers to individual cases, I think 

he makes a very good case for what we are trying to do in rural 

Saskatchewan, and that is is to deliver a top-quality, early 

response system. Having in-patient acute care beds doesn't help 

that situation. What helps that situation is upgraded emergency 

acute care and an early response system that can act 

immediately when a woman in that danger experiences 

difficulty. 

 

That's what counts, not in-patient acute care beds in a hospital. 

It's the emergency acute care and the early response system. 

And that is why it is so essential for us to take wasted 

institutional dollars on beds that aren't used for acute care but 

are used for in many cases long-term care and other services in 

a community, to take those institutional dollars, put them into 

an upgraded early response system, put them into emergency 

acute care and get those patients attention immediately. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Well, Madam Minister, at the meeting in 

Mankota — and the people that were there, the member from 

Humboldt, and the Minister of Agriculture, and one of the 

other members was in Mankota — and there was a lady that 

stood at the back and said to the minister and to the MLAs that 

were there, and said: last year there was an ambulance sent out 

to pick up a young man that had a vehicle accident. And the 

ambulance is from the area; they know where the roads are. 

But they missed the road by a mile, Madam Minister. And what 

they did is they 



1268 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1993 

attended a funeral that week — they did not get to that place 

because they missed the road by a mile. You're going to send 

emergency services to those people. 

 

(2115) 

 

And, Madam Minister, my youngest sister was born in the 

house that I live in, in a blizzard. When we had asked for the 

airplane to come out and get that . . . to provide that service — 

we asked for the service to come — and my father delivered 

my youngest sister in their bedroom on the 25th of March in 

1955, Madam Minister. I understand some of those things that 

deal with medical attention and requirements for medical 

attention, and there are many, many people who can identify 

with exactly the same thing. 

 

And, Madam Minister, we're grateful every day for the things 

that happen that happen right. But as a matter of course, 

Madam Minister, it doesn't always happen that way. 

 

And that's why, when you send emergency services, they 

cannot drive 125 miles to deliver that emergency service to that 

community at Mankota. And I only live 20 miles out of Swift 

Current, Madam Minister — 20 miles out of Swift Current. 

 

And you want to make that emergency service available to 

every farm and every community throughout that area? Well 

they've got lots of technology and there's people in the 

south-west are putting 911 in today, Madam Minister. They're 

putting 911 in today, and they are going to give the locations, 

the exact, precise locations of every farm. They'll be able to 

identify every location. 

 

That's all fine and good, but when it's 40-below-plus and it is 

blowing snow out there, it takes heroics on the part of the 

people who are well just to deliver that kind of an individual to 

emergency service without undue risk. And that, Madam 

Minister, is very, very serious. 

 

And that is at 20 miles away. And you're going to do this at 

125? That's what the people are really, really concerned about. 

And, Madam Minister, I want to have some response. I think 

the people in my part of the province need to have a certain 

degree of comfort on that. 

 

And I'll tell you why those hospitals were built in the first 

place, Madam Minister. They were built in the first place 

because of the distance that they had to go. The distance they 

had to go in order to get health services. 

 

And that, Madam Minister, is reason that the majority of them 

were built. And I want to know, and the people in my 

constituency want to know, they want to have some comfort in 

how you deal with the problems that I have just explained to 

you. And those are real, Madam Minister. They are very real. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Well first of all, Mr. Speaker, in these 

situations the member opposite describes, where there has to be 

surgery, you can't do a surgery 

without an anesthetist. You can't do this kind of major surgery 

without anesthetists. These people do not go into their small 

hospitals and obtain this kind of major surgery. They are 

stabilized and moved on to a place where they can obtain this 

service. 

 

So the member opposite is simply making our point, which is 

that we need better emergency services and a better first 

response system in these small communities with hospitals that 

don't have anesthetists and can't do the kind of surgery that 

would be required if there was a major farm fatality for 

example. 

 

So yes, they can stabilize and they will still be able to do that. 

But they cannot deal with serious cases. And yes we need good 

medical attention to stabilize people. And that will still be 

available in the facility. And then we need an upgraded 

ambulance and first response system . . . or a response system 

to get these people to where they can get medical attention. So 

the member opposite, I believe, simply makes the arguments of 

the government. 

 

What this community also needs is a good prevention program 

if they have high farm fatality in the community. We want 

these district boards to come together to do their needs 

assessment, to determine if they have high farm fatalities in 

those areas, if they have high risk to farmers. Well then that 

should be built into their needs assessment. They should have a 

prevention program to do that. They want to take a look at their 

emergency care and to see how they can deal with it more 

effectively and more promptly. 

 

But what they don't need is in-patient acute care beds to 

provide the kind of service that's necessary to get these people 

the medical attention they need in an emergency. They don't 

need wasted dollars on in-patient acute care beds. They need 

those dollars targeted to upgraded emergency systems and to 

prevention programs to prevent the accidents from happening 

to begin with. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Well, Madam Minister, I want to just point 

something out to you. Driving down a gravel road that's just 

been graded, at 120 or 100 miles an hour is almost impossible 

to do, and you are going to have pile-ups from people trying to 

do that thing. And I don't care how good an ambulance driver 

you are, Madam Minister. If you're going down the road at that 

kind of speed because of the emergency requirement, you're 

going to have more accidents, Madam Minister. Because what 

you would do is you intensify the problem that already exists 

and that, Madam Minister, is exactly what these people are 

saying. 

 

Now you said that emergency service would be available in 

those hospitals. Is it going to be available in Vanguard and in 

Kincaid? Is that emergency service going to be available in 

those two hospitals? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — We have told hospital facilities that we 

believe they should provide emergency acute 



April 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1269 

care, that they should change their roles, and one of the things 

they should do is provide emergency acute care. They may also 

want to provide other health care programing. 

 

The ambulances can also provide emergency acute care 

through EMT (emergency medical technician) systems and 

other systems by stabilizing people. So there are a number of 

options available to these communities. 

 

We have asked these communities to sit down with their 

district boards where there are boards; with their planning 

groups and steering groups where there aren't boards, to talk in 

terms of what the needs are and the health care planning and 

the emergency acute care that will be provided in that 

community. 

 

So the answer is yes, there will be emergency acute care; yes, 

the government is urging that the facilities be used in that 

fashion. We are also asking communities to talk to their district 

boards and do it in the context of the district and to come up 

with a community decision based on a district basis as we 

proceed in that general direction. What is happening now is the 

emergency acute care is being provided in those facilities and 

they move them on to the city. That will continue to stay in 

place. 

 

Now the member opposite said, well there isn't enough money 

to even keep the heating on. The money that has been referred 

to in the correspondence sent to those boards is transitional 

funding to convert from an in-patient acute care facility to a 

health centre with emergency acute care. It's transitional 

funding to do the conversion. And it's to go to the district 

board, and the district board will have the global funding and 

be able to move these facilities in that direction. Next year, 

how do we keep open the health centre? The global funding 

formula will take into consideration the services, and will fund 

the services that are being provided in that community that 

have been agreed upon between the community and the district 

board. 

 

So the one-time transitional funding that you're talking about is 

that. It's transitional funding in this period of transition, and in 

the new fiscal year there will be global funding to take care of 

the services that are then being provided in that facility. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Would I be able to tell the people in 

Vanguard and Kincaid that they're going to have an emergency 

bed available in that facility, in those two hospitals, and that 

they will be able to have that emergency . . . a bed available on 

a 24-hour basis, 365 days a year? Will you be able to tell me 

whether I'll be able to tell these people that? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chair, we aren't going to create 

one-bed hospitals. We are going to provide emergency acute 

care and we have asked hospitals, in conjunction with the 

district boards, to do their plans and to look at role conversions 

of these facilities because that's what we believe should occur. 

 

And in the role conversion they should provide emergency 

acute care services. That may mean an 

observation bed for emergencies in order to take a look at a 

person while the ambulance is picking them up and getting 

them on to a city hospital, which is what happens now. Those 

services will continue to be provided. What we won't be 

providing is in-patient acute care where a person can stay in 

bed for several days, because that is not an emergency. 

 

Emergency care will be taken care of, but hospital boards must 

do this in conjunction with their district boards and their 

planning groups. They have to come forward with a plan, with 

options, and then move in that direction and with the consent of 

the district board or the planning group. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Is there going to be also a respite bed 

available to those individuals in those facilities? Now I'm 

talking specifically about Vanguard and Kincaid because both 

of them are unique. They're not level 4 care integrated 

facilities; they're hospitals. 

 

And I want you to tell me . . . I think I've got the understanding 

from you that they will have an emergency care service. In 

relation to that, if there is no bed available for them to move 

that patient, Madam Minister, will they have the ability to leave 

that patient in that facility until there is a space available on an 

emergency basis, to either Swift Current or Regina or 

wherever? Can you give me that assurance, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chair, I've said repeatedly, one of 

the options in a facility is respite care. I am not going to stand 

here and say, yes, there's respite care here; no, there isn't here; 

yes, there's this there. We have asked boards to come forward 

with their plan. We have asked hospital boards to get in touch 

with their district boards and to do the necessary health care 

planning to provide us with what they believe affordable, 

sustainable options are. That may include respite care or day 

care; it may not. It will depend on what the needs are. Maybe 

respite care in one of the integrated facilities makes more sense 

in that particular district. We will ask the district to take a look 

at what facilities are there, what services they can provide, and 

to come forward with their plan and their options. 

 

The members opposite continue to look at one community, one 

institution. We have been saying for months now that it's time 

for us to go beyond that. It is time for us to start thinking in 

terms of a group of communities and the services that can be 

provided in a group — not one community, not one institution, 

but several communities coming together and providing these 

services. So I keep coming back to the need for our hospitals 

that are facing cuts to in-patient acute care to get into the 

context of a district, to do their planning on a district basis, and 

to come forward with their plans. 

 

There are all sorts of potential for these communities for 

enhanced programing that they can look at. We had a number 

of proposals put forward, for example, by some communities, 

such as health promotion and rehabilitation programs, such as 

health prevention 



1270 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1993 

programs. If we're looking at a community with farm accidents, 

there could be prevention programing done and they could use 

the hospital facility, the health centre, to do that kind of 

program. The possibility of basic physician's services being 

administered out of that facility is a potential. The possibility of 

program coordination to provide a single entry point to health 

services by assisting people and accessing a broad range of 

health care services in the district and outside of the district, 

regionally and provincially — that could be done in the context 

of that facility. 

 

The emergency response system and the 24-hour nurse call 

system is another potential that people can consider. 

Out-patient treatment services could be delivered out of that 

facility. That includes a 24-hour out-patient treatment 

component. Lab and X-ray on site — those services could be 

provided on a daily basis, or a bi-weekly basis, or whatever is 

appropriate and whatever the needs are with respect to the 

community. 

 

We can have observation. In some cases a patient that arrives at 

the out-patient emergency department may require short-term 

observation before the preferred method of treatment is 

determined. That sort of service could be provided in there. 

 

There are a whole range of potentials, from self-help groups, 

counselling, assessments, to emergency response and basic 

physician services. And this facility could be used for that 

purpose. 

 

(2130) 

 

But what has to happen is people have to put on their thinking 

caps. They've got to get together in communities; they've got to 

get together on a district basis and come forward with their 

plans and their options, and then we can take a look at it in the 

context of global funding and meet the needs of the people of 

that community and of the district. 

 

And that's the key here — to take institutional dollars that are 

being used on beds that aren't being used, for a broader range 

of services. The Milden hospital for example, which is 

converting and has been before we even made the 

announcement, is looking at bringing therapists and dentists 

and chiropodists into their community. They're exploring those 

possibilities. They see the opportunities within the change. 

 

But they're doing it in the context of a district and they're 

seeking the support of larger centres and asking them to help 

them and provide these services in their community. And 

there's a cooperation that's taking place in the Midwest area, 

and in Twin Rivers, that is really very spectacular and very 

enheartening. And they are looking at conversions and they are 

looking at ways that they can enhance programing for their 

communities and how they can use these facilities. And they'll 

be coming forward with their plan. 

 

And so we are asking every one of these facilities that 

are looking at in-patient acute care funding reductions to get 

involved in a district. That's why the district board legislation is 

so necessary. Get involved in a district and then let's do our 

plan and our needs assessment and let's get this resolved as 

quickly as we can, so that these communities are not left 

wondering what services will be available. We're anxious to 

work with them; we're anxious to work with their planning 

groups to get these issues resolved. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Well, 

Madam Minister, that certainly sounds encouraging and I think 

a lot of people have taken heart of what you're saying now. 

And I just want to follow up a little bit on that because this 

afternoon what you were telling my colleague from Moosomin 

doesn't seem to jibe with what you're saying now. 

 

You're saying to us, tell the boards we want these district 

boards to come up with their plan. We will do a needs 

assessment, that those people make the needs assessment. You 

said it will be their plans, their options, and you said that there's 

a whole range of potential of things that could be included 

within the services provided by this health district. 

 

And, Madam Minister, this means then that if a community 

decides that in spite of your government's cut-backs, they're 

going to keep their acute care beds because they need them — 

it's obvious my colleague from Morse here has made a very, 

very strong case for that — so what you're telling now then is if 

they can, for example, like the VON (Victorian Order of 

Nurses) in Regina here, come up with close to $200,000 of 

volunteer money, as long as they can provide that, as long as 

the need is there, as long as it is sustainable, in your own 

terminology, you will put your blessing upon it and say to the 

community, go for it because it's what you want. Is that correct, 

Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chair, I'll answer this question 

again. With respect to in-patient acute care beds, the 

government has made a decision with respect to 52 institutions 

in the province. That decision will not be reversed except under 

exceptional circumstances that may not have been considered 

by the Department of Health when they established their 

criteria and did their analysis across the province. 

 

It is not open to district boards to reverse all these decisions, as 

the member opposite suggests, and we have never implied that. 

What we have said is we want to rechannel in-patient acute 

care funding to other options, and we want districts and the 

communities, the facilities that are involved, the facilities that 

are receiving reduced funding in conjunction with their 

planning groups or their district boards, if there's a district 

board in place, to look at options. 

 

One of the most important options is the emergency acute care. 

That has to be maintained in a community. I have just spoken 

to a list of a whole range of other options that can be 

considered. The services that funding will be provided for have 

to be affordable, 



April 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1271 

they have to be sustainable, and they have to relate to needs. So 

the needs assessment will be done by the planning group or the 

district board, if there's a district board already in place. The 

options will be reviewed and funding will be targeted where 

there is the most need. 

 

We are, however, urging the facilities involved and the district 

boards to consider, first off, the need for emergency acute care 

services in that facility. We want them to take a look at 

providing X-ray and diagnostic services in that facility. And I 

have listed a whole range of other potential options. 

 

It will have to be, however, done . . . like people won't be able 

to come and simply say, well we want to get this in here three 

times a week and that's it. It'll have to be done in the context of 

needs. It'll have to be done in the context of the funding that's 

available and it'll have to be an affordable and sustainable 

system. And with respect to in-patient acute care beds, in those 

52 facilities, that decision has been made. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Well, Madam Minister, that just proves that 

your entire process of consultation and listening to the people 

is a farce. They can do what they want as long as it is exactly 

within the parameters that you set out. You're making the rules, 

in fact you're making the rules as you go along and you're 

making these people abide by those rules with no real input in 

it at all for themselves. 

 

That's what you're saying, Madam Minister, that if the 

community wants to improve its hospital, if the community 

wants to take that kind of initiative, you're saying no, even if it 

means rejecting volunteer money that may be being put into the 

system. Well then from that, Madam Minister, I would 

conclude, logically, the next step would then be that they can 

also not go to the property base and tax it. 

 

That seems to me, Madam Minister, would be a logical 

conclusion, that you would prohibit them from accessing the 

property tax base. Which would seem to me then that there 

would be no logical reason for you to persist in the denial of 

the request by SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities) and SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association) to do away with The Hospital 

Revenue Act. Would you agree with them now then, Madam 

Minister, that there's no need for that Act? Would you in fact 

do as they've requested and repeal that Act? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chair, the hospital revenue tax Act 

provides funding for the delivery of a whole range of health 

care services in the province, provides funding for that. These 

boards do not tax under the hospital revenue tax. It's a tax that's 

automatically in and it's automatically collected where there are 

not union hospital districts. 

 

The member opposite is saying, get rid of it and upload the $20 

million onto the provincial government or take it right out of 

the system. If you get rid of the hospital revenue tax you're 

taking 20 to 23 million right out of the system — bang! No 

more 

funding for even the options that we're talking about in these 52 

facilities. No more funding from the local level. I mean the 

logic of the member opposite's statement earlier in this question 

that I'm attempting to answer just doesn't ring true: that if for 

example we make a decision with respect to 52 facilities, then 

there should be no taxation at all on the property tax base. It 

just doesn't follow. 

 

Now with respect to the hospital revenue tax, there may be a 

better way of doing that, of raising contributions from the local 

level. There may very well be a better way and we're exploring 

that with SARM and SUMA. But for the members opposite to 

draw the conclusion that we should just remove the hospital 

revenue tax because we have district boards and they don't 

have taxation power, is really illogical. Yes, the boards don't 

have taxation power. The hospital revenue tax is not a tax put 

on by the boards. It's a tax that's simply there. It's to provide for 

local contribution to health care services. The issue then 

becomes what is the best way to contribute locally to health 

care services: through a tax on the property tax base, through 

some other form of taxation. And that discussion is taking 

place today between SARM and SUMA and the Department of 

Health, and other health care stakeholders such as the SHA and 

SASCH (Saskatchewan Association of Special Care Homes), 

and so on. 

 

And those discussions should take place before we proceed 

with any further changes with respect to the property tax base. 

The district boards will not have the right to tax on the property 

tax base. That is correct, Mr. Chair. And we have already, as a 

result of the legislation that we're proposing, there is 

approximately $5 million being taken off the property tax base 

because the union hospital district Act will not apply — which 

is an average of 4.5 mills — as opposed to the hospital revenue 

tax, which is a 2 mill levy. 

 

So already there is an uploading of $5 million under this 

district Act legislation. And the members opposite oppose it. 

They do not want the province to take over that $5 million off 

of the property tax base. And I say that's totally consistent with 

their position. They want it off the property tax base but they 

oppose the legislation that's already taking $5 million off the 

property tax base and upload it to the provincial government. 

 

Now is there any consistency in that approach? None at all. It 

doesn't make any sense. They want The Hospital Revenue Act 

repealed before we even have a district health Act. They want 

more money in health care services but they want the local 

contribution repealed. They want to take 20 million out of the 

system without thinking it through. And they object to 

legislation which is going to upload $5 million to the provincial 

government. I think that the members opposite have not 

thought through their position very well, Mr. Chair. 

 

The division bells rang from 9:43 p.m. until 9:46 p.m. 



1272 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1993 

Clause 1 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Thompson Whitmore 

Simard Sonntag 

Lingenfelter Roy 

Teichrob Cline 

Shillington Wormsbecker 

Anguish Knezacek 

Kowalsky Harper 

Lorje Keeping 

Lyons Langford 

Pringle Jess 

Draper  

— 21 

Nays 

Neudorf Britton 

Martens D'Autremont 

— 4 

 

The Chair: — The Chair would like to advise the members of 

the committee that by virtue of the time allocation motion 

which is governing the Committee of the Whole consideration 

of Bill 3, and by virtue of the fact that it's now past 9:45 p.m., 

that the Chair should now put every question necessary to 

dispose of every section of the Bill not yet passed. 

 

Clause 2 agreed to on division. 

 

Clause 3 agreed to on division. 

 

Clause 4 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — On a point of order, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The Chair: — Point of order. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — My point of order is, Mr. Chairman, that 

according to the time allocation on April 19, part of the motion 

on time allocation read: 

 

 That there shall be two sitting days allocated to the 

consideration of the said Bill in Committee of the Whole, 

and that at 15 minutes before the time set for adjournment 

on the second sitting day (which is where we are right now, 

Mr. Chairman), unless sooner concluded, the Chairman 

shall put every question necessary to dispose of every 

section of the Bill not yet passed and shall report the Bill 

forthwith to the House, and the question for the first and 

second reading of any amendments shall be put forthwith 

and decided without amendments or debate . . . 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, pursuant to the rules of this House, the 

opposition has, with the assistance of the Law Clerk of this 

Assembly, come up with very reasoned amendments to this 

Bill. And these amendments, sir, are in your possession and we 

have followed due course of the proceedings of this House in 

coming up with reasoned amendments that are in order 

according to the Law Clerk who has assisted us. They are in 

your possession, sir; they have been 

disbursed in the normal course of events with six copies each 

being made, and they are now part of the process of 

determining the culmination of this particular Act. 

 

And so therefore in clause 4 that we are right now, sir, you 

have three amendments dealing with clause 4 before you that 

should be dealt with as part and parcel of the question being 

put. So my point of order precisely, Mr. Chairman, is that we 

are not ready to dispense with clause 4 but rather have to deal 

with the amendments first. 

 

The Chair: — The member for Rosthern has raised the point 

of order stating that the opposition has amendments to move on 

remaining sections of the Bill that have not been called. 

According to the time allocation motion adopted on April 19, I 

am unable to recognize members for further debate after 15 

minutes before the set time of adjournment on the second day 

spent in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. I refer members 

to the second paragraph of the motion which was referred to by 

the member from Rosthern and as follows, and I quote: 

 

 That there shall be two sitting days allocated to the 

consideration of the said Bill in the Committee of the Whole, 

and that at 15 minutes before the set time for adjournment on 

the second sitting day, unless sooner concluded, the 

Chairman shall put every question necessary to dispose of 

every section of the Bill not yet passed and shall report the 

Bill forthwith to the House, and the question for the first and 

second reading of any amendments shall be put forthwith 

and decided without amendments or debate . . . 

 

Now under this order the Chair is required to: 

 

 . . . put every question necessary to dispose of every section 

of the Bill not yet passed. 

 

An amendment cannot be voted on until it is moved and it 

cannot be moved without a member being recognized in 

debate. At this point there is no further debate. The question 

must now be put on each remaining clause and the Bill is then 

to be reported to the House. And I will rule that the point of 

order is not well-founded. 

 

The division bells rang from 9:53 p.m. until 10:03 p.m. 

 

Clause 4 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Thompson Draper 

Simard Whitmore 

Lingenfelter Sonntag 

Teichrob Roy 

Shillington Cline 

Anguish Wormsbecker 

Kowalsky Knezacek 

Koenker Harper 

Lorje Keeping 

 



April 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1273 

 

Lyons Langford 

Pringle Jess 

— 22 

 

Nays 

Neudorf Britton 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd Goohsen 

— 6 

 

The division bells rang from 10:04 p.m. until 10:14 p.m. 

 

Clause 5 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Thompson Draper 

Simard Whitmore 

Lingenfelter Sonntag 

Teichrob Roy 

Shillington Cline 

Anguish Wormsbecker 

Kowalsky Knezacek 

Koenker Harper 

Lorje Keeping 

Lyons Langford 

Pringle Jess 

Calvert  

— 23 

Nays 

Neudorf Britton 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd Goohsen 

— 6 

The division bells rang from 10:16 p.m. until 10:26 p.m. 

 

Clause 6 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Thompson Sonntag 

Simard Roy 

Lingenfelter Cline 

Anguish Wormsbecker 

Kowalsky Knezacek 

Lyons Harper 

Pringle Keeping 

Calvert Langford 

Draper Jess 

Whitmore  

— 19 

Nays 

Neudorf Britton 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd Goohsen 

— 6 

The division bells rang from 10:28 p.m. until 10:38 p.m. 

 

Clause 7 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

 

Thompson Whitmore 

Simard Sonntag 

Lingenfelter Roy 

Anguish Cline 

Kowalsky Wormsbecker 

Koenker Knezacek 

Lyons Harper 

Pringle Keeping 

Calvert Langford 

Draper Jess 

— 20 

Nays 

Neudorf Britton 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd Goohsen 

— 6 

The division bells rang from 10:40 p.m. until 10:50 p.m. 

 

Clause 8 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Thompson Whitmore 

Simard Sonntag 

Lingenfelter Roy 

Shillington Cline 

Anguish Wormsbecker 

Kowalsky Knezacek 

Koenker Harper 

Lyons Keeping 

Pringle Langford 

Calvert Jess 

Draper  

— 21 

Nays 

Neudorf Britton 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd Goohsen 

— 6 

The division bells rang from 10:51 p.m. until 11:01 p.m. 

 

Clause 9 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Thompson Whitmore 

Simard Sonntag 

Lingenfelter Roy 

Shillington Cline 

Kowalsky Wormsbecker 

Koenker Knezacek 

Lyons Harper 

Pringle Keeping 

Calvert Langford 

Draper Jess 

— 20 

Nays 

Neudorf Britton 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd Goohsen 

— 6 



1274 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1993 

 

The division bells rang from 11:03 p.m. until 11:13 p.m. 

 

Clause 10 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Thompson Whitmore 

Simard Sonntag 

Lingenfelter Roy 

Shillington Cline 

Kowalsky Wormsbecker 

Koenker Knezacek 

Lyons Harper 

Pringle Keeping 

Calvert Langford 

Johnson Jess 

Draper  

— 21 

Nays 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd Goohsen 

Britton  

— 5 

The division bells rang from 11:15 p.m. until 11:25 p.m. 

 

Clause 11 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Thompson Whitmore 

Simard Sonntag 

Lingenfelter Roy 

Shillington Cline 

Kowalsky Wormsbecker 

Koenker Knezacek 

Lyons Harper 

Pringle Keeping 

Calvert Langford 

Johnson Jess 

Draper  

— 21 

Nays 

Neudorf Britton 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd Goohsen 

— 6 

The division bells rang from 11:26 p.m. until 11:36 p.m. 

 

Clause 12 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Van Mulligen Draper 

Thompson Whitmore 

Simard Sonntag 

Lingenfelter Roy 

Shillington Wormsbecker 

Kowalsky Knezacek 

 

Koenker Harper 

Lyons Keeping 

Calvert Langford 

Johnson  

— 19 

Nays 

Neudorf Martens 

— 2 

 

The division bells rang from 11:37 p.m. until 11:47 p.m. 

 

Clause 13 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Thompson Johnson 

Simard Draper 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Shillington Sonntag 

Kowalsky Wormsbecker 

Hagel Knezacek 

Koenker Harper 

Lyons Keeping 

Calvert Langford 

— 18 

Nays 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens  

— 3 

The division bells rang from 11:49 p.m. until 11:59 p.m. 

 

Clause 14 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Thompson Draper 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Shillington Sonntag 

Kowalsky Wormsbecker 

Hagel Knezacek 

Koenker Harper 

Lyons Keeping 

Calvert Langford 

Johnson  

— 17 

Nays 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens  

— 3 

 

The division bells rang from 12:01 a.m. until 12:11 a.m. 

 

Clause 15 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Thompson Draper 



April 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1275 

 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Shillington Sonntag 

Kowalsky Wormsbecker 

Hagel Knezacek 

Koenker Harper 

Lyons Keeping 

Calvert Langford 

Johnson  

— 17 

Nays 

Martens D'Autremont 

— 2 

The division bells rang from 12:12 a.m. until 12:22 a.m. 

 

Clause 16 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Thompson Draper 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Shillington Sonntag 

Kowalsky Wormsbecker 

Hagel Knezacek 

Koenker Harper 

Lyons Keeping 

Calvert Langford 

Johnson  

— 17 

Nays 

Martens D'Autremont 

— 2 

The division bells rang from 12:24 a.m. until 12:34 a.m. 

 

Clause 17 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Thompson Draper 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Shillington Sonntag 

Kowalsky Wormsbecker 

Koenker Knezacek 

Lyons Harper 

Calvert Keeping 

Johnson Langford 

— 16 

Nays 

Martens D'Autremont 

— 2 

The division bells rang from 12:35 a.m. until 12:45 a.m. 

 

Clause 18 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Van Mulligen Draper 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

 

 

Shillington Sonntag 

Kowalsky Wormsbecker 

Koenker Knezacek 

Lyons Harper 

Calvert Keeping 

Johnson Langford 

— 16 

Nays 

Martens D'Autremont 

— 2 

The division bells rang from 12:47 a.m. until 12:57 a.m. 

 

Clause 19 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Van Mulligen Draper 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Shillington Sonntag 

Kowalsky Wormsbecker 

Koenker Knezacek 

Lyons Harper 

Calvert Keeping 

Johnson Langford 

— 16 

Nays 

Martens D'Autremont 

— 2 

The division bells rang from 12:59 a.m. until 1:09 a.m. 

 

Clause 20 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Van Mulligen Johnson 

Thompson Whitmore 

Lingenfelter Sonntag 

Shillington Wormsbecker 

Kowalsky Knezacek 

Koenker Harper 

Lyons Keeping 

Calvert Langford 

— 16 

Nays 

Martens D'Autremont 

— 2 

The division bells rang from 1:10 a.m. until 1:20 a.m. 

 

Clause 21 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Van Mulligen Johnson 

Thompson Whitmore 

Lingenfelter Sonntag 

Shillington Wormsbecker 

Kowalsky Knezacek 

Koenker Harper 

 



1276 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1993 

 

Lyons Keeping 

Calvert Langford 

— 16 

Nays 

Martens D'Autremont 

— 2 

The division bells rang from 1:22 a.m. until 1:32 a.m. 

 

Clause 22 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Van Mulligen Johnson 

Thompson Whitmore 

Lingenfelter Sonntag 

Shillington Wormsbecker 

Kowalsky Knezacek 

Koenker Harper 

Lyons Keeping 

Calvert Langford 

— 16 

Nays 

Martens D'Autremont 

— 2 

The division bells rang from 1:34 a.m. until 1:44 a.m. 

 

Clause 23 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Van Mulligen Whitmore 

Thompson Sonntag 

Lingenfelter Wormsbecker 

Shillington Knezacek 

Kowalsky Harper 

Koenker Keeping 

Calvert Langford 

Johnson  

— 15 

Nays 

Martens Goohsen 

D'Autremont  

— 3 

The division bells rang from 1:45 a.m. until 1:55 a.m. 

 

Clause 24 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Van Mulligen Calvert 

Thompson Johnson 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Shillington Sonntag 

Kowalsky Wormsbecker 

Cunningham Knezacek 

Koenker Keeping 

Lyons Langford 

— 16 

Nays 

 

Martens Boyd 

D'Autremont  

— 3 

The division bells rang from 1:57 a.m. until 2:07 a.m. 

 

Clause 25 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Van Mulligen Johnson 

Thompson Draper 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Shillington Sonntag 

Kowalsky Knezacek 

Cunningham Harper 

Koenker Keeping 

Lyons Langford 

Calvert  

— 17 

Nays 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd Goohsen 

— 4 

The division bells rang from 2:09 a.m. until 2:19 a.m. 

 

Clause 26 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Thompson Johnson 

Van Mulligen Draper 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Shillington Sonntag 

Kowalsky Knezacek 

Cunningham Harper 

Koenker Keeping 

Calvert Langford 

— 16 

Nays 

Martens Boyd 

— 2 

 

The division bells rang from 2:20 a.m. until 2:30 a.m. 

 

Clause 27 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Van Mulligen Johnson 

Thompson Draper 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Shillington Sonntag 

Kowalsky Knezacek 

Cunningham Harper 

Koenker Keeping 

Lyons Langford 

Calvert  

— 17 

Nays 

Martens Boyd 

— 2 



April 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1277 

The division bells rang from 2:32 a.m. until 2:42 a.m. 

 

Clause 28 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Thompson Draper 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Shillington Sonntag 

Kowalsky Wormsbecker 

Cunningham Knezacek 

Koenker Harper 

Lyons Keeping 

Calvert Langford 

Johnson  

— 17 

Nays 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd  

— 3 

The division bells rang from 2:44 a.m. until 2:54 a.m. 

 

Clause 29 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Thompson Draper 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Shillington Sonntag 

Kowalsky Wormsbecker 

Cunningham Knezacek 

Koenker Harper 

Lyons Keeping 

Calvert Langford 

Johnson  

— 17 

Nays 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd  

— 3 

The division bells rang from 2:56 a.m. until 3:06 a.m. 

 

Clause 30 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Thompson Draper 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Shillington Sonntag 

Kowalsky Wormsbecker 

Cunningham Knezacek 

Koenker Harper 

Lyons Keeping 

Calvert Langford 

Johnson  

— 17 

Nays 

Martens Goohsen 

Boyd  

— 3 

The division bells rang from 3:07 a.m. until 3:17 a.m. 

 

Clause 31 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Thompson Draper 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Shillington Sonntag 

Kowalsky Wormsbecker 

Cunningham Knezacek 

Koenker Harper 

Lyons Keeping 

Calvert Langford 

Johnson  

— 17 

Nays 

Martens Boyd 

— 2 

The division bells rang from 3:18 a.m. until 3:28 a.m. 

 

Clause 32 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Thompson Draper 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Shillington Sonntag 

Kowalsky Wormsbecker 

Cunningham Knezacek 

Koenker Harper 

Lyons Keeping 

Calvert Langford 

Johnson  

— 17 

Nays 

Martens Boyd 

— 2 

The division bells rang from 3:29 a.m. until 3:39 a.m. 

 

Clause 33 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Thompson Draper 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Shillington Sonntag 

Kowalsky Wormsbecker 

Cunningham Knezacek 

Koenker Harper 

Lyons Keeping 

Calvert Langford 

Johnson  

— 17 

Nays 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd  

— 3 

The division bells rang from 3:40 a.m. until 3:46 a.m. 



1278 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1993 

Clause 34 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Thompson Johnson 

Lingenfelter Draper 

Shillington Wormsbecker 

Kowalsky Knezacek 

Cunningham Harper 

Koenker Keeping 

Lyons Langford 

Calvert  

— 15 

Nays 

Martens Boyd 

D'Autremont  

— 3 

The division bells rang from 3:48 a.m. until 3:49 a.m. 

 

Clause 35 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Thompson Whitmore 

Lingenfelter Sonntag 

Shillington Wormsbecker 

Kowalsky Knezacek 

Cunningham Harper 

Lyons Keeping 

Johnson Langford 

Draper  

— 15 

Nays 

Martens Boyd 

D'Autremont  

— 3 

The division bells rang from 3:50 a.m. until 3:52 a.m. 

 

Clause 36 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Thompson Draper 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Shillington Sonntag 

Kowalsky Wormsbecker 

Cunningham Knezacek 

Koenker Harper 

Lyons Keeping 

Calvert Langford 

Johnson  

— 17 

Nays 

Martens Boyd 

D'Autremont  

— 3 

The division bells rang from 3:54 a.m. until 3:56 a.m. 

 

Clause 37 agreed to on the following recorded 

division. 

 

Yeas 

Thompson Draper 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Shillington Sonntag 

Kowalsky Wormsbecker 

Cunningham Knezacek 

Koenker Harper 

Lyons Keeping 

Calvert Langford 

Johnson  

— 17 

Nays 

Martens Boyd 

D'Autremont  

— 3 

The division bells rang from 3:57 a.m. until 3:59 a.m. 

 

Clause 38 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Thompson Draper 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Shillington Sonntag 

Kowalsky Wormsbecker 

Cunningham Knezacek 

Koenker Harper 

Lyons Keeping 

Calvert Langford 

Johnson  

— 17 

Nays 

Martens Boyd 

D'Autremont  

— 3 

The division bells rang from 4 a.m. until 4:01 a.m. 

 

Clause 39 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Thompson Draper 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Shillington Sonntag 

Kowalsky Wormsbecker 

Cunningham Knezacek 

Koenker Harper 

Lyons Keeping 

Calvert Langford 

Johnson  

— 17 

Nays 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd  

— 3 

The division bells rang from 4:02 a.m. until 4:03 a.m. 

 

Clause 40 agreed to on the following recorded 



April 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1279 

division. 

 

Yeas 

Thompson Draper 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Shillington Sonntag 

Kowalsky Wormsbecker 

Cunningham Knezacek 

Koenker Harper 

Lyons Keeping 

Calvert Langford 

Johnson  

— 17 

Nays 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd  

— 3 

The division bells rang from 4:04 a.m. until 4:05 a.m. 

 

Clause 41 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Thompson Draper 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Shillington Sonntag 

Kowalsky Wormsbecker 

Cunningham Knezacek 

Koenker Harper 

Lyons Keeping 

Calvert Langford 

Johnson  

— 17 

Nays 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd  

— 3 

The division bells rang from 4:06 a.m. until 4:07 a.m. 

 

Clause 42 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Thompson Draper 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Shillington Sonntag 

Kowalsky Wormsbecker 

Cunningham Knezacek 

Koenker Harper 

Lyons Keeping 

Calvert Langford 

Johnson  

— 17 

Nays 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd  

— 3 

The division bells rang from 4:08 a.m. until 4:09 a.m. 

 

Clause 43 agreed to on the following recorded 

division. 

 

Yeas 

Thompson Draper 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Shillington Sonntag 

Kowalsky Wormsbecker 

Cunningham Knezacek 

Koenker Harper 

Lyons Keeping 

Calvert Langford 

Johnson  

— 17 

Nays 

 Martens D'Autremont t 

 Boyd 

— 3 

The division bells rang from 4:10 a.m. until 4:11 a.m. 

 

Clause 44 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Thompson Draper 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Shillington Sonntag 

Kowalsky Wormsbecker 

Cunningham Knezacek 

Koenker Harper 

Lyons Keeping 

Calvert Langford 

Johnson  

— 17 

Nays 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd  

— 3 

The division bells rang from 4:12 a.m. until 4:13 a.m. 

 

Clause 45 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Thompson Draper 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Shillington Sonntag 

Kowalsky Wormsbecker 

Cunningham Knezacek 

Koenker Harper 

Lyons Keeping 

Calvert Langford 

Johnson  

— 17 

Nays 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd  

— 3 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 



1280 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1993 

Bill No. 3 — An Act respecting Health Districts 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now 

be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — With such a motion, because it's 

pursuant to Special Order, would require the leave of the 

House. Is leave granted? 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:15 a.m. 

 

 


