




















































Hansard: April 22, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1117 

 April 22, 1993 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — By leave, Mr. Speaker, I move that 

we would move to special orders, adjourned debate, on the 

proposed motion by Ms. Simard dealing with Bill No. 3, 

second reading. 

 

Leave granted. 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 3 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Simard that Bill No. 3 — An Act 

respecting Health Districts be now read a second time, and the 

amendment thereto moved by Mr. Britton. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to bring out 

some points that I did not do the last time I spoke on this, and I 

want to point out some of the things that I did address at the 

time when I did speak on it the last time. And that had to do 

with some of the background in my part of the province, which 

dealt with health region no. 1, and I pointed out to the 

Assembly some of the points that I figured were pertinent to 

the discussion. 

 

I did note too, Mr. Speaker, that the observations were made by 

quite a few people who had watched that series of speeches 

from the Assembly, and they pointed out to me that they were 

glad that someone had taken the time to review the background 

in the first health district that was ever formed in 

Saskatchewan, and that was health region no. 1. 

 

Since that time, Mr. Speaker, there have been a lot of things 

that have been done in the health care side and as it relates to 

this Bill. I have, Mr. Speaker, attended quite a few meetings in 

my part of the province, in my constituency and in 

neighbouring constituencies, as well as on the east side of the 

province. And there is a continuing lack of information being 

provided to the people of the province about what the mandate 

of some of the steering committees has been. There has been a 

lack of information provided to these groups. 

 

For example, they get information at one time from one 

member of the Department of Health; then they get another 

piece of information from another member from the 

Department of Health. And then they get another piece of 

information from a minister and then they get another piece of 

information from the Minister of Health herself. There have 

been a whole lot of questions raised because of that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The way that it has been dealt with, Mr. Speaker, is that people 

from across the province have been asked to set up steering 

committees in relation to the kinds of 

things that would be discussed in rationalizing health care. 

And, Mr. Speaker, there is a great deal of willingness to 

participate in rationalizing, streamlining, and putting together a 

health care system that would be here for the future. 

 

What has been said over and over again by various groups and 

individuals across the province is that they needed far more 

time. They need time, Mr. Speaker, to integrate the use of all of 

the agencies that occur in Health. And that, Mr. Speaker, is the 

reason why we have asked this Assembly to defer this Bill. 

Defer the Bill and allow the people to discuss. 

 

We have had a system evolve over the last 30 years . . . we've 

had a system evolve over the last 30 years that has had 

different boards, different aspects of the health care system 

controlled and regulated by various kinds of boards. And that, 

Mr. Speaker, has grown because of government involvement in 

one way or another. It hasn't been the direct result of any one 

single emphasis or focus. But what has happened, Mr. Speaker, 

is you have ambulance boards and hospital boards and home 

care boards and all of these kinds of agencies that deal with 

health care. And that, Mr. Speaker, has been a process of time 

that that has evolved. 

 

And now in less than a year the Minister of Health has asked 

all of these people to bring all of that together. And I believe 

that, with all due respect, that the people of the province have 

seen a lot of problems in putting this all together. And the 

reasons they have is because they don't have any consistency in 

the direction being given by the members opposite or by the 

Department of Health. And that has raised a lot of questions in 

the minds of people. 

 

The information that has been suggested has appeared in the 

paper a number of times and I want to point that out. In the 

community that I live near to, the city of Swift Current, a lot of 

the members of the steering committee resigned because they 

felt that the mandate that they had been given was not what 

was expected of them and therefore they quit. The people in the 

community have had a serious problem with understanding 

what the Department of Health wanted, what the government 

wanted. 

 

In that respect, Mr. Speaker, they have had a lot of concerns 

raised about whether the government has a plan. Do they have 

a plan? Don't they have a plan? Will it produce a plan? And 

related to that also is the aspect of governance. How are these 

people going to get a global budget when they're going to be 

told that you have this acute care funding to cut back, you have 

that acute care funding to cut back? And then they get told that 

they won't be able to use the money. 

 

In one of the meetings I was at earlier this week information 

was provided to us that they would not be able to use the 

funding in designated acute care for home care. If there was 

money in home care they would not be able to use it for acute 

care or special care homes. Those, Mr. Speaker, are some of 

the 



1118 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1993 

concerns that the people in the communities have. And that's 

why yesterday's headline in the Star-Phoenix, or in their 

editorial page, is "What a farce!" That's the headline in the 

paper. 

 

 THE ISSUE: Announced closures of hospitals. 

 

 OUR POSITION: (Mr. Speaker, and coming from the 

editorial board of the Star-Phoenix is) Stop blather about 

local control. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is the headline in relation to the focus that 

the Minister of Health has placed on the way that the steering 

committee and then the appointed committee and then the 

elected committee and appointed committee can respond to, 

and the Star-Phoenix has it right. People across the province 

are saying, stop blather about local control. And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is what the people and the province have said. That's 

what we said at the beginning. We didn't see where they would 

be going in any other way but what they have gone. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we saw that in the amount of information 

that was provided. We saw that in the kinds of information 

provided, and as we go along we find out, Mr. Speaker, that the 

local bodies are going to have less and less control over what 

they're going to do. And that, Mr. Speaker, is what we were 

afraid of in the first place. And that is why we on this side of 

the House have said stop, hold the clock, let the people of the 

province determine it. 

 

And I want to use some examples, Mr. Speaker, because these 

communities have worked hard. And I want to say that I 

commend the people for trying to pull together and rationalize 

the system, but it's very, very difficult. I want to use as an 

example, the area around the city of Swift Current. 

 

They have been working since last November, Mr. Speaker, to 

put together a plan whereby they would be allowed to take the 

various services that they require and provide, and divide up 

that responsibility, give it some focus. And what has happened, 

Mr. Speaker, they have continually — and over and over and 

over again — continually been confronted with inconsistencies 

and frustration about what the plan would be. The plan 

changes, and from one time to the next, the areas change. 

 

All of that is almost beyond the reasoning of the people who 

are doing the assessments on whether the steering committee 

should be involved with one board or another board, another 

area, or the area that they're in. And that, Mr. Speaker, is the 

reason why these people have a lot of concerns about it. 

 

There are things that people would be prepared to do, Mr. 

Speaker. I have met with each one of the hospitals in my 

constituency. I have met with a number of those who would be 

in the area that has been applied for by the group, and they call 

it the Rolling Hills health district. And they've applied to the 

Minister of Health to have that district recognized as a service 

unit for a health district or a region. And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

generally the area surrounding the city of Swift Current. 

 

What has transpired since they formulated that health care 

group is that the majority of the hospitals in that group, which 

comprised at the time it was begun, seven different hospitals 

. . . at the time it was begun there was consideration being 

given to having three beds of acute care where there had been 

five before; two where there had been four; one and a half 

where there'd been three. Other locations have said, well maybe 

we can do with five or four instead of nine. And these scenarios 

have developed and they have said this over and over again. 

 

What we had happen last week, Mr. Speaker, is rather 

significant to the whole process. And the process showed some 

very serious concerns that we had felt were going to be there 

anyway. And we believed that they were going to be there and 

they did surface. 

 

One is that of those seven, only one had any acute care beds in 

that whole area. And if the people would understand this area, 

it is the area along the South Saskatchewan River that runs 75 

to 100 miles across just south of the South Saskatchewan River 

and then runs all the way to the U.S. (United States) border. 

 

Now that area, except for the city of Swift Current, has only 

five and a half hospitals . . . or five and a half beds with acute 

care possibilities. The rest were all cut in funding. Some of 

them . . . For example, Kincaid was cut. In six months they're 

going to be cut down to, as one health care director from one of 

the hospitals said, we're going to be cutting toenails. And the 

money we have received for funding for the last six months of 

the year will involve only keeping the heat on in the hospital. 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why we're concerned 

about it. It's why we have said to the members of this Assembly 

over and over again, that we want to have some reasoned 

approach to this whole wellness program that has been 

established. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to the Assembly, that's 

the reason why we have made available to the Assembly an 

opportunity to re-establish health care in these facilities by 

things that we have presented to the Assembly, like the Bills 

that we have prepared to recognize the importance of health 

care in all of these small communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have very, very serious concerns about things 

that we hear. I'll give you another example of that. One of the 

serious concerns expressed in a meeting I was at day before 

yesterday in Mankota was this: that the Lafleche hospital, 

which has got an integrated facility with level 4 care people 

and then also a hospital which is a part of the one unit, and in 

that they are going to have their funding cut back on that acute 

care side. 

 

And what are they doing in the community just north of 

Lafleche, 12 or 13 miles north of Lafleche? They have already 

said on two meetings that members of my Rolling Hills health 

care district have heard people say on two occasions is that the 

town of Gravelbourg 



April 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1119 

is going to receive a $10 million grant to construct a hospital. 

 

(1915) 

 

Now 13 miles away they close one down, and that is what these 

people are going to call a benefit to . . . a cost-saving measure? 

And to the Minister of Finance to recommend that they build a 

hospital when they've got one that is 13 miles away and another 

one that is 30 miles away. And, Mr. Speaker, if the province 

goes ahead, the government goes ahead with funding for health 

care in the city of Swift Current and you go straight south to 

the American border at Mankota, it is 125 miles-plus to get to a 

doctor. That is what is going to happen, Mr. Speaker, and these 

people are really concerned about it. Because the acute care 

beds have been cut out of Mankota. They've been cut out of 

Kincaid. They've been cut out of Ponteix. They've been cut out 

of Vanguard. They've been cut out of Lafleche. They've been 

cut out of Climax. They've been cut out of Frontier. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it is a very serious concern to those people in that 

community. And that bottom part of my constituency is served 

by those hospitals. It's served by the people and the doctors that 

live there. 

 

Another thing that has been brought to our attention and that is 

very, very serious, is that the doctors who depend on lab 

services for the provision of access to X-ray equipment, a 

technician that is capable of doing X-rays, an individual who is 

able to do lab work as it relates to blood testing and items 

related to diabetics and sampling various kinds of things . . . 

Those are the kinds of things, Mr. Speaker, that the doctor 

absolutely needs. 

 

One physician told me, he said, it's this way, it would be just 

like a farmer who bought some land and had no equipment. Or 

it would be like a mechanic who opened up a business and 

didn't have any tools. That's exactly what would be represented 

in this kind of a function with a doctor not being able to have 

lab and diagnostic services provided to him in that location. 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is a very serious concern. 

 

I want to point out also, Mr. Speaker, that in the meeting that 

was held in Mankota a week ago Friday, the doctor was late in 

coming to the meeting, and one of the reasons was, Mr. 

Speaker, that he had to sew up a person's arm that had been cut 

up and . . . cut in shreds almost, and 66 stitches were required 

to put that arm back together. Mr. Speaker, that is a very 

serious problem. If at any time that would have hit an artery, 

Mr. Speaker, that would have caused a very, very serious 

problem if that individual would have had to travel 100 miles 

to get any kind of health care service. 

 

And we say, if the doctors are expected to deliver health care 

from an office 120 miles away, and if he's going to be driving 

back and forth to that community to provide that service once a 

week, it isn't going to provide any kind of a service on an 

emergency basis. 

 

And if you have to take an ambulance and drive those 

100 miles to get a patient and deliver him back to have an 

emergency service, then that, Mr. Speaker, is also going to 

create a problem, because that will be four hours of travel at 

least for that individual to have emergency service. And then, 

Mr. Speaker — I'm only telling you what people have told me 

— and then, Mr. Speaker, if people take it upon themselves to 

take that individual who needs emergency care and takes him 

to the hospital himself, he's still two hours away, and the 

majority of times that individual is in a panic situation himself. 

 

And then he's going to take that individual and deliver him to a 

health care facility either in Assiniboia, which is a considerable 

distance away — more than an hour, could be a couple of hours 

— Assiniboia, Gravelbourg, or Swift Current. It is going to 

cause a serious problem to these people, and they are very 

concerned about it. 

 

So I want to raise that from our perspective, that the individuals 

in government have not taken seriously the problems and the 

concerns that people really feel about the things that are going 

on. And we contend that there hasn't been any serious thought 

about the impact in rural Saskatchewan as it relates to the 

functions that they're going to provide. 

 

And that's what it says in this article. It says, "What a farce!" 

Announced closures of hospitals is the issue. "Our position: 

stop blather about local control." And then it goes on to say: 

 

 If the wheels have not fallen off the Saskatchewan 

government's wellness model for health care, they have 

become wobbly at best. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people in the province of Saskatchewan have 

a very serious concern about what this health . . . wellness 

means. And if you take a look at one of the articles written in 

the Leader-Post, it pokes fun at a wellness clinic. If you're 

going to have a wellness clinic, that's for people who are well. 

It's not for people who are sick. If you're feeling good and want 

to become involved in a wellness clinic, go to one. And is that 

going to be like a fitness clinic? And that's what people in 

urban centres, in Saskatoon, are starting to say about this 

wellness of the health care program. "What a farce," it says. 

That is the most charitable thing that can be said about the way 

the government has gone after hospitals in small communities 

by cutting off acute care money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people in my constituency, which represents 

the area of Cabri, Vanguard, and Herbert, three hospitals of the 

10,000 people in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, they have five 

and a half beds. Under the program initiated by the 

government, they said one and a half beds per area. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, in that part of that area they don't have five and a half 

beds or one and a half beds per thousand. They have .39 beds 

per thousand. Why provide a serious hurt to the constituents in 

the south-west who are going to have a serious erosion of their 

health care requirements? And that, Mr. Speaker, is why people 

in 



1120 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1993 

larger centres are going to have just as serious a concern. 

 

At the meeting I was at in Herbert, and it was pointed out to me 

. . . to us, to all of us by the doctor, there was an individual 

there from the Department of Health who was standing at the 

front, and the doctor said to him: sir, if you had a heart attack 

today standing right there, he said, I would have to take you 

into the hospital here in Herbert and stabilize you for at least a 

week in order for me to get a bed for you to come to Regina. 

 

He said: and the reason is because you cut back there so much 

that there's no people there who will provide it or there's a 

reduced volume of people to provide the service in dealing 

with heart conditions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, then when that individual finally gets to go to 

Regina to get the help that he needs in an operation or 

whatever, then he's got to go back to recuperate in one of those 

hospitals. And what happens then, Mr. Speaker? 

 

He first of all leaves Herbert, he goes to Regina to get his 

operation, he comes back, and he's got to recuperate. What's 

going to happen if they don't have any acute care beds, Mr. 

Speaker? And what's going to happen if they don't have 

diagnostic services? And what's going to happen if they don't 

have a doctor? 

 

He won't go back to that wellness clinic in Herbert. He won't 

go back to that wellness clinic in Cabri or Gull Lake or 

Vanguard. He won't go back there because there's no doctor to 

help him. 

 

So he will stay in one of the hospitals in Regina, either the 

General, the Pasqua, or the Plains, and then he will be taking a 

bed that will be there as a bed for the people of the city of 

Regina. And that's why the doctors in the city of Regina are 

concerned about what these people are doing with health care 

in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are real, serious problems. In fact I believe 

that when all is said and done, when the people here in 

government side have done what they're going to do, it will 

likely cost more. It may not affect the coffers of the provincial 

government but from the farm gate or the mechanic's shop in 

Hodgeville, or Vanguard, or Climax, or Mankota, it will impact 

on that individual's cost. 

 

Number one, Mr. Speaker, in reduced effectiveness of being 

able to recover from whatever happens, but also from the very 

fact that he will have to deliver that patient personally to that 

health care facility, which could be 100 miles away. And that, 

Mr. Speaker, is a very serious concern. So if you take it from 

the shop, the mechanic's shop gate in Kincaid, or Hazenmore, 

or Ponteix, and you take that and deliver that patient, it's going 

to cost that individual far more to have that happen, Mr. 

Speaker, than it would have today. 

 

And that is the concern. And it's not only a monetary cost. Mr. 

Speaker, it is a serious health care cost. And 

the seriousness comes in all of the things that can impact on 

people who take emergency care situations into hand and 

deliver that patient, at probably break-neck speeds that they're 

not supposed to be driving anyway. 

 

And then I want to point out another thing that was pointed out 

to us. It was effectively told us in Mankota on Tuesday night 

about this young man who was in a car accident. And the 

ambulance driver missed the road by a mile, and he couldn't 

find the place where the accident had occurred. And the young 

man died because of that, because he didn't get attention 

immediately and by the time the ambulance got there, it was 

too late. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, the cost in dollars, the cost in human 

tragedy, the cost in human tragedy, in people who have to carry 

this serious impact of this emergency treatment for the rest of 

their lives, to those people it is a serious cost. And it is a cost to 

our society. And, Mr. Speaker, I don't believe these people 

have recognized that. I honestly don't believe that they have 

taken that into consideration. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this editorial board statement by the Star-Phoenix 

goes on to say: 

 

 Under the wellness model, it was not supposed to be this 

way. That there was a need for rejigging Saskatchewan's 

hospital system was not in dispute. Ways of going about it, 

however, were supposed to be decided by the affected 

communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the people from the Rolling Hills hospital 

district, which has six hospitals, would be allowed to decide 

that on the basis of the 14,000 people that live there that they 

had 21 beds for them to decide where the acute care would go, 

they would have the common sense to deliver those 21 beds 

into those communities where they were supposed to be. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, I heard over and over again. People are 

prepared to do the things that they have to do in order for us to 

maintain the health care system. 

 

In the town of Cabri, for example, which is somewhat halfway 

between Leader and Swift Current, those people are along a 

border that is just as much a border as the U.S. border or the 

Alberta border is because they cannot cross that river at any 

time except in one or two locations. One is at Leader and one is 

at the Saskatchewan Landing, just north of Swift Current. They 

have to have access to health care or you have 100 miles there 

where there is absolutely no health care. 

 

I want to point out another thing, Mr. Speaker. The people here 

say that oh, the health care will be delivered — health care will 

be delivered. And I want to point out to this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, that I have had members of my family work in health 

care in this province for a considerable amount of time. 

 

In fact I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, my sister was 



April 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1121 

hired by the former administration to work in northern 

Saskatchewan, and she served in the member for Cumberland's 

own home town, in the town of Cumberland, for four or five 

years working in a hospital, just exactly like these people want 

to put out in the rural part, in Mankota and in Ponteix and in 

Lafleche. 

 

What happens, Mr. Speaker? There's no diagnostic services 

there. There's none. There is only a nurse trained to do 

emergency service, to stabilize the individual only to the point 

where he can move on, to make that individual comfortable. 

That's what the service was provided there. 

 

Doctor comes once a week and does checks for children and 

does it like a nurse would check the children in a baby clinic. 

Dentist comes once a month. That's the kind of the thing that 

goes in one of these wellness clinics, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And for the people in rural Saskatchewan in my part of the 

province, they need far more than that, Mr. Speaker. I believe 

that they deserve more than that. And that's why, Mr. Speaker, 

we have said stop to this government, stop in your tracks; 

evaluate what you're doing. You said, you said over and over 

and over again that you would allow the steering committees 

and the boards to do the planning and the rationalization. 

 

How does this work in those communities? Well I want to 

point out an example of what it has done. In the area of of 

Vanguard, Kincaid, and Mankota, Mr. Speaker, there was 

already a rationalization begun by the hospital boards 

themselves. They had decided that they were going to become 

a unit, and in that unit they would provide those kinds of 

services that was expected, I believe, by this government. 

 

(1930) 

 

But what happened to those four hospitals, Mr. Speaker, 

including Ponteix — I missed that one — what happened to 

them? They got absolutely no acute care beds, none. And that 

is an area that is significantly impacted by the need for those 

kinds of facilities, and that, Mr. Speaker, is one example. 

 

I know that the people around Shaunavon, Frontier, and 

Climax, and Eastend, also had the same process in mind, and 

they had already begun to work that through. And now what 

have we got? The boards were overridden by the fact that they 

got this hospital cut and that hospital cut, and when the six 

months are over or the eight months are over, which some 

hospitals got, at the conclusion of that, what are they going to 

do? What's the doctor going to do? Is he going to stay if he has 

absolutely no services that are going to provide the lab and the 

technical services? Absolutely not. And they have said that 

over and over again, and they're not there to stir up the people, 

Mr. Speaker. They're there to try and rationalize a reasonable 

kind of health care program. 

 

I want to point out also in this editorial that we have 

from the Star-Phoenix yesterday. It says here: 

 

 Again and again, Health Minister Louise Simard said new 

district health boards would make their own decisions 

about health-care facilities. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that isn't the case. That isn't the case. "The 

district boards . . ." this goes on in the article to say: 

 

 The district boards would decide "what hospitals, if any" 

would close and "what, if anything" would replace them. 

No small hospitals were being singled out for closure. The 

district boards would decide. On and on it went. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what we have said over and over. 

And finally we see it happening. It's so evident all across this 

province. 

 

I have some letters here from the northern . . . I can talk about 

the northern part of the province too, Mr. Speaker. I have a 

bunch of letters here from Smeaton — Smeaton, 

Saskatchewan, which is up near . . . east of P.A. (Prince 

Albert), Mr. Speaker — and that is an area that is served by 

tourism and various kinds of things in summer. And these 

people say, no we can't understand what you're doing this for. 

In fact this lady writes in and says: 

 

 I am writing to you to express my dismay and, frankly, 

horror at the recent announcement of the closure of the 

Smeaton Union Hospital in northern Saskatchewan. I 

simply cannot believe that sufficient research into the 

question of whether the needs of this part of Saskatchewan 

can be met once this hospital is closed . . .  

 

They have 40 miles to drive one way to a hospital and 50 

another way to drive to a hospital. 

 

"I do not believe that they can be." Closed that means, there's a 

reference to. Are you . . . And this is a question for the Minister 

of Health: 

 

 Are you aware that this is the only hospital serving this 

northern stretch of road? Without this hospital the lives of 

many of the area's residents, plus those of holiday-makers 

will be placed in jeopardy. There is a distance of 40 miles 

to the Nipawin hospital in one direction and a distance of 

50 miles to P.A. (Prince Albert) in the other. Should an 

emergency arise that a person is critically injured and 

should not be moved without medical attention, it would be 

necessary for that person to wait 45 minutes to an hour 

before an ambulance would arrive from one of these 

hospitals and the same amount of time again before they 

can be delivered to a hospital. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don't say it's not impossible for every ambulance 

driver in the province of Saskatchewan in 



1122 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1993 

his area to know every road. I am not saying that that is 

impossible, nor that modern communications facilities wouldn't 

make it possible for him to have an exact road map of where 

that is. Nor am I saying that 9-1-1 wouldn't be able to help 

serve that need. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, as sure as I stand here I know that, having 

been involved in some of these emergencies myself personally, 

that it is a very, very serious concern on the part of these 

people. And that, Mr. Speaker, is why we object to having this 

thing done the way it's done. 

 

I'm going to go back to the town of Cabri because I believe that 

they run one of the most efficient hospitals in the province of 

Saskatchewan. As a matter of fact, their per bed cost is $242 a 

bed per day. That's their own cost and that is almost half, that's 

almost half of what the Canadian average is. 

 

I want to point out to the members of this Assembly also that 

they do have one board that regulates the ambulance. The same 

board runs the hospital. The same board runs the level 4 care 

facility there. The same board deals with the EMO (Emergency 

Measures Organization) offices that they have. Now the name's 

been changed to something else. The emergency measures 

people run out of the same facility. They all run out of the 

hospital. The people in low-cost housing who are seniors get 

their meals on wheels from the Cabri Union Hospital. 

 

There probably isn't one single facility in Saskatchewan that 

hasn't done exactly the same thing as that, or in the process of 

doing that. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why these people have 

been doing what you've been saying. As a matter of fact, if you 

took all of the acute care beds in the region that is considered to 

be the Rolling Hills community — the health care district 

which has six hospitals — if you took the acute care beds there 

today, Mr. Speaker, you would find that they would be very, 

very close to one and a half and maybe up to two beds per 

thousand. But not five. Not four. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is clearly in my mind the way that 

individuals have rationalized within the component of health 

care. They have done that over and over again across this 

province. And that, Mr. Speaker, is why we on this side of the 

House say give those people time. Give those people time to do 

that so that they can set the pattern where they can get those 

acute care beds and the long-term care beds. Where do they 

need them? 

 

In this area, Mr. Speaker, there are two hospitals that don't have 

acute care . . . or don't have level 4 care. In those two hospitals, 

one is in my constituency, and Vanguard was here yesterday in 

full force, Mr. Speaker. The reason is that if they lose that 

hospital they have absolutely no level 4 care in that community 

and they will have to drive 55 miles one way to get that to a 

community that has some facilities where there isn't a 

waiting-list that is 25 and 30 people long. 

And today, Mr. Speaker, today as I speak they have 10 beds in 

that hospital and they have 11 patients in that hospital — 11. 

And they have had an average daily census of 10 for the last 

four years. That, Mr. Speaker, is why people were out here in 

full force. That's why the mayor had to say what she said 

yesterday. She's concerned about it. And she said it over and 

over again. And the people in the community said it over and 

over again. That, Mr. Speaker, if they would have the chance to 

determine some of the opportunities that they could have for 

themselves where they would decide, Vanguard would have a 

facility that would remain open. But now in six months it's 

going to be closed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was called by the granddaughter of one of the 

residents in that hospital at Vanguard, and she said, I don't 

know what we're going to do with grandfather. He's 91. He's as 

alert today as he ever has been, but he can't move around. So 

what does he do? He rides around on a wheelchair. And, Mr. 

Speaker, he said: what is going to happen to me if I have to 

move. One of his children lives in Hodgeville, the other one 

lives in Calgary. So where are they going to move to? They can 

move to a community that would provide a residence for them. 

Right now they are 10, 15 miles away from their children . . . 

or he is. And if it happens to be that the hospital closes down, 

which is what these people want to have, he's going to have to 

either move to Calgary or he's going to have to move to a 

facility that is 50 and 60 miles away from where his children 

are. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the part that I don't understand. That man 

and his wife built that community. They probably even worked 

on that hospital. And now this government is going to take it 

away on him. 

 

And I say to the people in this Assembly, and to the people that 

are watching, that isn't fair to that man. That isn't fair in one 

way or another. And the people who are his family don't 

believe it's fair either. 

 

It's no different than this bunch of letters here I have from 

Smeaton. They don't believe that what you're doing is proper. 

They want to have time to consider and evaluate. 

 

I'm going to ask you this question. What have you got against 

letting those people decide where the acute care facilities 

should be? What have you got against that? Let them determine 

where those facilities should be. And what you're doing is 

you're just cutting across the board and you're saying, I'm going 

to take these out of there and I'm going to reduce the services 

so the doctor will be gone, and all of the facilities related to 

that health care are going to be gone. And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

happening over and over. I'm just using this as an example of 

what's happening across this province. And I think it's a shame. 

 

This letter from Smeaton goes on to say: 

 

 This is totally unacceptable. Further, many tourists make 

frequent use of the Nipawin 



April 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1123 

Provincial Park for camping, fishing, hiking, etc. What if 

they become ill or injured while there? It would be a couple 

of hours before an ambulance could even reach them. What 

about a car accident on the Hanson Lake Road? The same 

unacceptable length of time before medical help could be 

tendered. 

 

That's exactly what the problem is. It's no different in Smeaton; 

it's no different at Grenfell; it's no different at Whitewood; it's 

no different at Lafleche or Rockglen or Coronach or any of 

these places. And that, Mr. Speaker, is a fact. 

 

And I say to you, that the opportunity for fixing the health care 

system should be left and you should have some patience. Have 

some patience to allow the people in the province to determine 

the role that they should have, the money that should be 

allocated. They have no problem with you allocating money to 

them. They don't have a problem with that. But when you say 

that you're not going to get any more acute care bed funding 

and you say this hospital will be closed and that hospital will 

be closed and that other . . . the acute care beds in that one will 

be shut down, then, Mr. Speaker, they have a very, very serious 

concern about that. 

 

And I say to the members opposite, you are destroying, you are 

destroying something that was established over the last 50 

years and more. The people in these communities have a right 

to be a part of this province just like the people in Regina do 

and just like the people in Saskatoon, or in Swift Current or in 

Yorkton. The opportunity needs to be made available for them 

for that emergency care and that it will not be hundreds of 

miles away. 

 

This article in the Star-Phoenix goes on to say: "Fine words. As 

it turns out, they were only words." It's talking about the local 

boards having control over the global funding that was going to 

accrue to these regions. 

 

Why are they sceptical, Mr. Speaker? They are sceptical for the 

reasons that in a community with 14,000 people, in that 

community, they have five and a half beds, and those five and a 

half beds are 220 miles away from that community. If you take 

the five and a half beds that are in Herbert and drive south all 

the way to the U.S. border, there isn't a hospital in between. 

 

There are three of them on the road — on the road, Mr. 

Speaker — from Herbert through to Mankota, Saskatchewan. 

There's three hospitals on the road. And after the six months, 

and the eight months, there will be none, Mr. Speaker — none. 

 

From the South Saskatchewan River . . . and if you went across 

the river and you had Beechy and Lucky Lake and Dinsmore 

and all of that area closed, you probably could go to almost the 

middle of the southern part of Saskatchewan and drive straight 

south to the American border and pass six or seven hospitals 

that have been closed. 

And the people of the province say no, that isn't fair. That isn't 

right. Allow us the opportunity to determine. 

 

And that's why this article says: "Fine words. As it turns out, 

they were only words." It goes on to say: "The provincial 

government has pulled the rug out from under the district 

boards." 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is an understatement. Some of them feel 

threatened. Some of them are hostile about it. Some of them are 

angry. Some of them are frustrated. Some of them are 

disappointed. Some of them are disillusioned. And all of them, 

Mr. Speaker, are concerned. Every one of them is concerned 

about the kinds of things that are going on in health care — 

very, very concerned. 

 

 Money with which to pay for acute care is being taken away 

from 52 small town institutions. 

 

(1945) 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are institutions. These are places where 

individuals go. And I will use the town of Vanguard again. 

People go there and help their parents eat their dinner and 

supper. People from in the community go help their spouses 

who are in the same facilities, over and over and over again. 

And if they have to drive 50 miles one way to see them, are 

they going to go twice a day to visit them? No, Mr. Speaker. 

That's point number one. 

 

Point number two is this: those people have retired to those 

communities. They have purchased houses in order to live in 

those communities, to have the security in their old age, to have 

a place to stay when they know they're going to become ill in 

older age. And they do that over and over across this province, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what has happened, in my mind, Mr. Speaker, is that this 

government has eroded all of the confidence of those people in 

those small communities. It has just gone poof, and it's gone. 

And the concern, Mr. Speaker, is registered clear across every 

one of those communities. 

 

And then this article in the Star-Phoenix goes on to say: "So 

much for local people calling the shots." 

 

Mr. Speaker, so much for the local people doing and feeling for 

what they have as a responsibility, not only to their community 

but to the taxpayers of this province. And that is a very, very 

serious concern. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this article goes on to say, from the Star-Phoenix, 

and I quote: 

 

 In the wake of this announcement, Simard is still claiming 

local control means something. By taking away acute care 

money, the government is merely "asking" the hospitals 

and district boards to "consider a role change." 



1124 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1993 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it's a role change all right — a very, very 

serious role change in the town of Cabri, in the town of Gull 

Lake, in the town of Ponteix, in the town of Kincaid, and in the 

town of Vanguard and in the town of Mankota and in the town 

of Lafleche or Rockglen or Coronach. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it's really interesting that when you talk 

about the profile of a community, the profile of a community 

and wanting to draw business, and you have to put out this 

profile to draw a business into your community, and you say 

these are the things that I have in my community; will you 

come and invest a job-creation opportunity in Cabri, 

Saskatchewan, what will they say? What are your services? 

Yes, we have a school; yes, we have a rink; yes, we have 

recreation facilities. Do you have a health care facility? Well, 

we will till November. We will till November, Mr. Speaker. 

And what kind of a profile does that provide for that 

community to have an economic activity come to that 

community? 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is nobody that will do that. So what have 

they effectively done, Mr. Speaker? They have effectively 

squelched any opportunity for an economic development in 

that community. And then they will ask, where is the closest 

one that we can get to? Well if you go from here to Swift 

Current, from Cabri to Swift Current is 40 miles, from here to 

Leader is another 60. Oh well, that leaves that community out 

for economic development. 

 

What about the town of Mankota? What kind of economic 

commitment would come to a community like Mankota? 

Probably going south they haven't got a port of entry to go to a 

hospital across the American border. And to go north to a 

hospital — Swift Current, Gravelbourg, and Assiniboia — 80, 

90, and 125 miles away. Take your pick. Take your pick, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

That's the community's profile of itself. It's got a school, it's got 

a senior citizens' complex, but the seniors aren't going to retire 

there. Why would they retire there if they haven't got a hospital 

that they can come to where there's an acute care service 

offered? Why would they go there? 

 

And across this province, Mr. Speaker, we are slicing these 

kinds of opportunities from within the framework of people. 

 

Well it goes on to say: 

 

 If the NDP government is convinced that 52 small town 

institutions have to get out of the acute care business, it 

should say so, in so many words. Any number of studies 

have shown that Saskatchewan has far more hospital beds 

than it needs. Until now, no government, Tory or NDP, has 

had the guts to do anything about it. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, there is a reason why people haven't 

done it. And it will be proven by the Minister of Health's 

commission, when they finally have time to report — and if 

they haven't already — that this isn't going to save any money 

at all. And that's another 

issue that we have raised. You have totally disregarded the 

boards in the decisions they have made. You have mandatorily 

made decisions about cutting acute care beds across the board, 

and we're not even sure you're done yet. Probably after the 

session is over, you'll do a whole bunch more. And that has 

every person irritated, frustrated, and there are a whole lot of 

adjectives that you can't use in here. But, Mr. Speaker, the 

people are frustrated beyond words. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the local boards need to be given back the 

opportunity to make these decisions. And this Star-Phoenix 

editorial page says: 

 

 They would deserve much higher marks, however, if they 

would stop the blather about local control. Pious platitudes 

about "asking" district boards to "consider a role change" 

will ease no one's pain. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today we had an announcement by the minister 

responsible for gaming. He's going to spend $20 million on 

video lottery terminals. Well that's an economic opportunity. 

Let's just analyse this economic opportunity a little bit. Are 

they going to put it in the hotel in Cabri that is going to lose 25 

or 30 jobs in the next year in a health care facility? Are they 

going to put it in Vanguard in the hotel? The only facility and 

opportunity for any kind of outside money coming into that 

community is the hospital. Are they going to put it into that 

hotel in Vanguard? No, because he's going to be shut down. 

 

You go across the province in every one of those locations, and 

the majority of the impact will almost totally and exclusively 

close down those video lottery terminals. And what have we 

got? Oh yes, we're going to have an economic development 

opportunity. And what will it cause, Mr. Speaker? Those 

hoteliers will not even get an opportunity to open them up 

because they'll be shut down before you can even blink your 

eye. And that is exactly what is going to happen across this 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I'll just quote a paragraph from another letter that was written 

from Smeaton. 

 

 Consideration should be given to our location. Health-wise 

and community-wise, closing our hospital will be 

devastating. The inability of people to access reasonable 

health care will result in increased death among our rural 

population and the death of our rural communities. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what we've been saying, exactly 

what this caucus has said over and over and over again to you. 

Allow those communities an opportunity to rationalize their 

health care services and they will do it. It is my fundamental 

belief that they will do it and they will do it in an honourable 

way and they will do it in a practical way. 

 

And they will be even far more practical than you could ever 

be, because number one, they will be 



April 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1125 

innovative, Mr. Speaker. They will provide to that community 

an innovative health care that will supersede and outclass any 

of the opportunities that the people opposite have and would 

consider as ideas to make the health care system work. And, 

Mr. Speaker, on top of that, on top of that, the people there 

recognize that you need to save money. And they would be as 

frugal, and I believe more frugal, than the government 

opposite. 

 

An Hon. Member: — No. 

 

Mr. Martens: — And the member opposite says no. Well I 

believe they will. I believe, I will believe, Mr. Speaker, as sure 

as I stand here, that they have a far more sensitivity, far greater 

sensitivity to any of the things that relate to fiscal planning than 

many of the members here, and especially on the government 

side of the House. 

 

I want to point out too, Mr. Speaker, that over and over again 

people have written us letters supporting an opportunity for 

having these local boards make the decision. This letter comes 

from Cabri. It's addressed to the Minister of Health as well as 

to myself. 

 

 While understanding the difficulty of your recent decisions 

to withdraw acute care funding to rural hospitals, I question 

the manner that you are going about it. 

 

 You proposed health care boards be formed and that these 

boards make the decision on what were priorities within 

these regions. You have now made monumental decisions 

for those boards, according to your agenda and not the 

people within the communities affected. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is in a nutshell exactly what the people of 

the province have been saying over and over and over again. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think — I believe this — economically 

you're making one of the most foolish mistakes you could ever 

make. And that is that you are denying an opportunity for the 

people in the province of Saskatchewan to be innovative — 

innovative in their health care. You think that you have the 

mandate on intelligence, and the people in the province of 

Saskatchewan, in these health care boards, have absolutely 

none. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is the reason what irritates these people over 

and over and over again. And, Mr. Speaker, these people thrive 

on innovation. If you went to the town of Beechy, Mr. Speaker, 

you would find some very, very innovative men and women in 

rural communities, trying to survive on $2 wheat. And that's a 

very tough thing to do. 

 

And that innovation doesn't come from using the health care 

service. That innovation comes from being involved in painting 

and in all kinds of artwork. It's marketing the opportunity that 

those people take to deliver a community-based cultural kind of 

a focus. And these people market that. And now what you're 

doing is you're taking that opportunity for them to be 

innovative away. 

The second thing that you're doing — not you, Mr. Speaker, 

the people in the government — the people in the government 

are taking the opportunity away for people to have volunteers 

come and help. Mr. Speaker, the voluntary work . . . I met a 

lady the other day. She said, are those people in Regina going 

to take the opportunity to look after my mother? They don't 

know her. They will help to some extent but they will not 

provide the same care as individuals in this community provide 

for my mother or my father, and they will not do that. Why? 

Because they don't even know that it's my mother that's in the 

hospital in Saskatoon or Regina or Moose Jaw or Yorkton or in 

Prince Albert. 

 

So you've done two things already. You've taken away an 

opportunity to be innovative. You've taken the opportunity 

away to have volunteers do work that normally will accrue to 

health care givers in a salaried position. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, I want to go on to another point that 

has concerned us. And I really am concerned about this one. 

And that is when you have the various agencies in a health care 

district, and I'll name some of them. You have an ambulance 

service. You have home care. You have acute care. You have 

special care homes with level 3 and 4 and then you have the 

senior citizens' home which are level 1 and 2, then you have the 

mental health groups, you have the physiotherapy. All of these 

things. 

 

(2000) 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you get a community that has a health care 

program that has a budget of $50 million and that health care 

service is going to be provided for that $50 million, how much 

are they going to pay a chief executive officer to manage that 

office so that these funds can be spent in the right location? 

 

That individual will not come there for less than $100,000. He 

will not, Mr. Speaker. And you won't find one that'll come and 

administer $100 million in an area in as broad a base of 

perspective as this is going to be for less than $100,000. 

 

And then what you're going to have to have, Mr. Speaker, is 

chains of command. One person is going to be responsible for 

the acute care, one person will be responsible for diagnostic 

services, one person will be responsible for level 4 care, and all 

the way through. And how much, Mr. Speaker, are these 

people going to work for? 

 

Well let's say it's half of what your chief executive officer 

would work for — and I think that that would be low. Let's say 

he's going to work for $50,000 a year. And if you have five to 

ten of these kinds of . . . well you could call them 

vice-presidents of this health care district. If you have these 

kinds of people drawing these kinds of wages then you need a 

whole bunch of clerical staff that are going to do the phoning 

and the paperwork that is required to provide the necessary 

work to get the funding and 



1126 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1993 

provide the funding and make sure the audits are done and all 

of those kinds of things. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the whole cost of this new health program 

is placed on the people of Saskatchewan, in my view, it is 

going to end up costing more. It is going to end up costing 

more because you know what? The majority of the work done 

by the steering committees, at least in my part of the province, 

has been done for nothing. It has been done for nothing. 

 

And what I mean by that is the people didn't get any pay. They 

did it because they wanted to have an involvement in the 

communities and they wanted to have an involvement . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Cline: — I'd like to beg leave to introduce a guest. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With thanks to the 

member for Morse, I see in your gallery is Mr. Mark 

Thompson who is a member of the council of the city of 

Saskatoon and has been for some years. And also, I believe is 

the chair of the Saskatchewan assessment management 

authority. And I'm sure that all members would like to join 

with me in welcoming Mr. Thompson to our proceeding here 

tonight. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, with leave I would also 

like to welcome Mr. Thompson here tonight. We've had . . . 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Thompson is also chairman of the 

intercommunity cooperation task force and quality of life 

advisory committee for the minister. We've had meetings 

today. And I would also like the Assembly to welcome Mr. 

Thompson to the proceedings tonight. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 3 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Welcome here, 

Mark. I appreciate you coming. And I've met . . . in fact, I sat 

together with him one day at a basketball game in Saskatoon 

when we both had to open the 

facility there and I remember that very well. I want to extend 

my welcome, too . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Actually, the 

member opposite raised a point. It wasn't a health care facility, 

Mr. Member, it was a recreation facility. And it happened to be 

the Saskatchewan Place. 

 

I want to point out to members here one other thing that is very 

important about fiscal management and the responsibilities that 

are here. I mentioned, Mr. Speaker, the innovative opportunity 

that is being avoided by this government saying — on a 

sweeping mandate — saying, poof, here it goes. We won't 

allow you to think about how you're going to regulate what's 

going on in your community. 

 

It became evident to me, Mr. Speaker, in the small town of 

Cabri. There is a lady there who's the director of nursing and 

her name is Eileen Jackson. She's an English lady. She's a lady 

who has a lot of sparkle, a lot of imagination, a lot of creativity. 

And what they do, Mr. Speaker, in that hospital? They share 

the workload. When the nurses aren't doing things that relate to 

health care, they're washing the sheets. If they've got time off, 

they're washing the sheets. In what way and for what purpose, 

Mr. Speaker? It's so that their community has a way of saving 

money and delivering health care in that community that is 

worthwhile. And what they have done, Mr. Speaker, is they 

have lowered the cost of patient care in that community by a 

significant amount of money. And that, Mr. Speaker, that 

innovative attitude, you just kicked in the teeth. You men and 

women opposite have just thrown that in her face. 

 

And she says to me, why did I do that? Why did I put my 

nurses into this position and say, you clean the floor and you 

mop the floor and you look after the laundry? And that's what 

their responsibility has been, and that's been like that for the 

last 10 years, Mr. Speaker. They have done that. Why? They 

have done that to lower the costs in that hospital. And if you 

would go across the rural part of this province, you would even 

see people come into that facility and do it on a voluntary basis. 

 

But have you ever taken the time to have any creative thought 

in your head about how that is going to impact in rural 

Saskatchewan, what you're doing to these people? And why 

they were so angry here yesterday is because you threw this in 

their face. Their volunteerism and their attitude of giving to 

their community, you threw it in their face. And, Mr. Speaker, 

these people will not forget that. They will not forget that. 

 

And as I walked up the steps here I asked these young men and 

women who were standing on the steps here, I asked them, are 

you going to ever forget this day? And they said, no. What you 

have done to the spirit of Saskatchewan is you have thrown this 

in their face and they will not forget it. They will not forget it, 

Mr. Speaker, and that's why the editorial in the Star-Phoenix 

was exactly right — "what a farce". "Stop blather about local 

control". 



April 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1127 

You have totally destroyed initiative in their hospitals, 

innovative initiative that could have made an opportunity for 

you to take a hold of this health care problem in an economic 

way and said, have you got a solution? Have you got a way to 

address this? And they would have said in spades, yes we do. 

In fact they did. 

 

And now what you've done, Mr. Speaker, what they have done 

is they have thrown it in their face. And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

why this side of the House has such a deep-felt resentment for 

what the government is doing in relation to this Bill. You are 

deciding the fate, you are deciding the fate of hospitals that 

people laboured for. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, and 

every community will be exactly like the communities in my 

constituency. And I'll use Cabri as an example again. The 

people two years ago decided . . . or three years ago, decided 

they were going to build a hospital. Why? Because the hospital 

that they had there was crumbling and falling down and going 

to pieces. So they decided to build a hospital, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in 1988 there was probably not a drier place in the whole 

province of Saskatchewan than Cabri or those communities 

west of Cabri. And yet the farming public and the public there 

decided, we will make an investment in this hospital to deliver 

health care. And, Mr. Speaker, they put over a million dollars 

of their own money into that hospital. The municipalities, the 

towns, collected the money and put the money into that 

hospital. And now you're slapping them in the face with it. 

 

They said, give us an opportunity and we'll take it. The 

measurement was a million-plus from that community that 

went into it. And now, Mr. Speaker, this government is 

throwing it in their face, throwing it in their face, Mr. Speaker. 

And I want to say to the members opposite, they will not 

forget. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why this side of the House 

has continuously objected to the kinds of measures that they've 

been taking on that side. And that is why, Mr. Speaker, on this 

side of the House we have said over and over again, give us 

time, give us time, give us time. But no, they can't. In fact the 

hurrier they go the behinder they get. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why this opposition says, 

stop, be patient, allow the people who have worked on the 

health care facilities for the last 30 years establish an 

opportunity to be innovative and reconstruct the opportunity in 

a health care system that will deal with what they have to do 

with in the next 30 years. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is a very, very emotional focus for me 

personally, and for my family, and for the people in my 

constituency. People have worked tirelessly to have a health 

care system they could be proud of. People have worked 

tirelessly to provide a health care service that would meet the 

needs of the people. In fact I'm going to relate this story to this 

Assembly, and I'm sure this man wouldn't mind. And I will 

conclude with that, Mr. Speaker. 

Now this gentleman is very, very seriously ill. He's had a heart 

condition for a long time. His family, or he personally, has 

served on the school division in the Swift Current rural school 

division for at least 20 years. He gave of himself all that he 

could. And this Mr. Williams has written articles in the 

Grainews, on matters from the left. 

 

And he has, over and over and over again, said health care is 

more important than anything else but we have to be 

reasonable, rational. In fact when he was on the school board 

he closed his own school to save money for the school division. 

And you know what? He was re-elected in that school division. 

He was re-elected because he had concern for his economics, 

he had concern for the welfare in his community. 

 

But I want to tell the members opposite what his reaction to 

this is, Mr. Speaker. I want to tell you what his reaction to this 

is. He moved into the town of Cabri so he could be close to the 

hospital. He bought a house in Cabri so he could be close to the 

hospital. His wife has worked for this provincial government 

for many, many, many years; in fact was the president of home 

care for the whole of the province, and understands health care. 

She got up at the meeting on Monday night in Cabri and she 

said, this is one of the worst decisions this government has ever 

made. This is the worst decision any government has made. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the peace of mind I had by the fact that I 

had my husband a block away from the hospital is the reason 

why we moved to this community and now what's going to 

happen? They're going to be uprooted again and they have to 

move to another community. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, he votes for those people over there. And 

that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why this is not right. This is 

why this is an emotional experience in my constituency, 

because these people have built these opportunities. They have 

worked hard to preserve them and now you're taking it away. 

And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that is an example of the kinds of 

things that people in the province will remember for 

generations to come, about how you took away their health 

care opportunities. 

 

(2015) 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, I will defend that as long as I possibly 

can, the opportunity for people to have the right to access to 

health care. And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I will vigorously and 

adamantly oppose any of the things that they do in relation to 

this, in any way, shape, or form because I don't believe it's 

driven by money. I believe it's driven by power and a hunger 

for power in more ways than one. 

 

And I resent that. And I think it's wrong, Mr. Speaker, and it's 

wrong for these people to have blamed the deficit for it because 

you're not cutting expenses and you won't be cutting expenses. 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I will be voting against this. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 

opportunity to join my legislative colleagues in addressing Bill 

3, An Act respecting 



1128 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1993 

Health Districts. 

 

Earlier this year, Mr. Speaker, I travelled to the south-west part 

of the province to hear the concerns of people in communities 

like Gull Lake, Shaunavon, Eastend, Maple Creek, and Climax. 

Across that area several issues arose in discussions as a 

common concern. One of those issues was health care. The 

residents of that area, many of whom offer hundreds of hours 

to their community on health care and hospital boards, were 

quite concerned with the government's failure to introduce a 

Bill to allow for the creation of health districts. 

 

These people were worried that they would be left without 

clear rules, and confusion would reign. The government finally 

fulfilled its promise to provide clear rules, they state, through 

this Bill. The government fulfilled its promise but in doing so 

broke many, many others. Mr. Speaker, while I support the 

idea of a more regionalized and effective health system, I do 

not support the hard-nosed, uncaring, and Draconian tactics 

used to put this Bill through. I do not support the uncaring 

means used to push time lines on communities. I do not support 

the government's, it's my way right away, or no way, approach 

to health care and to governing. 

 

Last year, in her White Paper on health, the minister constantly 

argued that she wanted to create health districts that would 

allow greater community involvement. I emphasize "greater 

community involvement", Mr. Speaker. After analysing the 

Bill, I fail to see how this government is cooperative. I fail to 

see how the government is concerned about communities. 

Within this Bill the minister is asking for the power to create 

boards arbitrarily so that her regional vision of health care can 

become a reality. Where's the community involvement in 

having a minister in her Regina marble palace telling the 

people from the top that they will have a board? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister clearly states when asking for those 

powers that local people can have it one of two ways: they can 

have a board appointed by her or they can have one appointed 

by themselves that won't have a great deal of say anyway. It 

won't have a great deal of say because the minister has already 

set the targets, already determined the funding, already made 

the important decisions that affect health care. 

 

Local people can choose to create their own boards or they can 

let her appoint the faithful to serve for them. Either way, local 

people are not going to get the input, the control, or the 

influence that they deserve. They're not going to get the input, 

the control, or the influence envisaged by the Murray 

Commission on health care. They are not going to get the 

community involvement, the true community involvement that 

they believe the minister was promising them when she 

released her White Paper last year. So much for 

community-based system of health care, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As I pointed out earlier this week, the minister and the 

members opposite throw principles like cooperation out of the 

window as soon as it suits them. The rest of 

the time, they preach them, Mr. Speaker. I fail to see the 

political integrity in that. 

 

While I have no problem with districts boards in principle, 

some great problems remain. This Bill creates districts by 

force. It does not guarantee that those district boards will be 

given adequate responsibility. Boards may be even be elected. 

That doesn't, however, guarantee that they will be able to be 

responsive. It doesn't guarantee they'll be responsive because 

while this government wants to set boards up to take the flak, 

they don't want to give them the responsibility to make the big 

decisions that they, as local representatives, feel they need to 

make. 

 

What sort of community-based health system is that, Mr. 

Speaker? It appears that the minister only focuses on 

community when it serves her purposes. Communities are 

useful to take the political heat, but they are not important 

enough to be trusted to make the responsible decisions. Sadly, 

Mr. Speaker, this is but one more example of how Big Brother 

still thinks he knows best. 

 

An indication of how the minister's community-based health 

system has its limits is found in the powers granted to the 

minister through this Bill. Like other pieces of legislation put 

forward by this government, this Bill allows for measures 

which appear heavy-handed. 

 

Clause 3 of this Bill, in particular, sets out the powers which 

the government will be allowed to use in setting up a district 

health board. That power appears to be only limited by what is 

laid out in clause 4. Without delving too much into particular 

clause numbers, Mr. Speaker, these clauses allow the 

government the power to create boards by order in council. 

 

Before issuing an order in council this Bill compels the 

minister to consult. It doesn't leave me feeling particularly 

secure, Mr. Speaker. Well that seems to be a very laudable 

concept. This Bill, like so many others, allows the minister to 

openly interpret what is, and I quote: reasonable amount of 

consultation. 

 

There are one too many examples of how this particular 

government avoids consulting. Last year, Mr. Speaker, despite 

promising to consult before putting forward any tax increases, 

this government went on one of the largest tax grabs ever 

without consulting. It came as a surprise to many that they 

would no longer be eligible for the Saskatchewan Pension Plan. 

It came as a surprise to many that they would not receive 

coverage under the drug plan or be able to rely on programs 

like FeedGAP (feed grain adjustment program). 

 

Mr. Speaker, as bad as that record is, this government's greatest 

failure to consult is what we've been observing over the last 

many, many weeks, and that is on health care. 

 

In a letter to her fellow NDP (New Democratic Party) 

members, the Minister of Health writes, and I quote: 



April 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1129 

The changes coming in health will be implemented with 

extreme care and concern for the patients, the employees, 

and the communities most directly affected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister showed so much care for the 

communities affected that she decided to tell 52 of them that 

they would not have acute care funding after October 1 before 

boards were ever given a chance to finish their own needs 

assessments. 

 

The NDP say they want community involvement, that they care 

for communities, and yet they go ahead and change the shape 

of the playing-field and the rules without notice, without 

consultation. That is not cooperation, that is not caring about 

communities. 

 

Now our rural communities are telling us that they want more 

time. They want more time to finish their own needs 

assessments. But the minister introduced her bed targets right 

away, without notice, before many of the boards she is 

proposing were ever beyond the planning stages. Mr. Speaker, 

this is not consultation and that certainly is not showing that 

they care, let alone, and I quote again: "extreme care." 

 

Mr. Speaker, how can anyone believe the Minister of Health 

will, and I quote again: "reasonably consult"? How can we 

believe that she will show extreme care for communities and 

the employees? 

 

Just last week I received a letter from nurses saying that they 

wanted to see the government's plans, plans embodied in this 

Bill today, placed on hold — placed on hold until some 

reasonable plan was in place to decide how lay-offs will be 

handled within districts, as to how job losses could be reduced. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how can the minister claim to be showing care 

and concern, let alone extreme care and concern for people, 

when she is putting in place a plan that will result in 

approximately 700 lay-offs province wide, when there is not 

reasonable substantive job creation or retraining strategy to 

retain these people in communities or even in our province? No 

job creation or retraining strategy that could keep people in 

rural areas; keep that second income in families that is the 

difference between losing the farm or not. 

 

Just yesterday I met with one woman who told me that her 

son's university education is dependent upon whether or not 

she's able to keep her nursing job. If she loses it her son will 

not be able to return to school next year. And even if he could 

this family would have to deal with a youth unemployment rate 

that is twice the norm and student loan and job-creation 

programs that this government's slashed into an endless pit. 

 

A young person wrote to me yesterday and said, I quote: 

 

 My mom works at the Vanguard Union Hospital. Because of 

the closing of rural 

hospitals she has lost her job as of September 30, 1993. 

Without mom's hospital income, we will only have the farm 

income. And as you know, this is impossible for a family of 

five to live on. 

 

She continues to tell the Minister of Health, Mr. Speaker, and I 

quote: 

 

 I really hope you (referring to the Minister of Health) will 

rethink your plans to better suit the people of rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And she ends by saying that the Minister of Health's plans will, 

and I quote again: ". . . finish off most of our small 

communities." 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I fail to see how the minister consulted on 

this one. She didn't tell this family that they would lose some 

income. She didn't tell them that they would be losing services. 

She didn't tell the nurses' unions they and other health 

care-givers would lose jobs, up to 700 of them. 

 

What is the hurry, I ask. What is the hurry in all of this? And 

while I find it regrettable that the previous administration did 

run up debt and often considered irresponsibly, in many cases 

did use hospitals as a political plum, this government is 

showing that it is absolutely no better, and in some instances 

worse. With a self-righteous kind of attitude about being the 

people to carry the banner of medicare, this is just almost too 

much to attempt to swallow. Why should the government be in 

such a hurry — such a hurry when it hasn't even laid out a 

good, solid plan to alleviate job loss from these changes, to 

help families like the ones who have written to me. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's as if someone has come up to me and told me 

that they're going to take my car away but oh, don't worry 

about it, we'll guarantee you that you'll make it to work every 

day. They'll take away my vehicle without telling me exactly 

how they are going to be getting me to work. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I'll give up my ride to work through a dubious 

proposal like that about as quickly as the people in rural 

communities are about willing to give up their rural services. 

They don't want to give them up until they know the 

alternatives, and they deserve to know the alternatives. 

 

I raised in this House the other day, Mr. Speaker, the fact that a 

very laudable thing happened with institutionalized care in this 

province in North Battleford and in Weyburn many years ago. 

With a swipe of the pen, the New Democratic Party of 

Saskatchewan deinstitutionalized people who had been, in 

many cases, there for more than 30 years. But what they did 

not do, and what people will tell you even today, they did not 

put in place the kind of community-based services these people 

required in order to be able to cope. Very few people disagreed 

with the concept of deinstitutionalization. Most people 

supported it wholeheartedly. What they did not agree with was 

turning people out into never-never land. 



1130 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1993 

This is precisely what's happening tonight. It's precisely what's 

happening in our province now with the changes to health care. 

There are not things that are being put in place to give people 

the sense of security, and people are not being involved in the 

process, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The minister keeps telling everyone: trust me; trust my 

government; you'll get the health care you need. And given 

their total record to date in fulfilling their promise to consult 

people, it is understandable why people wouldn't be willing to 

give up their hospitals until they know what's going to replace 

them. 

 

Earlier, Mr. Speaker, I referred to the minister's letter to her 

fellow New Democrats on her health care plan which is 

embodied much in part in this Bill that we see tonight. In her 

letter the minister tells everyone that small rural hospitals will 

close and will be replaced or converted to, and I quote, "health 

centres". Mr. Speaker, the minister claims, and I quote directly 

from her letter: 

 

 Health centres can provide a wide range of services, 

including physician services, either full-time or visiting, 

therapy or other visiting services, 24-hour on-call nursing 

or health response lines, access to ambulance or other 

emergency services, needed social services, self-help 

groups, counselling, and health education. 

 

(2030) 

 

In her comments, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health states 

that health centres can provide — she says "can", Mr. Speaker. 

People in towns like Birch Hills and Mankota, Eston, 

Bengough, and others, they don't want to know what wellness 

centres or health centres can provide — they need to know 

what they will provide and nothing short of it. 

 

Today the minister is asking this House to make major 

changes. She's asking people to give up hospitals in favour of 

wellness centres without telling them what services these 

health centres will provide. 

 

Why should people accept this? Why should they? Why should 

they accept until they know? Why should they accept a 

wellness centre when there is no model as to how one will 

work in a rural area? Why should Saskatchewan people accept 

the idea of a district, being forced into one by August 17, 

without knowing how they will work? 

 

These people want to be part of the process of change. The 

minister appears to want time to lay out her plans because she 

certainly hasn't done so yet. People are telling me that if the 

minister wants to take her time telling everyone what the 

wellness centre and health district era is all about, then they 

deserve just as much time to come to terms with it, to decide on 

a local level just what services they wish to offer. 

 

In Eston last week, Mr. Speaker, the people made an important 

comment to the Minister of Health. I took a 

four-hour detour from the legislature that night and landed in 

Eston to listen to what people had to say. 

 

She was told, like so many other people have told her, but she 

has not heard. The people mentioned that even though the 

minister promises to upgrade ambulance and emergency 

services before the hospital closes, this won't be possible. 

That's what they told her. It won't be possible because there's 

not enough time. There aren't enough paramedics. They can't 

train the emergency medical technicians fast enough. And 

worst of all, Mr. Speaker, the government hasn't given them 

any idea what upgraded ambulance and emergency services 

they will be able to afford under these new districts. 

 

Without knowing these things, people are afraid. They are 

afraid and with good reason. Without knowing these things, 

that people affected by this particular Bill have a right to ask 

for time. Without letting people know what is going to happen 

to them, how can the members opposite, the Minister of Health, 

sit back and dare to claim, and I quote again the Minister of 

Health ". . . is going to change the health care system with great 

care and great sensitivity." 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I was attending that meeting in Eston last 

week, there were 1,500 people present. And one gentleman 

arose and he said, Madam Minister, we have over a million 

dollars that we were making a decision about investing in 

improvements to our Bible college. We've been thinking about 

this for some time. Should we go to Alberta? Should we stay 

here and invest this in Eston? Two hundred young people 

going to the Bible college, more than $1 million being invested 

in improving this particular Bible college. 

 

And that gentleman rose and he asked the Minister of Health, 

what do we now tell all of the families of these 200 young 

people from all across the country who are going to come to 

this Bible college. Do we now write them and say, oops, we 

don't have a hospital any more, we don't know what kind of 

care we can provide your children in terms of health care 

services? He wanted to know, and they had a right to know this 

when they were making those kinds of decisions about 

investment and in terms of the best interests of those young 

people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do not believe that there is evidence of good 

consultation. We have to ask what kind of consultation has 

gone on. What kind of record is there really of cooperation? 

What sort of compassion has there truly been in this kind of 

decision making? I would say very poor. It leads me to 

seriously doubt whether the minister will use the powers in this 

particular Bill wisely and prudently. Will she consult with 

communities adequately so that they can have the arrangements 

that they require? 

 

After reading further through this Bill, I notice that the 

government gave the minister the power to automatically force 

union hospitals and ambulance boards into agreements within 

120 days. Well I understand the government wants to 

encourage these different groups to make agreements before 

entering 



April 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1131 

into a board. Where was 190 days arrived at, a mere 120-day 

deadline, and how do we know that that is enough? 

 

The Bill allows for elections. It also allows the minister to 

appoint board members. Even when boards are elected, the 

minister is asking for the power to appoint an administrator to 

oversee the operation of the health district. The minister is not 

only asking this Assembly for the power to arbitrarily appoint 

an administrator, or what could be by some considered a 

temporary dictator, but the power to add board members. 

 

This raises a question, Mr. Speaker, of whether the government 

intends to appoint additional members to boards whenever it 

simply can't get its way. Is that the cooperation and community 

control that the Minister of Health boasts is in the wellness 

plan? If the wellness plan is so cooperative and so community 

oriented, why would the minister need such pervasive powers 

to appoint members? 

 

Del Robertson, the president of the Saskatchewan Chamber of 

Commerce, raised an excellent point on the minister's health 

reforms. Mr. Robertson states, and I quote: 

 

 Biting the bullet on rural hospital funding may have been 

made . . . easier had the government granted rural areas 

more autonomy so they could play out their own futures . . . 

we've got a cost structure dictated in Regina and a delivery 

system dictated in Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the president of the Saskatchewan chamber raises 

a good point. And the member from Regina Elphinstone talks 

about the amount of time we've spent in this legislature trying 

to discuss this, Mr. Speaker. I find that rather curious given that 

the member is probably the person who should be given the 

award for ways of being able to use tactics in this legislature, 

when he was in opposition, for delaying. 

 

And as well, I think that it should be pointed out that almost 19 

months have gone by since this government was elected. If it 

were so interested in being able to bring in health care reform 

and allow people time to adjust they should have started sooner 

and truly had people participate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the president of the Saskatchewan chamber says 

that he wants what we all want — more value for our health 

dollar and good quality care for all. 

 

He believes the province should have set standards and let the 

communities decide what they need, not the government. What 

they need. In his remarks he questions this government's 

commitment to cooperation, and he does so with good reason. 

The president of the chamber, Mr. Robertson, goes even 

further. 

 

He states, and I quote that we should "have a summit to say 

what we can do for rural Saskatchewan . . . " 

And the reporter summarized by saying, "he calls it a crime 

that nothing along those lines is in the works". 

 

A crime, Mr. Speaker. We are talking about the lives of people 

who have worked their whole life, intergenerationally, to 

determine their ends; to determine the kind of communities 

they wish to live in. 

 

And now we have dictating from above, complete changes to 

their way of life. It is one thing for government to ignore the 

principle of cooperation, of community, of consultation, that 

they preach on this issue endlessly, but they must not forget 

just how much this decision affects real people. 

 

It appeared last year that the government had abandoned rural 

people when it gutted the GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) program without consultation and cut the Agriculture 

budget so significantly it was a greater chunk than any other 

part of the budget. 

 

This year they added to that, with an $80 million cut to the 

Department of Agriculture and Food. And now they want to 

save $20 million by closing or converting hospitals and setting 

up health districts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government may have an agenda and a vision 

for Saskatchewan, but it does not appear to include rural 

Saskatchewan. They say they're living up to the wishes of 

boards who now want clear directions. They might be doing 

that but they are hurting one group of people significantly — 

rural people who are not presently in the midst of a crisis, but 

have been fighting crisis after crisis after crisis for the last 10 

years in this province. These people are strong, they are caring, 

and if one gives them a chance, they will beat the odds again 

by bringing about their own change. Rural people want to 

reform their health system. They want to as much as anyone 

else, but they want assurances based on evidence that they will 

have quality of care. 

 

They want and they deserve these kinds of guarantees. They 

want guarantees that their communities and their families can 

look forward to jobs, just like all of us want — a good quality 

of life. And they want what the rest of us want as well in terms 

of a future for their children. And they want those opportunities 

to be near or in their homes. 

 

Above all, Mr. Speaker, these people, and many urban people 

like them, want time. They want and deserve time to discuss 

the changes, to control them in their favour, and to influence 

them as much as they can. They want to be empowered people, 

Mr. Speaker. They want the time to make certain that loved 

ones are not forced to move away to get the care that they need. 

They want time to ensure that in the event of an emergency, 

they will receive the care that they require. And that is not too 

much to ask — that is not too much to ask. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while the process and the means used to get this 

Bill and the health care plan it embodies in 



1132 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1993 

place troubles me, so too do some of its details. I'm very 

concerned about the regulatory powers laid out under this Bill. 

I find it unusual that the government would choose to lay out 

the means for how the new health districts will be elected 

through regulation. 

 

All too often governments are turning to regulation to get done 

what they want done. I find it unusual that the government 

would choose to use regulations to lay out how elections 

should be held, and just as importantly, who should pay for 

them. I wonder if the members opposite would feel so 

comfortable if the provincial election rules with which they 

deal to get themselves into office were subject to the whims of 

regulatory change. 

 

Mr. Speaker, apart from the powers which the minister asks 

under this Bill, there are some other fundamental problems 

which arise, fundamental questions. Mr. Speaker, after hearing 

the minister comment many times in this House, I remain 

concerned about most of the details. I'm concerned that local 

health boards have no idea how capital funding will be taken 

care of in the future. Five to six years ago, capital funding was 

based upon depreciation, and after that it was converted to 

grants. 

 

Now that grants are gone, how will districts be given money 

for capital funding? And who, Mr. Speaker, will determine 

which districts get that funding? These are matters that are 

essential to the operation of any health care district, but those 

in place have no idea what's going to happen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are some questions about how districts will 

deal with debts for capital projects. When boards are created in 

areas where acute care hospitals must be converted to other 

facilities, who'll decide how debts from capital projects are 

settled? What if, Mr. Speaker, there are two communities 

owing money for capital projects but one of the capital projects 

for which money is owed is closed as an acute care facility? 

Should the community whose hospital is closed still be obliged 

to pay for the cost of the debenture, even if the hospital they 

pay for is either closed or converted for some other use? 

 

Like, why don't these people who are making these decisions 

for people provide some answers? Why don't they do 

something to alleviate the concerns and the questions that 

people have, that are very, very valid? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members to my right have raised the issue of 

funding. And it is indeed an important issue in this Bill. 

 

I want to say however, that given the comments that have been 

coming forward, not only in the program on W5 the other 

night, but in other ways, they too should have been concerned 

about funding many years ago and perhaps we may not have so 

little to go around today. 

 

(2045) 

None the less, Mr. Speaker, the minister has not clarified the 

funding issue properly in this Bill. I'm worried about it and its 

effects on the equality of service between districts. This Bill 

allows district boards to enter into voluntary funding 

arrangements with municipalities falling within their 

boundaries. 

 

In the past, municipalities had no choice but to levy taxes. Now 

they can voluntarily provide monies to boards. When boards 

covered one, maybe even two municipalities, that wasn't a 

problem. The new board in Moose Jaw, for example, has 

boundaries that cover one city, 25 towns and villages and up to 

18 rural municipalities. Arranging voluntary financing under 

this situation would be difficult to impossible, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It goes without mentioning that the property tax base in 

municipalities is already one of the most saturated around. It's 

incapable of supporting any more activity. 

 

The idea of voluntary funding creates yet another problem. We 

all know, Mr. Speaker, that some areas are more affluent than 

others. That inevitably means some districts in this province 

will be far better off because they can get voluntary funding 

while those in poorer rural areas will be left out in the cold. 

 

People in those areas will receive a lower standard of care as a 

result. Is that what we want for our province? A two-tiered 

health system where less affluent rural areas receive health 

services that are at times worse than those in their urban 

counterparts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are just some of my concerns, some of the 

concerns of the people from across this province that have 

written and spoken to me on this issue. And just so the member 

from Elphinstone knows, I have actually received more letters 

on this topic than anything else that I've received in four years 

of being Leader of the Liberal Party in Saskatchewan. And the 

stack is growing — the stack is growing. 

 

These are not people who are simply from one political 

affiliation, these are the people of Saskatchewan who actually 

care about what's happening to their lives. And as people jest in 

this room and this Assembly, I think that people should keep 

that under consideration; really, I do. 

 

Well these issues need to be addressed. The problem we have, 

Mr. Speaker, is that this government and the minister 

responsible don't want to budge. They want to get their way 

even if it means gagging the opposition, as they have, and in 

turn gagging the people of this province. Even if it means that 

they complained about the same things they complained about 

endlessly when they were sitting on the opposition benches. 

 

I think one of the things to keep in mind is that we're talking 

about people here, Mr. Speaker, who are now in government in 

this province who like to rewrite history. They like to talk 

about medicare as something that just happened. That in 1962 

it just happened to occur, Mr. Speaker. What they don't talk 

about are all 



April 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1133 

the precursors to medicare in our province. The fact that health 

regions were set up beforehand. The fact that hospital 

insurance was established beforehand. That time was taken to 

ensure that this could be generalized across the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Unfortunately, what happens when people are members of one 

particular political party, they're brainwashed so much they 

don't want to get the real version. They like to write their own 

version. It's an unfortunate thing because a lot of what people 

state . . . and in fact the Premier of this province, Mr. Speaker, 

talked about how I would implement deterrent fees. 

 

That's a very, very interesting thing, Mr. Speaker, given that in 

the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix during the election campaign, the 

only person on record for saying that she would not implement 

deterrent fees was me. And each member of the New 

Democratic Party, who was interviewed by the same 

Star-Phoenix interviewer — by the same Star-Phoenix 

interviewer — Mr. Speaker, everyone of them was too gutless 

to even be quoted. So that part of the column stayed empty, for 

the New Democratic members, Mr. Speaker. Isn't that 

courageous? 

 

At least I looked into health care, Mr. Speaker, and I'm on 

record for saying that the research shows that deterrent fees are 

not valuable. Premiums are a different consideration and 

should be used as a last resort. 

 

But I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, I have never stated — nor will I 

ever state — that we would bring in deterrent fees. Unlike the 

way that the Premier has indicated falsely that the Liberal Party 

would. 

 

It is a very, very interesting thing, Mr. Speaker . . . well the 

member from Regina Elphinstone raises the issue of Ross 

Thatcher. Very curious thing. A gentleman who was able to 

balance the books in seven solid years of recession, which it 

would have taken a moron not to be able to balance the books 

in the '70s when we had all the money from gas and oil and 

potash. Oh, yes. And you had all sorts of monies, that you 

complain about the megaprojects of the administration of the 

Conservatives, sir . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I would like to just remind the 

member from Saskatoon Greystone not to get into a debate 

with a member from the floor. Direct your questions to the 

Speaker. And I also would like to ask the Government House 

Leader not to interrupt. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker I did indeed, I 

did require that reminder, Mr. Speaker. I was truly getting on a 

roll. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to remind you of Mr. Thatcher's 

words. I would like to remind you of Mr. Thatcher's words 

some 20 years ago — just over 20 years ago — when he said 

that it was the New Democratic Party who was teaching the 

people of this province that health care was free, that it cost 

people nothing. And if something was not done, in 20 years 

medicare would be threatened. And we stand here in 

this province today, and in this Assembly today, Mr. Speaker, 

and they tell us that medicare is threatened. So I would suggest 

perhaps if they'd listened a little more carefully to Mr. Thatcher 

we wouldn't be in this bind today. 

 

The people of this province deserve a lot better than what 

they're getting, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan people from one 

corner of this province to the other, they're strong, they're 

caring, they're intelligent, and they're committed people, and 

they deserve answers. 

 

They deserve the assurances they ask for based on evidence. 

They deserve the right to be heard. This government has not 

bothered to listen. They have not bothered to listen to people, 

listen so that they can hear not only the words but the feelings 

of the people of this province on this issue. 

 

It has thrown many valued principles like cooperation, like 

community, like consultation, out the window, because they 

simply want to get their way. And all people are asking for is 

time. Saskatchewan people are willing to change but they want 

time and they want the responsibility to make decisions for 

themselves rather than have them made by big sister. That's 

what they want. 

 

And it's interesting, Mr. Speaker, that people in this Assembly 

raise the issue about closing hospitals. During the campaign 

there was one time that CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation) radio misquoted me and they came back on the 

air and they corrected it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

At no time did I say that I would close hospitals. At no time did 

I say it and it is not on record, but of course the members of the 

opposition at that time, government members, took out one 

page ads in rural newspapers all across the province, even 

though that one thing was corrected. 

 

And it's a very, very interesting thing, Mr. Speaker, that one of 

the things I did talk about, which I can say that the Liberal 

Party had the courage to do, was that we required health care 

reform and that we would not simply build hospitals where 

people said they wanted one, and hospitals and health care was 

not going to be used as a form of economic development and 

merely job creation. 

 

And in fact, there's something very fitting about the fact that 

this New Democratic Party should have to try to resolve some 

of this problem. It's not just the hospitals that were built in the 

last nine and a half years that are the problem. It's the fact that 

no economic development strategies were put in place in rural 

Saskatchewan when they were in power. 

 

What they did instead was to build Crown corporations. What 

they did instead was to build a mushrooming bureaucracy. 

What they did instead was to build hospitals instead of having 

economic development in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I urge the members opposite 



1134 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1993 

to reconsider the pace of change. Take the time and iron out the 

wrinkles. Try a test project. What's happening in Saskatoon and 

Regina — these are self-contained units; there are ways in 

which people can far more readily accommodate change, both 

in opportunities for other kinds of jobs as well as access to 

health care services. 

 

But in rural Saskatchewan and in the North, people need an 

opportunity to see evidence of what is going to happen, and 

they want to be participants in that change. Let the people be 

heard. Empower people instead of always seeking power for 

yourselves. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 3, I will be rejecting. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great 

deal of pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to enter into this debate right 

after the leader of the third party, who is attempting to paint 

herself and her party as the patron saint of health care for the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan know a lot 

better than that because the people of Saskatchewan have 

examined the history of the third party when they were in 

opposition in the 1960s when medicare was brought in. Mr. 

Speaker, the Liberal Party of the day was in opposition and the 

opposition lobbied in the House and argued at length against 

the Bill that brought in medicare to this province. Mr. Speaker, 

the Liberal opposition opposed extending the sitting hours to 

allow for the legislation to pass to bring medicare into this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during that period of time the Liberal opposition 

criticized the then premier, Tommy Douglas, and the CCF 

(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) party for taking 18 

years to fulfil their commitment to the people of Saskatchewan 

of bringing forth a medicare program. But then when they did 

introduce that legislation, the opposition Liberal Party of the 

day wanted more time to study it further. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like to take this opportunity to quote from 

Hansard on October 24, 1961: I think this will possibly go 

down in the history of this province as one of the most undying 

and everlasting shames. That, Mr. Speaker, was spoke by the 

then Liberal member for Pelly, J.R. Barrie — Mr. Speaker, the 

last Liberal member for Pelly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am entering into this debate to support the Bill. 

This Bill, Mr. Speaker, is a Bill designed to preserve and 

protect our medicare system. Mr. Speaker, I know that the 

opposition oppose that and resist it. And it comes as no great 

surprise to me, Mr. Speaker, that the opposition would oppose 

maintaining and preserving a medicare system, for, Mr. 

Speaker, they have never ever been in favour of a publicly 

funded, a publicly administrated health care system. Mr. 

Speaker, their overall objective is to destroy medicare, destroy 

it in a way that will open the doors to privatized medicine. Mr. 

Speaker, that is 

something that we stand totally opposed to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of ways to approach the 

destruction of medicare. One is simply to allow it to reach a 

certain level where the public purse can no longer afford it and 

then allow privatization to sneak in the back door, very similar 

to what is going on in Alberta today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because of our commitment and our longstanding 

commitment to maintaining a publicly funded, a publicly 

administrated health care system, we are taking the leadership 

role in reforming the delivery of health care and health care 

services in this province to ensure its longevity. Mr. Speaker, 

we're not alone in that. The vast majority of the people all 

across this province certainly support it. And I'd like to quote to 

you now, Mr. Speaker, a couple of quotes from the 

Leader-Post. 

 

(2100) 

 

Mr. Leys, a farmer from Elrose, Saskatchewan, is quoted in the 

Leader-Post on April 13, 1993 as saying: 

 

 "Health care has moved beyond (the) small rural hospitals 

. . ." 

 

Another quote, Mr. Speaker, from the Leader-Post of April 13, 

1993: 

 

 . . . rural hospitals: while they're a good first stop in an 

emergency, they can't provide much medical care for 

patients unless they aren't very sick. 

 

 Dinsmore's acute care beds aren't used very often for people 

who are critically ill, said Ann Rankin, the centre's director 

of nursing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are just a few quotes, a few quotes from the 

people across this province. 

 

And I have been in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, last 

weekend and I had the opportunity of chatting with a long-time 

acquaintance of mine, a Mr. Johnson, who farms just south of 

Norquay. Mr. Johnson is 75 years of age, Mr. Speaker, and he 

has admitted to me on several occasions that he is not of the 

same political stripe as myself. But, Mr. Speaker, he said I 

always support good policy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: — And he said, Mr. Speaker, and I support what 

you and your government are doing to health care. The reform 

of health care is something we need. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: — So we in many cases have taken our health 

care and our medicare for granted too long. That was just last 

Sunday, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And he brought to my attention, Mr. Speaker, an event 



April 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1135 

that took place in his family this winter. They are our local 

snowbirds, Mr. Speaker, and they spend 60 to 90 days every 

winter down in Arizona enjoying the sunshine. And while there 

this winter, Mr. Speaker, his wife of 34 years of age was 

walking down a set of stairs, misjudged the bottom stair, 

slipped and fell down and broke her right arm. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, they took her to the hospital there, she had her arm set 

and the cast put on it. And as he was leaving the hospital, he 

stopped to pay the bill, and the bill, Mr. Speaker, for setting an 

arm and putting a cast on it in Arizona was $1,400. 

 

He said to me, Mr. Speaker, he said, although I am not of your 

political stripe, I must admire your party for their commitment, 

their long-term commitment to the health care of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

He said, I had the pleasure of being an adult in 1947 when your 

previous party, the CCF Party, introduced hospitalization. He 

said, I remember very well those days when the opposition 

party and those in league with them would go around the 

province suggesting that hospitalization was a terrible thing. 

For if hospitalization came into effect, there would be no 

hospitals in Saskatchewan. And yet today, Mr. Speaker, we 

have more hospital beds per capita in Saskatchewan than any 

other province. 

 

He said, Mr. Speaker, I remember that and I support that good 

policy. He said then I also remember it was your party, the 

CCF Party, in 1962 that introduced medicare. And even I, Mr. 

Speaker, at my young age remember those times. 

 

I remember, Mr. Speaker, the rallies that took place in front of 

the legislature. I remember the thousands of people that 

gathered in opposition to medicare. I remember the KOD 

(Keep Our Doctors) meetings across this province that was 

organized by the Liberal Party. I remember, Mr. Speaker, 

people suggesting that the doctors would leave this province. I 

remember, Mr. Speaker, the doctors even going on strike and 

pulling their services for 40 days. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, two years or three years after medicare was 

in place you couldn't find anybody in Saskatchewan that didn't 

like it. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the opposition who has the history 

of opposing all health care in this province, even today say they 

like medicare. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, they are . . . when the opposition who had a 

history of well over 50 years of opposing any type of publicly 

funded, publicly administrated health care system, suggest that 

they're caring about it, suggest that they are going to look after 

it, Mr. Speaker, suggests to me that that is a little like Colonel 

Sanders in charge of the chicken coop. 

 

Mr. Speaker, medicare was introduced in this province in two 

phases. And I'll quote from the father of medicare, Tommy 

Douglas, when he said: when we began to plan medicare, we 

pointed out that it would be in two phases. The first phase 

would be in removing the financial barrier between those 

giving 

services and those receiving it. 

 

The second phase, Mr. Speaker — and that's the new 

generation of medicare; that's the phase we've started now — 

the second phase would be the reorganization and the 

revamping of the whole delivery system. And that of course is 

the big item. The big item that we have started now, Mr. 

Speaker, and that is a direct quote from Tommy Douglas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the medicare system, the medical system, the 

health care system, and the delivery of health care in this 

province, that has served us extremely well over the last 30 

years, is something that we should all be very proud of. But, 

Mr. Speaker, like any vehicle that's 30 years of age, it needs to 

be updated; it needs to be repaired. In fact, Mr. Speaker, in 

some cases it needs to be overhauled. Well, Mr. Speaker, that is 

what we're about and that's what this Bill is all about. This Bill 

is going to bring into line the needs of the 1990s and the health 

care system that we have here today. Why, Mr. Speaker? 

Because of our commitment to the people of Saskatchewan to 

deliver to them the best possible health care services anywhere 

in this world. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: — But, Mr. Speaker, the official opposition says, 

oh but we're concerned about the future of medicare. And they 

will go on and ramble on with all their quote, unquote, reasons. 

But let's look at a Conservative policy for medicare, Mr. 

Speaker. Let's look at the federal government's Conservative 

policy of offloading its responsibility for funding health care in 

this province and all the provinces across Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the federal government's offloading has cost 

Saskatchewan taxpayers $500 million this year and then their 

country cousins try to pretend that they're concerned about 

medicare. Mr. Speaker, once again when the Conservatives 

suggested they're concerned about medicare, it reminds me of, 

once again, Colonel Sanders in charge of the chicken coop. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have examples of how the Liberals would 

look after medicare. We've seen their record in this province. 

Many of them remember how they were so concerned about 

medicare in the '60s that the leader of the Liberal Party at that 

time was trying to kick down the doors to get it in or out. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we have some modern, modern examples of 

what Liberal governments do. In New Brunswick the Liberal 

government there simply introduced legislation that basically 

expropriated that province's 51 hospitals from their local 

communities, from their churches, and then began about to shut 

them down with no health districts, no local input, and no 

community needs assessment. That, Mr. Speaker, is known as 

Liberal compassion. 

 

Oh you can say, Mr. Speaker, and maybe the Liberals would 

say that that's only one example. Well let's just look at what's 

going on in Alberta, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there the 

government of the day — which 



1136 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1993 

happens to be a Tory government — has decided not to reform 

health care, but simply to leave it the way it is and allow it to 

deteriorate, so it allows private sector health services can creep 

in the back door. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you can get an MRI (magnetic resonance 

imaging) scan, for example, in Calgary without much of a 

waiting-list. But, Mr. Speaker, you need $900 up front first. 

 

And the Liberal leader in Alberta, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Decore, 

has said that he wants private profit hospitals and other 

medicare, private medicare services in that province — the 

privatization of health care, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, those are the things that we are opposed to. 

Those are the things, Mr. Speaker, that we are addressing and 

insuring will not happen in this province. We are assuring, Mr. 

Speaker, that we will continue to be able to provide to the 

people of this great province the best in health care available 

because that's what the people of Saskatchewan deserve. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in some ways it is a shame, it is a shame that we 

have to concentrate so much of our efforts and our time on a 

delivery of that health care. And that's come about because of 

the reckless spending of the former government for nine and a 

half years, with absolute disregard for the future of this 

province, disregard for the future of the citizens of this 

province. But what's more despicable, Mr. Speaker, absolutely 

disregard for the children of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm very proud of our government. I'm very proud 

of the direction our government has taken in health care. And 

the people of this province are going to be and are very proud 

of this, of the direction, simply because they know that by 

putting health care in the community-based wellness program 

will ensure the survival and improve the delivery and improve 

the quality of health care in this province. Not only for us, Mr. 

Speaker, but for my children and my grandchildren. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are embarking on a brand-new health care 

generation that will stand in history to rank shoulder to 

shoulder with the medicare that was brought in here in 1962, 

that led the way not only in Canada but all over North America. 

Mr. Speaker, our new generation of medicare will be leading 

the way not only in Canada, not only in North America, but all 

over the world. Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of 

pleasure to speak in support of this Bill. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we've heard lots in the last 

number of days about health care reform in the province of 

Saskatchewan and the NDP's style of health care reform. But, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, all over this province people realize 

exactly 

what health care reform is going to mean to them. They realize 

exactly what health care reform is going to mean to 

communities like Eston and Dodsland, Climax, Frontier, 

communities like that. 

 

Fifty-two communities around this province, Mr. Speaker, are 

going to lose their health care services. And they say that 

they're not going to lose them; they're going to be converted. 

Converted to what, is what everyone's asking. Converted to 

health centres. And no one — no one — Mr. Speaker, has been 

able to determine what these health centres are going to be. In a 

public meeting in Kerrobert, Saskatchewan, that I attended and 

over 600 people were there to voice their concerns about your 

plans for health care, the Minister of Social Services was asked 

that exact question. 

 

What is this wellness centre going to be? What is it going to 

be? And she responded, it can be whatever you want it to be. 

That's her response. And the people at that public meeting that 

night, Mr. Deputy Speaker, were absolutely aghast at that 

answer. It can be whatever you want it to be. And so one 

gentleman stood up and said, we want it to be exactly what it is 

today; that's what we want it to be. And she stood up and said, 

no, it can't be that, but it can be whatever else you want it to be. 

 

(2115) 

 

And John Borody, the representative of the Department of 

Health, was also there that evening. And he stood up and he 

said, it can be whatever you want it to be, but it's a little bit like 

going to McDonald's; it can only be for $1.49. That's what he 

said. You can do whatever you want, but you're only going to 

be able to do it for a budget of $1.49. 

 

And the people again that evening were aghast at those kind of 

responses from the ministers. How dare they insult the 

intelligence of the people of rural Saskatchewan when they 

suggest those kinds of things? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it's no wonder, it's no wonder there are 

health care meetings all over this province and the NDP is 

scurrying around the province trying to protect themselves and 

hold up these lofty principles. It's no wonder all over this 

province that that's happening, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And if any one of them had the courage of their convictions, 

Mr. Speaker, I would say to them they would resign their seat, 

force a by-election and find out whether their constituents 

support them. Because I don't think they do. I bet, Mr. Speaker, 

in constituencies all over this province, particularly rural 

constituencies all over this province, they would reject your 

plan just as they showed on the steps of the legislature 

yesterday. 

 

They reject your plan. They do not support you. And even 

though you did a masterful job at trying to get out there and 

work the crowd, as one member said yesterday, who had 

suffered a little bit too much suntan yesterday, he said, I was 

roasted in more ways 



April 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1137 

than one out there yesterday. And he recognized, he recognized 

how bad he was getting beat up on the issue. 

 

And that is why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they're having to force 

this thing through as quickly as possible. They realize the 

political damage that they're suffering out in rural 

Saskatchewan. They realize what kind of political damage and 

fallout that's happening to the party, the NDP Party, right now 

in rural Saskatchewan and they have to get this over as quickly 

as possible. Get this out of the way. 

 

You only got two more years until you're going to have to go to 

another . . . before you have to go before the electorate. And 

they're holding up their hands and saying, three. Well three will 

come just a little bit later on, all right. It'll be a very short time 

before you have to face the wrath of the electorate in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I predict that member after member after member of your 

party will fall, and particularly, Mr. Speaker, and particularly 

the members who voted against towns in their constituencies 

when forced to vote in this legislature — and, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, when forced to vote against their constituencies about 

their communities in their constituencies in this legislature. We 

intend to bring forward a Bill to restore health care in each and 

every one of those communities that have lost it — 52 of them 

— and we're going to force you to vote on those. And then the 

people of your constituency will know exactly whether you 

respect or respond to the wishes of their constituents. They will 

know for sure where you stand once and for all on health care 

reform. 

 

An Hon. Member: — No mandate. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — No mandate. Exactly. Your party doesn't have a 

mandate to do this. You know it doesn't have a mandate to do 

this. You didn't campaign on this. You couldn't have got 

elected on this and you know it. You couldn't have got elected 

on this without any changes. You know very well that that's 

true. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the only party that campaigned on 

closures of hospitals in Saskatchewan was the Liberal Party. 

That was the only one. In the last election, the Liberal leader 

promised that, if elected, she would rationalize health care in 

Saskatchewan and close out hospitals. She promised that. She 

said in interviews around this province, and candidates that 

represented her party around this province, said that it was a 

plum, a political plum to have a hospital built in their 

constituency. Well I reject that notion, madam. 

 

I reject that notion and so do the people of Eatonia, who your 

candidate in the election campaign, about a few days, just a few 

days prior to the election, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when she 

thought she might have a chance, just might have a chance — 

all she had to do is get another couple of hundred votes out of 

the town of Kindersley — she decided to go for it and take the 

chance. And she stood in her place in Kindersley where she 

thought it would have the biggest impact, 

and said the hospital in Eatonia should never have been built. 

And the people of Kindersley saw through that. They realized 

exactly what she was trying to do. She was trying to pit 

community against community within her own constituency. 

And the people in Eatonia recognized it for what it was. She 

didn't think that the people of Eatonia would find out in such 

short time before the election. But they did. They found out and 

they rejected her out of hand. 

 

And they realized that the Liberal leader was the one that was 

in favour of closing hospitals. She said she would close the 

hospital in Beechy even though ever since that day she's 

regretted that remark and she's tried to correct it time and time 

again. But the people of this province know, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that she said it. And she meant it, and afterwards 

realized it was a mistake and tried her best and still continues 

to this day to try and retract that statement, even though she 

knows it was incorrect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, she also said that the hospital in Lafleche 

shouldn't be . . . should never have been built. She also says 

that the hospital in Beechy should never have been updated. 

And she knows very well that that's true. But, Mr. Speaker, at 

least she campaigned on closing of rural hospitals. The NDP 

did not. And she knows that, and the NDP know that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Communities in my constituency, Mr. Deputy Speaker, have 

had public meetings, and lots of them. And in the health care 

region that's being proposed in my area, there's been meetings 

now in Eston, where 1,600 people turned out. That was the 

climax of all of the meetings in that area. The largest meeting, 

the largest public meeting ever held in that community — 

1,600 people turned out. And that's, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in a 

community of only 1,300.  Every man, woman, and child 

turned out at that meeting, and 300 rural residents surrounding 

that community and other communities from around the 

immediate area turned out in support of that community, 

because they realized how desperately important it is to that . . . 

the hospital to that town. Desperately important. 

 

There's been a hospital in operation in that town for 77 years in 

one form or another. The first one was built by the pioneers in 

the early 1900s, and it burned to the ground in, I believe it was 

'55. And the people of that community, realizing how important 

it was, turned a community hall into a temporary hospital, Mr. 

Speaker. And during that time, they performed emergency 

surgeries, delivered babies. All kinds of things happened in that 

community hall and it has quite a history. The people of that 

community can relate that kind of thing to you, Mr. Speaker, if 

you'd take the time to listen to them. 

 

And then they built a brand-new hospital in '56 in Eston, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, 1956 they built a brand-new hospital there. 

And it still stands today. It is an extremely good facility. It's not 

a crumbled-down facility by any means — brand-new facility 

at that time, excellent facility today. 

 

And just two, I believe it's two years ago now, the 



1138 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1993 

community decided that the one part of the health care services 

in that community that needed some upgrading was the clinic 

where the people go in to visit their doctor. So they decided 

that the thing to do was build a new clinic, and they raised the 

money through the local tax base — some $800,000 — and 

built a new clinic onto their hospital, adjoining their hospital. 

 

Beautiful facility, absolutely beautiful facility. It allowed for, it 

allowed for, Mr. Speaker, for the first time in a number of 

years, about 15 I believe, for a dentist to be located in that local 

area. 

 

Now we have not only the services within that town of a doctor 

— two doctors, pardon me — we also have the return of dental 

service to that area, something that hasn't been in place for 

some 15 years. So not only are the people of that town using 

medical services, they are expanding medical services in that 

town currently. 

 

And the member from Saskatoon Greystone was correct, that at 

that public meeting in Eston, the chairman of the board of the 

Full Gospel Bible Institute of Eston, Saskatchewan, stood up 

and said that they are in the process right this very moment of 

planning an extremely large, major expansion — $1 million, 

possibly up to $2 million. I spoke to them prior to the meeting 

earlier in the afternoon. Up to $2 million of money could be 

built . . . or spent, pardon me, expanding the Full Gospel Bible 

Institute facilities in that community. 

 

And it attracts, it attracts young men and women from literally 

the world to that facility to learn about Bible studies. From all 

over the world they attend that, primarily from western Canada, 

but nevertheless they've had students from all parts of the 

world attend that facility. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that minister that night, Rodger Halvorsen 

— I don't think he'd mind me mentioning his name in the 

Assembly — he said to the people of that meeting, that one of 

the very first things, one of the very first things that applicants 

ask when they are considering coming to that community for 

Bible study classes is — and their families are very concerned 

about it also — is there adequate health care services, is there a 

hospital in this town? 

 

And they've always been there, always up until now, been able 

to proudly say, we have fine, fine facilities in this community. 

But no longer. That whole project may be put in jeopardy, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that whole project, 1 to $2 million expansion, 

may be put in jeopardy by the changes in the plans of this 

government. And it's an economic development strategy and 

plan that is extremely, extremely important to that community. 

 

About eight years ago now, that Bible college expanded once 

prior to that; built a tremendously beautiful and large church in 

that area, Mr. Speaker. One of the best and finest churches, I 

would say, probably in all of Saskatchewan — 

state-of-the-art-type church, Mr. Speaker, beautiful 

facility. And that's just an example of the kind of commitment 

that people have to that community. 

 

And the people that are on the board of directors of that Full 

Gospel Bible Institute . . . It's an interprovincial board, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. There are people from all three prairie 

provinces that are represented on that board. 

 

And now they had an emergency meeting already to discuss the 

future of that very facility, not just the expansion plans but the 

future of the entire facility. They're looking at it, and they're 

giving very serious consideration, in light of the changes that 

the government is proposing, to wrapping the whole thing up 

and moving it to Calgary. 

 

And that's exactly, Mr. Speaker, the reason why there is such 

concern there at that meeting. That is exactly the reason why 

there is that kind of concern. And the members opposite say, 

we could have told them not to worry. 

 

But they worry, they fear, they fear for these changes. And the 

reason they fear for these changes is because of the unknown, 

the types of things that that Minister of Health had the 

opportunity to straighten out that evening but did not do it. 

 

The doctor in that community, Dr. Holmes, Dr. Stewart 

Holmes, has served that community for some 30 years and his 

father before him had served that community for 41 years. The 

combined service of the two families — there was some 

overlapping time — but the combined service of that family of 

doctors to that community is 71 years; 71 years that that family 

has provided medical services to that community — 71 years. 

 

And when I mentioned that at that public meeting, there was 

such a tremendous round of applause and gratitude exhibited to 

that family that he broke down and cried at that meeting 

because of the amount of gratitude that the people expressed, 

the people expressed that night to him and his family, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

And the members opposite can make all of the snide little 

remarks they like about the Holmes family, but the fact of the 

matter is they have supported that community. They have 

provided service to that community for 71 years. And you 

people want to sit in your chairs and laugh, and laugh at that 

kind of dedication and service. Well I say to you, shame on 

you, sir, for that kind of attitude. Shame on you for that kind of 

reaction to a testimony about the people of that. Shame on you 

for saying that those kinds of things are wrong. In rural 

Saskatchewan that kind of story happens all over the place. 

 

(2130) 

 

And if you took the time to go to rural Saskatchewan you'd 

realize that. If you took the time to go to rural Saskatchewan 

you would realize the kind of dedication and commitment 

people have to their 



April 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1139 

communities . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . A good 

imagination, the member says. Well I invite you to that 

community. I invite you to that community and I'll take you 

and I'll introduce you to that gentleman, Dr. Stewart Holmes. 

I'll introduce you to him and his family. His wife and his 

daughter are currently nurses employed at that hospital as well. 

And they have worked in that facility for years and years and 

years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and these members laugh at them. 

 

Well the people of Eston, I'll tell you, the people of Eston, there 

were 1,600 people there that night and they weren't laughing. 

They weren't laughing at you, sir, they weren't laughing . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Tell the truth. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Tell the truth, he says. Well what am I not 

telling the truth about? What am I not telling the truth about? 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I do want to remind the 

member from Kindersley that he has already spoken in this 

debate and really should try and keep to the amendment if he 

could — number one. And number two, I have asked members 

earlier this evening to please direct their comments through the 

Chair and not to other people in the Assembly. 

 

Is the member finished speaking? 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I was 

saying that that family has served that community for 71 years, 

and if anyone doesn't believe me, they can check the record. Go 

out there and ask them, Mr. Speaker. The people of that 

community know that that's true. The people of that 

community, no one disputed that fact that evening. The people 

of that community know of what I'm saying is the truth, and 

that's why, that's why there is such concern in that community. 

And that's why there is such concern in that community, Mr. 

Speaker; they realize the importance of health care in that 

community. That's why there's been such fine health care in 

that community for this long time — 77 years. 

 

And other communities in my constituency that are being 

affected by these profound changes are communities like 

Dodsland. Dodsland, Saskatchewan, a small, little community, 

nice little community, lots of good, fine folks there, located up 

in the north-east part of my constituency. They're being 

affected by this too. 

 

They believe and they realize now that their entire facility is 

going to be closed and they know that. Emergency services in 

that area are extremely important to them. There's only one 

way into that community, Mr. Speaker, one way into that 

community. It's a relatively poor highway leading in from the 

East, extends on further out to the West to a road north of 

Kindersley, and it's an extremely . . . not that great, it's not that 

great of a road, and everyone in that area has always been 

concerned about that. You can't go south in wintertime from 

Dodsland 

Saskatchewan, in any kind of uncertain weather at all. You 

simply can't do it. You either go to Rosetown to the east or 

Kindersley to the south-west of Dodsland. And the people of 

that area recognize that if the hospital in their area is closed 

out, they are some 45 miles to health care services in the winter 

or in any kind of inclement weather conditions. 

 

They realize the extreme importance of health care services in 

that area. And they realize that if those services are taken from 

their area, how profoundly it will effect them and their 

community. That community, Mr. Speaker, is not a large 

community. And they realize that if that hospital closes it will 

mean the end of their community. 

 

We're talking about, Mr. Speaker, the very foundations, the 

very foundations of communities in rural Saskatchewan. The 

hospital, the school, the church, a few businesses, you've got a 

community. That's what it takes in rural Saskatchewan. We 

don't ask a lot in rural Saskatchewan. We don't ask for 

magnificent facilities like the Centre of the Arts or other types 

of facilities in rural Saskatchewan. We ask for the basic 

requirements of a community and that's it. That's all we ask for 

in rural Saskatchewan — 1.7 per cent of the health care budget. 

 

And rural Saskatchewan, we are being told by this government, 

isn't worth it. One point seven per cent of the health care 

budget of this province and you people are going to close down 

52 hospitals and say that you don't deserve that kind of service 

in rural Saskatchewan any longer. Well I say to you, rural 

Saskatchewan is worth 1.7 per cent of the health care budget of 

rural . . . in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They are worth that. 

They profoundly believe that you are wrong. And that is why 

there are health care meetings all over this province right now. 

They're taking place daily. They're taking place daily, and the 

people of this province are turning out at those meetings. 

 

I've attended one in Leader, Saskatchewan. Some 5 to 600 

people turned out at that. Not a very large community. 

Something in that order to begin with — 800, 900 people 

maybe. I attended one in Eatonia in my constituency. There 

was 500 people turned out at that meeting; no government 

representatives, although we invited them both to the meeting 

in Leader and to the meeting in Eatonia. That was a little bit 

before . . . that was just prior to the government realizing what 

kind of brush fires were breaking out all over rural 

Saskatchewan, and the political damage that they were 

suffering. 

 

And then they started . . . they realized they'd better get out and 

try, try and defend their actions, Mr. Speaker. But it wasn't 

working all that well. From there, there were other 

communities in that area started realizing the impact. And the 

members that attended them — when they finally started 

attending them — like the Minister of Community Services, 

the member from Melfort stood in her place in Kerrobert . . . or 

pardon me, in Kindersley and suggested that all of the answers 

are 



1140 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1993 

available, all of the answers are available. There's big 

packages, she said, of information that's been sent to every 

MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly), and everybody 

knows about it. The health care boards have all been sent all 

this kind of information. 

 

And it was a funny thing — the reeve of one of the 

municipalities in the area, he stood up and said, we were not 

sent any big package of information; the only information we 

get is what we can pry out of John Borody at our meetings. 

That's the only kind of information that they've been able to 

get. There was no big package of information arrived at my 

office, either here or in Kindersley, from the Department of 

Health explaining all of this wellness. 

 

And there was at the meeting in Kerrobert, for example, the 

chairman of the health board in Dodsland, Mr. Bob Joyce, 

stood up and said that what's going on in this province with the 

wellness plan, the people of rural Saskatchewan will never be 

able to recover from it for a hundred years of wellness. And 

again, Mr. Speaker, members opposite laugh. Members 

opposite laugh and they say, tell the truth. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Well the member from . . . the Minister of Social 

Services was there that night. She knows exactly that that was 

said. She can testify in front of all of us that she knows exactly 

that that was what was said that night. Mr. Bob Joyce stood up 

and said that this will ruin his community. It will close down 

everything in the community of Dodsland. And all of these 

folks, Mr. Speaker, they laugh at the community of Dodsland. 

Well I don't laugh at the people of Dodsland. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, they're having a public meeting this 

Monday, this coming Monday, April 26, in Dodsland, a public 

meeting. They realize the fact that this government's probably 

going to be able to ram it through, crush all opposition in the 

next few days. But they realize how important it is for the 

people of that area — the Dodsland area — to have a meeting 

to discuss the concern that they have in their community, and 

discuss the kind of impact . . . 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Point of order. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. What's the member's point of order? 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on the point of order. You 

have just not long ago, to this member, directed him to direct 

his comments specifically to the amendment and the 

amendment only as he has previously spoken on the Bill before 

us in second reading. I quite appreciate, Mr. Speaker, that in 

second reading it's normal for debate to be wide-ranging. But 

when a member is rising who has already spoken to second 

reading to address the amendment only, and this amendment 

deals merely with . . . it calls for the Bill to be not read a 

second time and on the grounds that the claim is made, the 

fundamental principles . . . that the Bill is contrary to 

the fundamental principles of medicare and the delivery of fair 

and just treatment to all citizens of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a very specific focus. And I have heard the 

member make no reference whatsoever to the fundamental 

principles of medicare or to the delivery of fair and just 

treatment to all citizens of the province. And I would ask you, 

Mr. Speaker, to require the member to address those and those 

only, as he has already spoken at quite length, I would remind 

the Assembly, on the second reading. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have been very 

patient in listening to the debate that's been going on, and I 

recognize, Mr. Speaker, that many of the principles of 

medicare have been discussed by the member from Kindersley. 

And the fair delivery of fair and just treatment to all citizens, I 

think he was right in his assessment of the communities that he 

is familiar with. And I know that he is interested in maintaining 

his track on the principles of the amendment. And I believe, 

Mr. Speaker, that he was doing that in a fair and reasonable 

way. 

 

The Speaker: — Let me, first of all . . . the amendment is a 

wide-ranging amendment, but I was checking here because 

many of the things that the member was speaking about, about 

packages that were to be available by the member, sounded 

very familiar to me. And I've been trying to find it in the 

member's speech from the other day, and it . . . Yes, I think I 

will find it. 

 

Also the member is speaking about Kerrobert and I just noticed 

the other day he spoke about Kerrobert also and he spoke about 

Dodsland . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, but the same 

things are being repeated today as the member spoke on the 

main motion. 

 

And there's nothing wrong in making your arguments again by 

referring back to arguments that you made the other day, but 

you can't repeat the same arguments again when you're 

speaking to the amendment. And I ask the member to . . . the 

amendment is wide enough that the member can speak about 

the principles of medicare and relate his speech to that tonight. 

 

So the member's point of order is well taken. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, I 

don't believe the principles of delivery of fair and just treatment 

to the constituents of my area are being upheld by this 

government. I don't believe that the principles of medicare are 

being upheld. And I don't believe the people of Kerrobert think 

that they are. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that they think and agree with the 

members of the opposition in this legislature that the principles 

of fairness are not being exhibited by this government. They do 

not believe what is happening in rural Saskatchewan is fair. 

They don't believe that the treatment that they are getting at the 



April 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1141 

hands of this government is fair. 

 

And the reason they don't believe that is because they see 

community after community all over this province going to 

lose their health care services. That's why they don't believe, 

Mr. Speaker, that they are being treated in a fair and just 

manner. 

 

They're being asked, Mr. Speaker, for example, to set up health 

boards all over rural Saskatchewan right now. And I'll tell you, 

right from the outset there was a great deal of support for it at 

the outset, Mr. Speaker. There was a lot of acceptance of health 

care reform in our area. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we are not against health care reform. We 

are not opposed to health care reform. We've said that right 

from the very outset. But what we are opposed to is the kind of 

heavy-handedness that this government is exhibiting with 

respect to health care reform. And that's why the people don't 

believe it's fair. 

 

What's happening, Mr. Speaker, is . . . and for example, for 

example, Mr. Speaker, the health boards in that area were 

meeting on a regular basis and holding the type of meeting to 

try and bring together a unit. And what was happening, what 

was happening, Mr. Speaker, was that a number of those 

communities were meeting and they were saying, yes, we can 

rationalize in this area; we can look at overlapping jurisdictions 

of boards; we can look at cutting down of duplication of 

services and that type of thing. 

 

(2145) 

 

But they do not now support the kinds of things that this 

government is asking them to do. The administrator of the 

hospital in Eston, for example, Mr. Gary Johnson, stood up in 

the public meeting in Eston and said, Mr. Speaker, he doesn't 

believe this is fair. He doesn't believe in this any longer. And 

the reason is simple. He said: we worked and supported this 

and believed that what we were doing was right and then the 

government came along and dropped a bombshell on them and 

said, here are the targets for acute care bed funding in your 

area. 

 

And now after seeing another phase of the so-called wellness 

plan, they realized that what was being asked of them was not 

right. They realized that what was being asked of them is not 

fair, Mr. Speaker. They realized that what was being asked of 

them . . . And he went on to say that all of the work — all of 

the work — that we have put into this plan up till now has been 

for nothing. That's what he said that night. It's all been for 

nothing. It's all thrown out the window; there's nothing in this 

for us any longer. We realize exactly what the government's 

agenda is now. We realize that they want to take away health 

care services to our area and they don't agree with you any 

longer. That's what he said. 

 

And that night, as well, they talked about fairness with respect 

to ambulance services. And they talked about fairness with 

respect to long-term care in that area. 

And they talked about fairness with respect to home care in that 

area. And the representatives of all of those areas had an 

opportunity to speak at those meetings and they said, initially 

we supported this but we don't any longer because we know 

now what this government's agenda is. It's just simply to, it's 

just simply to make us try and believe that this is going to be 

good for us when we know it isn't. 

 

And an example of that, Mr. Speaker, was a worker, an 

ambulance driver at the meeting in Kindersley. He got up and 

said he knows the kind of gut-wrenching feeling it is to have 

someone pass away, to have someone die in his ambulance. He 

knows that feeling because he's seen it, he's had it happen to 

him. He knows that kind of feeling and he said, I can only think 

that these kind of changes will mean to me, they will mean that 

I will have that gut-wrenching type of feeling more frequently. 

 

Is that fair? Is that fair to rural Saskatchewan? Is it fair to place 

that kind of burden on rural Saskatchewan? Is it fair to ask 

those people to accept this kind of change when you know full 

well that what he is saying is correct? When you know full well 

that what he is saying is right and you are wrong. 

 

And the people realize that all over rural Saskatchewan and 

that's why . . . And I found it interesting, Mr. Speaker, when we 

talked about fairness and how yesterday there was a meeting 

and somewhere in the range of 800 to 1,000 people attended it 

out front on the steps of the legislature. 

 

And I don't think people of the media or people in the cities 

realize how hard it is for people in rural Saskatchewan to take a 

day out of their busy schedules, particularly at this time of the 

year with seeding approaching, to come, to come to Regina and 

talk about these types of things and plead their case before the 

minister. 

 

And what happened, Mr. Speaker? Another example of how 

they felt they weren't being treated fair by this government. The 

minister had an opportunity to speak, the other party leaders 

had an opportunity to speak, and then there was a question 

period. And the minister answered two questions — two 

questions — and then said, I have to go into the legislature 

right now; I'm busy. 

 

And the people again realized how unfairly they were being 

treated, and how the principles of medicare and fair and just 

treatment were not being exhibited by this government. 

 

They wanted to ask that Minister of Health question after 

question after question and get some answers from her on the 

steps of the legislature yesterday. But she was too busy. She 

wanted to come into the sanctity of the Chamber here because 

she knew that in this Chamber she could give all of the kind 

rhetoric that she normally gives. And she knew that there 

would be a band of back-bench support for her, clapping on 

cue, like they always do in here for her. 



1142 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1993 

She knew that that kind of support was not on the steps of the 

legislature yesterday, Mr. Speaker. She knew that they were 

not there. She knew that the support wasn't there. She was 

roundly booed by the people on the steps of the legislature 

yesterday. She realizes that she had to get out of that type of 

situation. She realized that she didn't have the answers to their 

questions. She realized that the people from Vanguard and 

communities like that, that turned out en masse yesterday, 

wanted to save their hospital and that was the reason they came 

there. 

 

They didn't come to hear about the kinds of things that the 

minister talked about, about debt or about any other types of 

things. They came to protect and to hold on to their hospital 

with every amount of being they have. That's why they came 

here. They didn't come here to talk about anything else. They 

came here to get some answers from the minister and plead 

their case to save their hospital. That's why they came. 

 

But the minister was busy. And unfortunately they didn't get 

much of an opportunity to plead their case, and they realized 

how unfair that was. They realize how unfair that was to them 

and their community. And they also, a few of them, a number 

of them, when they took the opportunity to come into the 

Chamber here and sit in the galleries, Mr. Speaker, they 

realized how unfair it was that a government with a massive 

majority is steamrolling this legislation through. 

 

They realize that in opposition, a small opposition with only 10 

members, doesn't have much of an opportunity to stop this, and 

that's why they thought public pressure might finally, finally 

bring this government to its senses. But they realized that that 

wasn't going to happen. 

 

They realized that their community is not going to be protected. 

They realize that communities all over this province are not 

going to be protected or supported. And that's why they are 

saying, this is unfair. This process is grossly unfair. It does not 

serve the needs of our area. It does not serve the needs of rural 

Saskatchewan, and that's why they won't support this, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And that's why this government has to ram this through. That's 

why it has to happen as quickly as possible. That's why they 

will not allow opposition members to speak as long as we'd like 

to speak on this, Mr. Speaker, and that's why it's not fair. 

 

And on CBC the other night, there was a clip about a family in 

my constituency, and I just want to relate the story a little bit, 

Mr. Speaker, because it's so grossly unfair to that family and 

they recognize it. 

 

They have a daughter that's in the hospital in Eston and she has 

suffered severe brain damage. She's in that hospital right now. 

She's only, I believe it's something like 18, 19 years old. Very 

unfortunate circumstances surround it, but nevertheless she's 

there, she's one block away from their family home. That's 

where they live, just happen to live down the street from that 

hospital facility. 

And they wake up every morning and they thank God because 

she is so close to them. She is so close to them, they can walk 

down the street, a short distance, walk down the street and go 

into that hospital and see their daughter. 

 

And not only that, but the people of the community, the people 

of that community are helping them right now, volunteer help, 

going into the hospital on a daily basis — and there's a whole 

number of people doing it — going into the hospital on a daily 

basis to provide therapy for their daughter. And they realize . . . 

 

And the gentleman was on the newscasts the other night and he 

said, we sure hope that this government sees fit to keep our 

facility open because we're really concerned where our 

daughter will have to go if this hospital is converted to 

something other than what it is today, or closed. He's saying, 

what are we going to do? We have no idea what we're going to 

do with our daughter. Will she have to go to Swift Current to 

the rehab centre there, or will she have to go into Saskatoon or 

Regina or whatever? What will happen to her and what will 

happen to her family? 

 

And that's why they're concerned about it. And I think it's a 

legitimate concern. And they don't believe that anybody's 

raising any fear about anything out there. They have their own 

fears, they have their own suspicions, they have their own 

reasons for doubting the sincerity of this government. 

 

And they know, they know that what's likely to happen isn't 

going to be to their benefit. They realize that their daughter is 

likely going to have to be moved to another facility, some . . . 

Who knows how far? The type of services that she requires is 

not going to be met in just any hospital. It's going to have to be 

met in a facility that has physiotherapy and all of those kinds of 

things to try and provide her with some quality of life. 

 

And it'll be met, incidentally, by people in another setting that 

are going to be paid. And they realize what's happening right 

now is volunteers are going in there, doing it out of their own 

goodwill towards that family and helping them. And they're 

being supported by the community. And they realize that's 

likely not going to happen any longer. And they are saying, and 

that man said that night, he doesn't believe that this is fair. 

 

He doesn't believe that what's happening to him and his family 

right now, being put into this kind of unfortunate circumstance 

that they find themselves in, is fair. And they don't believe the 

principles of medicare are being supported by this government 

any longer, Mr. Speaker. And that's just one — one of the 

gut-wrenching, heartfelt stories that is happening in rural 

Saskatchewan right now. 

 

Those kinds of stories could be put before the people of this 

legislature on a daily basis because that's the kinds of things 

that are happening. That's the kinds of things that you see in 

rural Saskatchewan right now. And unless members of the 

legislature are, I guess, are 



April 22, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1143 

ever put into those kinds of circumstances personally, maybe 

you would never realize the kind of profound fear that this 

family has. And there's others as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the other members talked at great length about the 

privatization in the health care system and how unfair that 

would be, and how that would be against all of the principles of 

medicare, Mr. Speaker. But I would have to ask that member 

and other members of this legislature, are the kinds of things 

that are being done now not privatizing health care? Is the 

changes in the prescription drug plan just not one step towards 

the privatization of the health care system? Is that not what 

that's all about? Are optometric services that are now 

de-insured not a step towards private health care in this 

province? Are the changes in the chiropractic services not a 

step towards private health care in this province? Are the 

changes in the school-based dental plan not a step towards 

private health care? 

 

Within days, within days of these changes that were set out in 

the budget, I noticed that already one private health care 

company in this province was already advertising on television, 

already advertising that they were going to allow people of this 

province the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to be able to buy 

insurance. And that's private medicare, is it not, private health 

care services? 

 

And you lecture us, Mr. Speaker, members of this legislature 

stand up and say that we are the ones that are driving this 

towards private medicare, private health care insurance in this 

province. Well the kinds of things that you are doing is exactly 

. . . the kinds of things that you are doing, this government right 

now, are forcing those onto the people of Saskatchewan. Those 

kinds of things, those four examples — the prescription drug 

plan, optometric services, chiropractic services, and the 

school-based dental plan — are all moving this province in the 

direction of health care by private companies. And you know 

it. And the people of Saskatchewan know it. They know that 

that is exactly what's happening. They know that it's not fair 

and it doesn't uphold any principles of medicare, even though 

member after member of the government stand in their place 

and say it does, does that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And this . . . I'd like to quote a few passages from this editorial 

that came out in the Star-Phoenix a few days ago . . . April 22, 

just today, Mr. Speaker. And it's from a gentleman in the 

Eatonia area, an area that's being targeted by this government. 

And he doesn't consider it fair. 

 

 Rural Saskatchewan has finally had the last nail firmly 

driven into its coffin. (Well I don't think he thinks it's very 

fair, what's happening to him in his community.) The 

planned obsolescence of the rural hospital and downsizing 

of long-term institutional care in rural centres have sucked 

the last breath from rural areas. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this is a spokesman for that area. A 

well-known gentleman that writes on an occasional 

basis, editorials in the Star-Phoenix in this province, and he 

doesn't believe it's fair. No . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. It now being 10 p.m., this House 

stands adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 

 

 


