




















































Hansard: June 07, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2243 

 June 7, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I have 

some petitions to present on behalf of Saskatchewan residents, 

and I'll read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions come from the Estevan, Oxbow 

areas of Saskatchewan, as well as Saskatoon, Regina, Regina 

Beach.  I'll present those now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too would like to 

present several petitions.  Mr. Speaker, these . . . I'll read the 

prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions come mostly through the Regina 

area, up as far as Lumsden and on down into Lebret and places 

like that there, Mr. Speaker.  I'm pleased to lay these on the 

Table. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have 

petitions to present today.  I will read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from Regina and area.  I 

lay them on the Table now. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have several 

petitions to present on people from the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the 

NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance and financing 

arrangements. 

 

These come from Broadview, Redvers, Moose Jaw, Chaplin, 

Regina, Mossbank, and all around I guess that general area, 

Mr. Speaker.  And I'll lay them on the Table now. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have a petition 

on behalf of co-op members and others interested in energy.  

And I'll read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governing 

and finance arrangements. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these co-op members are from Viceroy, Bengough, 

Langham, North Battleford, Saskatoon, Swift Current, places 

like Dalmeny, and more from Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have some 

petitions to lay before the Assembly this afternoon, dealing 

with the upgrader: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, most of these are from the city of Regina, 

although a page is from Broadview itself. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have a petition 

here from various people in the province.  I'll read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced 

to redefine the NewGrade Energy Inc. corporate governance 

and financing arrangements. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I have them from Saskatoon, Warman, Birch Hills, Kinistino.  

And I have some from Carduff, Estevan, and Weyburn and 

Halbrite, and I lay them on the Table today. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order, the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7), they are hereby read and 

received: 



2244 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 1993 

 Of citizens of the province praying that the Assembly may 

be pleased to defeat any legislation introduced to redefine 

NewGrade Energy corporate governance and financing 

arrangements. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, it's my pleasure to introduce to you and through you 

to all members of the Assembly 10 living skills for special 

abilities people class from SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Science and Technology) in Moose Jaw who are 

seated in your gallery today, Mr. Speaker.  These students have 

been on tour of the building, and following question period 

today, the member for Moose Jaw Wakamow and I will both 

be meeting with them for a visit and refreshments to discuss 

things that they learned and would like to ask about related to 

their visit here at the Legislative Assembly chambers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of the Assembly to join 

both members of Moose Jaw in welcoming these students to 

the Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

It's with real pleasure that I welcome and invite members to 

join me in welcoming 25 students from Imperial School.  For 

those of you who are from out of the city, this is the school that 

sits on Broad Street that many of you pass on your way in. 

 

They're joined by their teachers, Jan Finlay, Marcel -- the 

handwriting is not very clear -- Lorenz, Allyson McCrimmon, 

Mrs. Short, and Mrs. Baer.  I'm going to be looking forward to 

meeting with these students afterwards.  They're here to learn 

something of democracy and their government in action.  I 

hope they have a good day. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kujawa: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is my pleasure to 

introduce to you and to the members of the Assembly 25 grade 

11 students from Campbell Collegiate.  They're in your gallery 

now with their teacher, David Evans. 

 

I hope to meet with them in room 218, and I hope the questions 

that they have for me will not be too difficult.  Please welcome 

these students. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like 

to introduce to you and to all members of the Assembly, groups 

of people representing the labour movement in this province 

from Regina and other places.  They're sitting in the east and 

west galleries, and I'd ask all members of the Assembly to 

welcome them here today to the proceedings. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

STC Route Cut-backs 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

being open and honest with the public of Saskatchewan seems 

to be very difficult for the NDP (New Democratic Party) 

government; in fact it seems to be a major failure on their part. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people remember when the opposition 

accused the NDP of planning to close rural hospitals.  No that's 

not true, is what they said -- we would never close rural 

hospitals.  That's just scare tactics, they cried.  Of course, we 

all know that they went ahead and closed over 52 rural 

hospitals just a few short weeks ago. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, recently the NDP said that they would not 

eliminate bus routes to rural Saskatchewan.  In fact the 

president of STC (Saskatchewan Transportation Company) 

promised in April no routes would be eliminated completely.  

Well, Mr. Speaker, a few weeks ago . . . and guess what 

happened.  Seven routes are being eliminated while frequency 

of service on several other routes are being reduced. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister responsible for 

STC.  Mr. Minister, why must your government insist on 

playing games with the Saskatchewan public when making 

negative announcements?  These are major cut-backs to these 

small towns and villages and the people in those communities 

deserve your complete honesty.  Why did you and your STC 

officials mislead these people into believing their routes were 

safe? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, if there's somebody 

who's misleading, I think it's the opposition again.  I think . . . 

he refers to the hospital questions and what we said was we 

weren't closing hospitals; we were converting hospitals and 

that's exactly what's happening.  They insist on the same 

language. 

 

I assure you, Mr. Speaker, that the STC was running a $5 

million deficit which in the face of the financial mess we 

inherited, everybody agrees cannot continue.  We've had wide 

consultation with people as to how to deliver the same services 

as cheaply as we can.  We need to save some money.  We need 

to, at the same time, maintain services as the best of our ability 

to those communities, and that is exactly what STC is 

attempting to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Perhaps the 

minister wouldn't mind explaining to the people in Mankota 

what their hospital was transferred 



June 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2245 

into. 

 

Mr. Minister, in April it was a disastrous month for rural 

Saskatchewan.  That was when the Minister of Health broke 

her pledge to the small towns and villages and closed their 

hospitals.  They're still in shock over that betrayal, Mr. 

Speaker.  Now we find out that your assurances to those same 

people about their bus routes has been another NDP betrayal.  

You told them in April, when they were reeling over hospital 

closures, don't worry, be happy, your bus routes are safe.  And 

now we see the elimination of seven rural bus routes. 

 

Mr. Minister, we are not allowed to call a spade a spade in this 

Assembly, but the word misleading comes to mind. 

 

Mr. Minister, why did you tell the people of Saskatchewan that 

their bus routes were safe when you knew full well that you 

would be closing them in addition to their hospitals? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, the people in rural 

Saskatchewan are undergoing some tough times.  But I'll tell 

you, the people in rural Saskatchewan, unlike the members 

opposite, are getting to work and doing something about it.  

They are working on a new way to deliver health system on the 

new wellness model.  The people out there are not whining and 

crying and snivelling as the opposition is; they are out there 

doing something about it and they're also doing . . . We're 

talking to these people about bus routes and how to deliver 

service and how they can maintain the service, and they've got 

some innovative ideas.  And you will see when the smoke is 

cleared that we will have efficient service to rural 

Saskatchewan, and rural Saskatchewan will survive in spite of 

the doom and gloom that comes from the benches opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, not only are 

you closing the rural hospitals, but now you're taking away 

their buses so they can't even get down the road to those 

hospitals miles away.  And you told the people that you would 

not close bus routes, and now you are. 

 

That's betrayal, plain and simple, Mr. Minister, and it's another 

nail in the coffin of rural Saskatchewan.  And your government 

has no concept of the meaning, open and honest, other than to 

write it in your campaign literature. 

 

The board members from the Amalgamated Transit Union 

know what your government is all about.  They accused you of 

not being open about the cuts.  In fact, one board member asks: 

why not tell the people?  Why not tell the seniors?  Why not be 

opened about it? 

 

Mr. Minister, I ask you to answer their questions.  Why not tell 

the people?  Why not tell the seniors?  Why not be open about 

it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 

continue to contradict themselves.  They ask us first to consult 

with people, to go out and talk to people before we make 

decisions, and we do that.  Then they say, well why didn't you 

just tell them upfront what you were going to do? 

 

I think that there was a process involved, as never before with 

STC, where they looked at people and talked to local people 

and talked to local communities, put the problem on the line 

which is a $5 million deficit in the bus company, and looked 

for people to help us with innovative solutions. 

 

And although there's decisions . . . some of the decisions we're 

making are tough, I think they are the right ones, and I think 

again rural Saskatchewan is not dead in spite of what the 

members opposite would like us to believe. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, you talk 

about consultation.  Consultation also involves listening, and 

that's where your government has fallen down terribly.  Your 

idea of consultation is to send Gordon McMurtry around to 

inspect bus stop washrooms. 

 

Mr. Minister, you know full well that you didn't come clean 

with the people in April, because you didn't want to heap more 

disastrous news on them while you were closing their hospitals.  

And that's what the truth is. 

 

Mr. Minister, the ATU (Amalgamated Transit Union) are 

holding small-town meetings to help focus attention on these 

cuts.  As one member said, we are finding out there's a lot of 

people who are not happy, and they are not getting a chance to 

express it.  That sentiment seems to follow your government 

around.  Everyone is angry with you these days, Mr. Minister -- 

co-op members, seniors, business and union alike. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you allow those who are not happy the 

opportunity to express themselves.  Will you attend these 

meetings and hear and listen firsthand to what the results of 

your ongoing betrayal are. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Certainly, Mr. Speaker, we're 

always ready to listen to people.  Those union meetings are just 

beginning.  We did have people from the department attend.  I 

think the one that was held I believe it was last night or the 

night before, had a whole sum of 20 people out, some of which 

were the government officials who were there to hear the 

concerns. 

 

Certainly I think people are willing to talk to us and we're 

willing to listen, but I think in a different way than the 

opposition talks, which is to stand back and point and holler 

and cry.  I think there's much more constructive thoughts 

coming from the communities 



2246 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 1993 

than there are coming from the benches opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Purchase of Video Lottery Terminals 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the minister responsible for gaming.  Mr. Minister, on a 

number of occasions we have asked you to release all of the 

video lottery bids you have received so Saskatchewan people 

can see they are getting the best possible value for the $20 

million of their tax money you are spending.  On every 

occasion you said the bids cannot be released at the request of 

the companies who submitted the bids. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, that's not true.  The real reason that the 

information cannot be released is because you have put a gag 

order on the bidders so that no one can see the decisions you 

are making behind closed doors. 

 

In the request for proposal this is what it says: bidder action 

which may lead to immediate disqualification include the 

release of any information related to the request for proposal or 

award without the express written consent of the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Commission. 

 

Mr. Minister, why was this gag order of the proposal call . . . 

what are you trying to hide?  What are you trying to hide from 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I guess this may be 

number 75 that I've answered now, but I'll answer it one more 

time.  And I want to say with respect to the proposal call that 

the member will know that the Gaming Commission 

short-listed after doing an in-depth analysis of technical details.  

The proposals that were put forth by these companies were 

then short-listed.  From then, from that process, that we would 

sit down and work through the final details of what may in fact 

turn out to be a final deal with the two companies. 

 

What I have consistently said is because of the information that 

was received with respect to the security report from other 

jurisdictions in terms of their gaming commissions, from other 

law enforcement agencies with respect to the information that 

they supplied, that the Gaming Commission would not be 

releasing the details. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don't know how much more concise or how 

much more clear I can be, or how many weeks that I have to 

deal with this issue and answer the same question with the 

same answer, because there is only one answer.  And I say to 

the member from Morse, the answer that I gave today was the 

answer that I gave last week and the week before that and the 

week before that, and it'll be the same answer that I give again 

next week if he continues to answer the same question. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, you issued 

this gag order because the proposal call process was nothing 

but a sham.  You had already decided who you were going to 

do business with.  You couldn't afford to let the information on 

the bids out because Saskatchewan people might see that you 

didn't make the best possible choice. 

 

Mr. Minister, you say you can't release, then you do it partially.  

Quit blaming the companies who made bids, which you did on 

Thursday last week.  Tell us why you issued the gag order on 

the bid proposal.  What is it in those bids that you don't want 

anyone to see? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, in answer to the 

member's question, and I want to just point out some of the 

inconsistencies.  For two weeks, perhaps three weeks in a row, 

he comes in questioning . . . into this legislature questioning as 

to why we dealt with VLC (Video Lottery Consultants) out of 

Manitoba . . . or out of Montana, why we short-listed them.  A 

week later he comes in lobbying on behalf of one of the 

unsuccessful bidders who wanted to use VLC's technology in 

terms of the bid and in terms of what they wanted to offer the 

people of this province with their proposal. 

 

So I want to say to you, Mr. Member from Morse, instead of 

lobbying why don't you work with the Government of 

Saskatchewan and work with the people of the province, work 

with the people in the hotels association to put this program in 

place so that we can generate some revenue for rural hotels and 

maintain the viability of some of the smaller communities in 

rural Saskatchewan?  Why don't you work with us, Mr. 

Member from Morse, as opposed to standing up in this House 

day after day putting forth half-truths, if half-truths at all?  

Why don't you do that, Mr. Member? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, a quote from 

the request for proposal:  bidder action which may lead to 

immediate disqualification include the release of any 

information related to the request for proposal or award without 

express written consent of the Saskatchewan Gaming 

Commission. 

 

That was in the bid, Mr. Minister.  You want to be open and 

honest and forthright.  Take that away and let everybody see 

what the people of the province have a right to see, and that 

you're spending $20 million behind a gag order placed on the 

individuals who put the bids in, of the four companies.  Will 

you provide that to the people of Saskatchewan so they can see 

what you chose in relation to the others. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, let me say to 



June 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2247 

the member from Morse that we will release the details, that we 

will . . . that will be appropriate to be released.  We will release 

them at the appropriate time. 

 

I want to say to the member from Morse that I'm not going to 

negotiate, nor would the Gaming Commission negotiate in 

public with respect to this.  We're finalizing the deal. 

 

In terms of the purchase of the video lottery terminals, I have 

indicated to him quite clearly that the security report and other 

matters that were . . . that were looked into by the 

Saskatchewan Gaming Commission would not be appropriate 

to be released.  I say that today.  I said that last week.  And I'll 

say that to the member next week. 

 

Mr. Member, I say, instead of standing up and sniping into 

mid-air, why don't you sit down and work with the people of 

this province.  Work with the people in the hotels industry so 

that we can get this program working, up and running this 

summer, as opposed to the ongoing and nagging question that 

you can't seem to get out of your mind. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, you say you have nothing to 

hide but your actions simply don't match your words.  You 

refuse to release the security report.  You refuse to allow Mr. 

Egan to come before the legislature to answer questions.  You 

refuse to release the proposals to the public.  You put a gag 

order on all the companies participating.  You are like a 

minister with a lot to hide, Mr. Minister. 

 

If everything you are saying is true, if everything is clean, then 

why don't you simply release this information and let the public 

decide?  Will you do that today, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, in answer to the 

member's question, I want to take him back to last week where 

he accused members of Executive Council of being involved in 

the decision to short-list.  He trots before the people of this 

province letters that came by one of the competitors who were 

not successful, who wrote, lobbying the government, after the 

fact, after cabinet had made this decision. 

 

Weeks later he comes in and comes to this legislature with 

public documents, letters that were lobbies on behalf of one of 

the unsuccessful bidders and puts this forth as being 

documentation that members of Executive Council were 

involved in the choice in terms of the short list of the VLTs 

(video lottery terminal). 

 

So I say to you, Mr. Member from Morse, you had no 

credibility last week.  You've got no credibility today, and 

you'll have no credibility tomorrow if you continue with this 

ridiculous sham. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, I'm here 

representing the taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan, 

and I will defend them to the very last that they have the right 

to know where you're spending $20 million. 

 

Mr. Minister, there's another section in the request for proposal 

that I find kind of strange.  Your government likes to talk about 

and encourage value added manufacturing, job creation, but 

once again your words are hollow. 

 

On page 5 of the request for proposal, under the heading, 

maximizing the program's benefit to Saskatchewan, the 

proposal call reads this:  this objective does not imply a 

preference for Saskatchewan-based suppliers or products. 

 

In exactly the same proposal presented in Alberta they said, we 

will maximize Alberta's input.  Mr. Minister, are you like the 

Associate Minister of Finance who wants to go into Medicine 

Hat to represent them, to have Alberta people compete on an 

ongoing basis with us when we don't have an advantage?  I'm 

here representing the people of Saskatchewan.  Why don't you 

give us an opportunity to see those bids? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, what we say to the 

member for Morse, it's becoming more and more clear who 

he's representing, and it's not the people of Saskatchewan.  He's 

here lobbying on behalf of one of his private-interest friends; 

that's what he's here doing.  Because there is no one that would, 

with the lack of credibility that you have displayed, would 

stand in this legislature and ask for 75 or 80 times. Who are 

you lobbying on behalf, I say to the member for Morse? 

 

Mr. Member, the company that you're lobbying on behalf of 

was not successful and I want to tell you why.  Because they 

were buying from one of the companies that the Government of 

Saskatchewan short-listed.  And then they were going to sell to 

the people of Saskatchewan after they had purchased from 

them.  And basically what we were looking at was a 

middleman. 

 

So what I say to you, member from Morse, why don't you open 

your eyes and understand what the perception is of the people 

of the province.  You're nothing but a lobby group.  That PC 

(Progressive Conservative) caucus is nothing but a lobby 

group. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Next question. 

 

Boundaries Legislation 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- My question is directed to the Minister of 

Justice.  Mr. Minister, on May 14 you announced that a 

boundaries commission will redraw Saskatchewan's electoral 

map.  You stated at that time, and I quote:  This legislation will 

allow an 



2248 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 1993 

independent commission to establish constituency boundaries 

without obstruction.  End of quote. 

 

Has the mandate of the proposed commission changed since 

that date? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, the answer is no. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, you state today that the 

commission will work independently, I'm sure, with no 

interference from government. However recent statements by 

you indicate otherwise. 

 

In the May 19 edition of the Lloydminster Times you were 

quoted as saying, the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster, 

and I quote: 

 

 . . . would avoid the reaper if the legislation to cut eight 

MLA's was passed. 

 

End of quote. 

 

Is it for you to judge who will and won't be affected by 

boundary redistribution? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- What I said to the media in 

Lloydminster was that the present population of the 

constituency of Lloydminster would be about the average size 

of the population under redistribution.  I did not mean to imply 

that the borders would be exactly the same or anything like 

that, but a constituency the size of Lloydminster would 

probably be about the average size of a constituency based 

upon 58 constituencies distributed on the basis of plus or minus 

5 per cent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'm going to 

quote, Mr. Minister, from the same news item.  And you were 

talking about the constituency of Cut Knife-Lloydminster and 

how it might be affected by boundary redistribution.  And this 

is your quote: 

 

 "It won't make much of a difference here in Lloydminster.  

(And true, you did mention size).  This is about the size . . . 

we're looking for." 

 

Furthermore, in the Prince Albert Herald on May 18, you 

indicate that changes of the electoral map in Prince Albert will 

be minimal as well.  By making such statements, Mr. Minister, 

are you not undermining the commission's job to determine 

how the electoral map will be redrawn? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- In both those interviews, which were on 

the same day, what I was intending to convey to the 

interviewers, as I've already indicated to the member, is that 

those seats, those three seats were about the right size.  If you 

take the 58-seat configuration under the Bill, take away the two 

northern seats, you get 56 left, and the average size is about the 

same size as those two constituencies. 

 

I did not mean to imply, and I well could have -- I don't know; 

I can't remember my exact words -- but I 

did not mean to imply that the boundaries of those 

constituencies would not change.  What I meant is that the size 

of those constituencies, the numbers of people in them, would 

be about the same as they were now.  That's what I was trying 

to convey. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, can you 

confirm that the Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation's mapping agency is already this day, drawing up 

boundary maps in spite of the fact that a new electoral 

boundary map has not yet been determined nor has the 

boundary commission to draw up the new map even been 

formed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The commission has not been formed.  I 

have invited both opposition parties to suggest names, and 

indeed you have suggested one name, and I believe that after 

the Bill is passed, the official opposition will be suggesting 

names.  Certainly there is no work going on in SPMC 

(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) or 

anywhere in government with respect to constituency maps 

now, none at all. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  You are 

confirming then that the mapping agency of SPMC is not doing 

any work at all, is what I heard you say today.  I'd suggest that 

your government's fingerprints are already all over the 

boundary commission and you dictated that 58 seats would be 

established. 

 

You have dictated that two northern ridings will remain 

unchanged.  You've stated that any changes to the ridings of 

Cut Knife-Lloydminster and Prince Albert will be minimal.  

Your fellow member from Moose Jaw Palliser has stated, and I 

quote:  It's certain that Moose Jaw will continue to have at least 

two seats after the electoral map is redrawn. 

 

Is this what you consider allowing the boundaries commission 

to work independently -- and I quote you again -- without 

obstruction and in a manner which will deserve the full 

confidence of all Saskatchewan people? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I certainly hope so.  It's a difficult 

question to answer in those terms, but I certainly hope so.  And 

I think everything that I've said publicly has been in that 

connection, particularly when I stress again that I was referring 

to the average size of the constituencies. 

 

I want to just deal with one other point in response to the 

member's question, and that is the dictating the number of 

seats.  And this is a matter the member has raised, her 

suggestion being that we should leave that question up to the 

commission. 

 

And I want to say that our view of this matter, the government's 

view of this matter is that the size of government must come 

down.  This legislature is too 



June 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2249 

large; there are too many of us here.  And we gave that 

question a lot of consideration, a lot of internal debate, and 

decided that we should reduce the size of this Assembly by 

eight seats.  And that is a cost-cutting measure which has 

reality, because it saves over a million dollars a year.  In 

addition it sends what I consider to be a powerful signal to the 

rest of the province that these things can be done and should be 

done in these very difficult times that we face. 

 

So we want to say in the legislation that this reduction shall 

take place and prescribe what it is, rather than leave that 

question up to a commission structured as this one is, with one 

of the members being selected by the Chief Justice and the 

other two by us in this Assembly. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

during the campaign there was a leaders' debate.  And there 

was only one leader in that debate that even talked about 

reducing MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly).  The 

now Premier and the previous premier both indicated that they 

would not be in agreement to reducing the number in this 

Legislative Assembly.  It was only I that ran on that. 

 

The member from Saskatoon Idylwyld appeared on CBC 

(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) Noon Edition, May 19.  

And when asked why the commission should not decide how 

many MLAs Saskatchewan should have, he replied, and I 

quote: that's the decision that government should make.  The 

government has an obligation to accept the responsibility to 

decide how many members that the legislature should have.  

That is always how it has been done.  End of quote. 

 

Mr. Minister, when we are talking about reform, is the fact that 

things have always been done this way any basis for 

determining something that is of such great importance, as your 

colleague suggests? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I think so.  I know 

it's not important that things are always done that way.  But I 

would point out to the member that in this country of Canada, 

through all of its history of 125 years, I am not aware that a 

question of the size of a legislature should be left up to an 

outside commission.  I may be wrong, but I don't know of any 

precedent for it whatever. 

 

I think that it's a decision that's appropriate for this legislature 

to make.  After all we're elected to govern this province.  And 

part of government is the structure of government itself. 

 

I would ask the member in return though, how large would be 

the proposed provincial senate that she has proposed in times 

past? 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to introduce 

guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my 

privilege and pleasure to introduce 21 grade 4's from the 

Oxbow Elementary School.  Oxbow is in the southern side of 

my constituency near the U.S. (United States) border and is the 

largest town in my constituency. 

 

Along with the grade 4 students, we have their teacher, Earl 

Huenison; chaperons, Chris Christienson, Arlene Hansen, and 

Julie Hannah; and their bus driver, Angie Armstrong. 

 

I would ask everyone in the legislature to join with me in 

welcoming them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Before orders of the day, I'd ask for leave to make a statement. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Seniors' Week 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much.  Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to honour our senior citizens and to share with this 

Assembly my pleasure in proclaiming June 6 to 12 as Seniors' 

Week in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Much has been said and written about getting older and living 

longer.  The issues are not abstract, they are very real.  They 

touched our loved ones and they touch us.  The simple truth is 

that as we grow up, we also grow older.  We experience life, 

we make history, and hopefully we gain some wisdom along 

the way.  Mr. Speaker, it is seniors' wealth of experience, 

insight, and wisdom that I wish to recognize today. 

 

Most seniors are active and contributing members of our 

province.  During this week in particular, hundreds of seniors 

will be participating in special events and activities. 

 

Seniors service all by sitting on boards and on local 

government councils.  They provide hundreds of hours of 

volunteer work for churches, charities, and service clubs across 

this province.  Many seniors have spoken to me about getting 

involved in helping shape the new health districts and in 

developing a strong wellness approach to health care. 

 

But these community-minded commitments are only part of 

seniors' contributions.  As importantly, seniors are an enduring 

source of support and encouragement to their families and 

friends. 

 

Today's youngest seniors were born in 1928.  They grew up in 

the Great Depression.  They knew war and they knew good 

times. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our seniors understand the collective 



2250 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 1993 

sacrifices we must make to ensure a brighter future for 

ourselves and for our families.  More than anyone, our seniors 

understand the importance of working together towards a 

common goal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our elders have developed a province 

characterized by caring and a cooperative spirit.  I invite all 

members of the Legislative Assembly to join with me in 

thanking our parents and our grandparents for this legacy and 

in asking them for their guidance and wise counsel as we work 

together to build a future for our province.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to join with 

the minister in acknowledging Seniors' Week.  However I must 

say, Mr. Speaker, I believe it's ironic, to say the least, that the 

NDP would even go to the trouble.  They certainly have not 

troubled to exercise any responsibility for seniors over the last 

two years, and they have done nothing to show any real 

commitment to the province's seniors. 

 

Indeed, Mr. Speaker, I say to the minister: over the past 19 

months we've seen your government undertake the single most 

brutal attack on the seniors in the history of Saskatchewan.  

You cancelled the seniors' heritage plan; you gutted the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan; you closed hospitals and cut 

long-term funding.  You are phasing right out of 1 and 2 level 

funding.  You cut the bus route, you cut the bus route . . . 

totally eliminated the bus route to Mankota; you closed the 

hospitals.  And now how do you expect those seniors to get to a 

hospital, Madam Minister? 

 

You increased prescription drugs, utility bills, taxes, and you've 

made it extremely difficult for thousands of seniors on fixed 

income to get by, month by month.  And I say again to the 

minister: you certainly have changed your tune from the days 

when you used to stand on this side of the House and pretend 

that you were a friend to the seniors.  It's just completely 

apparent, Mr. Speaker, that the concern the NDP had for 

Saskatchewan seniors ended on election night, and they've been 

attacking them ever since. 

 

The NDP government hacked drug cost, hearing-aid cost, 

oxygen, insulin, chiropractic care, and optometric care, Mr. 

Speaker.  You've increased income tax, sales tax, power bills, 

phone bills, and natural gas bills.  And, Madam Minister, to the 

seniors these increases amount to a substantial portion of their 

monthly income.  And then the minister says to the seniors: too 

bad, we have this debt, you know.  So you will just have to find 

the resources to pay -- pay for your insulin, your long-term 

health care, and so on and on and on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And meanwhile you say to Eaton's: gee, well, we see your 

taxes on here are too high; we'll give you a rebate.  Yeah, we'll 

give a rebate to Eaton's, yeah.  Seniors, we have a debt; no 

rebate for you. 

 

You say to your ministerial assistants: well golly gee, I see that 

$40,000 a year isn't enough for you to enjoy 

life, so let's get it up to 50,000 or 60,000 a year and show some 

compassion for our political staff.  Seniors: oh, we have a debt, 

you'll have to give up your $500-a-year heritage grant.  Yes, 

right.  And the list could go on and on, Mr. Speaker, but I won't 

take up too much more time. 

 

I just want to close, Mr. Speaker, by issuing a clear challenge 

to the government through the Minister of Social Services.  Just 

on one issue, Madam Minister, and that's the issue of home 

maintenance.  Mr. Speaker, this government forces people out 

of their homes, out of nursing homes in the name of home care.  

They are missing the point, Mr. Speaker.  The elderly cannot 

remain in their homes if the homes are not maintained.  It will 

not matter, Madam Minister, if a nurse visits those homes once 

or twice a week if the roof is leaking and the lawn is not 

mowed. 

 

Right now, Madam Minister, the great burden of home 

maintenance is falling on the municipalities, which they 

themselves are reeling from your cut-backs.  If this government 

wants to prove commitment to those seniors in real need, all it 

has to do is bring in a line item in the budget for home 

maintenance. 

 

And I leave the minister with this challenge.  And the 

information that . . . And I will leave you this information, 

Madam Minister.  That subject will be very high on my agenda 

over the next few months, because I continue to receive pleas 

from seniors throughout this province.  Madam Minister, 

would you please take a look at that challenge?  Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1445) 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well some 

people dread it, but many of those who have reached a plateau 

say they actually like it.  And this group is the fastest growing 

segment of our society in Canada.  I'm talking about the people 

in this country who are 65 years of age and over. 

 

Most seniors say that turning 65 is an opportunity to do the 

things that they just didn't have the time to do in the past.  And 

while many seniors lead productive lives, their biggest 

challenge, beyond financial concerns for some and health 

concerns for others, is really not their age but rather their 

perception that they can no longer contribute as they once did.  

It is valuable that seniors are honoured in ways such as we are 

doing this week in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

To stress the point, how significant they are, people who are 

active who are capable and enhance our society through their 

expertise, their experience, and their wisdom.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 



June 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2251 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 38 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Human 

Rights Code 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask at this time that the minister please 

introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, the officials that I have with 

me today are Madeleine Robertson, who was here when this 

matter was being considered in committee last Friday, and Mr. 

Ross Macnab of the constitutional law branch of the 

department. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Chairman, it already appears the Bill is definitely in trouble.  

We already have a change in the minister's personnel. 

 

Mr. Chairman, when we look at Bill 38 -- I think the minister's 

even surprised that I noticed that there was a change at the back 

-- but as I indicated on Friday, Mr. Chairman, and to the 

minister, certainly when it comes to legal questions and 

legislation that's . . . regardless of who brings in legislation or 

regardless of the type of legislation, it would seem to me the 

format that takes place in the legal community, there's always 

some person or other at the end of the day will find a way to try 

and get around legislation or find a way to argue a point on a 

different basis. 

 

And it seems to me in viewing the two amendments brought 

forward by the minister . . . And I'm sorry to say that I would 

have to suggest that I don't find the amendments really as 

encompassing as the minister has led us to believe. 

 

One of the things that has really been pre-eminent, a point of 

focus in the debate on Bill 38, Mr. Chairman, and to the 

minister, has been the area of employment and of housing.  

And I'm wondering if the minister let this House know if there 

was another way of addressing the point of guaranteeing 

employment and housing, especially to individuals whose 

sexual orientation as the Bill is relating to, would be 

individuals of homosexual persuasion.  Mr. Minister, is there 

another format that could have been used? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, with respect to the change in 

officials, I want to say to the member that the thing to watch 

for is the minister.  When there is a change in ministers then 

maybe you can read a lot into it. 

 

Of course these matters could have been handled in a different 

way.  Before human rights legislation came along, they were 

handled in many different ways and human rights legislation 

was, to a large degree, the collecting of a number of different 

statutes and bringing them into one piece of legislation because 

they dealt with the rights of individuals.  So there could have 

been other ways of doing it. 

Mr. Toth: -- Well thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you, Mr. 

Minister.  I guess, Mr. Minister, that's one of the major 

problems we do have.  And the fact that today you happen to 

be, sir, the individual sitting in the chair responsible for Justice, 

there's no guarantee that even after the shuffle coming up in 

this later on, in the earlier on in the summer or later on, 

whatever the Premier chooses to make the change, that the 

position of Justice minister may not be up for change as well.  

And once you've left the position, Mr. Minister, does that mean 

that the next person that is sitting there will have the same 

views and have the same persuasions, have the same 

convictions that you are bringing to this position of Justice 

minister, especially when we look at Bill 38? 

 

And it would seem to me, Mr. Minister, when you've indicated 

that there are other avenues, I would like to know why the 

government and why you as minister have chosen not to look at 

the other avenues rather than opening up the Human Rights 

Code. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, and to the member, we were . 

. . in our research with respect to the suggestion that these 

matters might be the subject of separate pieces of legislation, 

we were at an early stage reminded that in fact before human 

rights codes were enacted in Saskatchewan and elsewhere, 

these provisions were contained in other pieces of legislation.  

For example, there was fair accommodation legislation and 

labour standards which were protective of individuals in one 

way or another. 

 

And in Saskatchewan and in the other Canadian provinces and 

indeed in the federal jurisdiction, the decision was made to 

consolidate these various anti-discrimination provisions into a 

piece of human rights legislation.  Saskatchewan was, I think, 

one of the first to do that, but it was not the only one of course.  

And that is the pattern across the country. 

 

And it seemed to us that if we were now to take for example 

the prohibition respecting discrimination on the ground of 

sexual orientation and try and pull that out of the Human 

Rights Code and reconstitute or repass fair accommodation 

legislation, it would be a step backwards.  It would not 

recognize the considerable contribution to human rights that 

have been made by the passage, right across this country, of 

specific legislation collecting together all of the prohibitions 

against discrimination in respect of employment and 

accommodation and access to public services. 

 

The member is right and the various petitioners on this point 

are right that these matters were covered to some extent in 

other statutes before human rights legislation came along.  We 

don't want to go back to that system.  We think it's appropriate 

that these all be contained within one code, and that's the path 

we're on, that's the path other jurisdictions are on, and I think 

it's the right path. 

 

As to other ministers, I'm going to take the question as serious.  

One thing is certain and that is that ministers 



2252 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 1993 

will change from time to time.  Either the public will change 

them for us or the Premier will change, and those things 

happen.  I think that any new minister of Justice in this 

province will be working with the same officials that I have 

worked with over these many, many months in developing 

these ideas.  And I think that any minister would find himself 

or herself in the same space that I'm in on these questions. 

 

I didn't come to this office a fully learned human rights lawyer 

and I'm still not, but I have learned a great deal working with 

my officials, reading things that they have given me to read and 

reading things that I have found to read and others have 

provided to me.  And I would think that any new minister 

would find himself or herself in that same position within a 

relatively short time after assuming this office. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Chairman, Mr. 

Minister, I just want to as well acknowledge the fact that I 

believe and I do have a lot of confidence in the officials and I 

think I have a lot confidence in the present Minister of Justice, 

but there's no guarantee down the road.  And one begins to 

wonder if the Premier has any confidence any more. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, when you look at it, and as you've indicated 

you've given us a bit of a basis as to why you decided to go 

through the Human Rights Code, amend the Human Rights 

Code rather than a specific piece of legislation that would just 

strengthen those aspects within the Human Rights Code rather 

than opening up the whole debate on the Human Rights Code 

and amending the code. 

 

Now if, as a number of jurisdictions have already found out . . . 

And certainly across the United States of America there are a 

number of challenges that have taken place.  In some cases . . . 

I believe it was the state of Colorado had a vote last fall along 

with their state elections, and the vote overwhelmingly 

defeated the present, I believe it was the present Bill and asked 

-- I'd have to go back to the information I have on it just to 

bring out all the details on it . . . but it would seem to me, Mr. 

Minister, why couldn't we have looked, even in the province of 

Saskatchewan, of a specific piece of legislation that would 

have strengthened protection within the Human Rights Code 

rather than opening up and amending the Human Rights Code 

to address that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I am going to be repeating myself to 

some extent, Mr. Chair, in answer to this question.  We, as I 

have said inside and outside this House . . . is the very limited 

idea that's contained in Bill 38.  The protections that are 

extended by Bill 38 are really quite limited, and I concede to 

the member, as I have before, that it would be possible to 

address these prohibitions in separate statutes. But at the end of 

the day we had to ask ourself why we would do that when the 

framework for protection is there.  It is the protection that we 

wish to extend to the ground of sexual orientation and family 

status and receipt of social assistance.  It works precisely for us 

in that respect. 

If we were to go with separate legislation, we would in effect 

be repassing The Human Rights Act under another title to take 

care of one particular ground, and we couldn't see why we 

would do that, particularly in light of the fact that right across 

this country it has been dealt with within the four corners of the 

human rights legislation. 

 

So at the end of the day we concluded that it would be a step 

backward to try and do it the way that you have suggested, that 

it was most logical to do it within the framework of the existing 

human rights law.  As I point out, it is our view that this is a 

very limited protection, that the demarcation lines are clear and 

indeed vivid.  And there is, in our view, no case for treating 

this any differently than you treat other prohibited grounds for 

discrimination in our society. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I find that 

interesting because certainly the debate that is taking place . . . 

and I'm sure that all jurisdictions, even across our nation, 

jurisdictions that have already amended their Human Rights 

Code to bring in protection based on sexual orientation have 

probably found -- and indeed time will tell -- of the extended 

debate that is going to take place, not only beyond the 

Legislative Assembly here, but in all areas of Canada.  And the 

demands that people will be placing based on the changes to 

the Human Rights Code. 

 

And when I look at the changes and observe the changes here, 

Mr. Minister, it seems as much as we're endeavouring or you've 

endeavoured to tell people and let people know, no, this isn't 

going to go beyond a certain point, that certainly it does now 

open up the doors to the demands by the individuals with 

homosexual persuasion to demand greater access to adoption or 

greater access to marital status or even the spousal benefits. 

 

It just seems to me, Mr. Minister, that regardless of how we 

look at it, the fact is that any time we try to accommodate a 

group, at the same time it seems that in trying to accommodate 

-- whether it's a group over here, whether it's a homosexual 

group, whether it's an ethnic group, or whether it's a religious 

group on the other side, Mr. Minister -- as soon as we start 

trying to accommodate groups or the demands of individual 

groups, at the end of the day what we have would just open up 

a broader base for argument. 

 

And certainly when you get before a court of law and in a 

courtroom, that argument can become very broad and very 

wide-ranging.  And I think the Bill, as we see it today and as 

you're presented it to the House, leaves itself wide open for that 

broader debate. 

 

And I would think and I believe, Mr. Minister, as we will see 

down the road, and it may not be in this session or in this term 

of government -- it could be even 5, could be 10, could be 15 

years down the road -- I believe we live in a province where the 

greater percentage of the populace base still have some high 

moral values, and those values just in the fact of our 



June 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2253 

relationship with our neighbours is passed on to individuals. 

 

Mr. Minister, I believe that when you look at it, and as greater 

groups become more active, I think as you will find -- and 

maybe you've already noticed it since you've been elected in 

1991, even in the two years you've been there, and I only was 

elected in '86 so it was the last half of the previous 

government's term -- but it seemed to me, Mr. Minister, that 

you didn't need a lot of individuals involved, but some groups 

can become very active, can become very activist, and they can 

be very . . . certainly put real lobby or present a real lobby, 

whether it's you or whether it's us or whether it's the Liberal 

Party or the Reform Party, whoever.  Any time a party's elected 

to govern, it seems there's always somebody out there looking 

for something. 

 

And my feeling, Mr. Minister, and certainly the feeling of 

individuals across the province of Saskatchewan, is that that's 

what we are going to see.  We are going to see a minority 

group using changes to the code to demand greater access to 

the privileges that they feel that they are left out of, that they do 

not have the opportunity to participate in at this time. 

 

And I guess we can stand here and we'll probably debate this 

for a day or two yet.  And certainly I think that debate will 

reflect the differences of opinion that are right across this 

province. 

 

But how can you really guarantee to the Saskatchewan public 

that this piece of legislation is not going to go beyond what 

you've proposed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, and to the member, I 

want to answer that question from two perspectives.  First of 

all, with respect to the legislation itself, we were at pains in the 

drafting process to ensure that the protection being extended by 

the code did not extend beyond the code, did not extend to 

other matters but were restricted to the matters in respect of 

which protection is given to other questions like race and 

religion and age and sex, within the code. 

 

So we tried to use that same structure.  And we are confident in 

doing that that we don't have some kind of a piece of 

legislation on our hands that is going to explode into something 

else when it gets into the hands of the judiciary.  I think that 

that will not happen.  I think the judiciary are, if I may use the 

term, relatively conservative about these matters. 

 

And if not, we are the supreme law-making body here in this 

legislature, and if the judiciary are not reading us correctly as 

to our intention, we can go back and do it over again and get it 

right.  But I don't think we're going to have to do that.  We've 

looked at all the other pieces of legislation in the country and 

we have considered carefully the effect of the words that we 

used and we think we've got it right. 

 

The other thing I want to deal with though -- and this is the 

main thrust of the member's question as I 

understood it -- was what will we do if they come back and ask 

for more, if gay and lesbian people are not satisfied with what's 

in this code and they have a larger agenda and come back and 

press on us some more. 

 

I have said on behalf of this government in the clearest terms 

that I could find -- don't bother; this is as far as this government 

intends to go with respect to this subject.  And I've drawn the 

limits as sharply and clearly as I could, and I have the 

government behind me. 

 

I believe that on these issues you speak for your party, and you 

have made your views very clear on these matters.  I believe 

that on these issues you speak for your party, and you have 

made your views very clear on these matters.  I believe that the 

member from Saskatoon Greystone similarly has clear views 

on this matter which she has been successful in communicating 

to the public.  And so we have in this House a remarkable 

degree of consensus as to what we shouldn't do.  And we're not 

doing it, and we have said to the community that we don't 

intend to do it. 

 

Now you and I can't speak for people who will be elected four 

years from now and eight years from now and so on, you 

know.  They will have to make their own decisions.  But we 

can speak for ourselves and we have both done so.  We have all 

done so. 

 

So if there is a lobby group forming up out there with a larger 

agenda, I don't know about it, my colleagues don't know about 

it, and I don't think that you know about it.  It's still to come.  I 

would think that that would not happen in light of the clear 

lines that have been drawn and the clear statements that have 

been made.  But how do you know?  Anything can happen; 

anything is possible.  But I would personally doubt it. 

 

So I think from both those perspectives we can proceed with 

this Bill and do so with some comfort, and I presume to say the 

following.  I believe that you and your caucus are comfortable 

with this Bill as so far as it is an anti-discrimination Bill.  But 

the problems that you have is that it may be something more or 

may lead to something more.  And I think I understand that and 

I'm pleased to discuss Bill 38 in those terms. 

 

But from my perspective, that is as far as it goes and we'll deal 

with any other agendas that come along later, any other 

presentations that are made, when the time comes and in the 

context of the very clear statements that have been made as to 

our thinking and our intentions and our limitations with respect 

to this particular agenda item. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, what I'd 

like to know is what your perception is of the role of an MLA.  

In a democratic system as an MLA, I perceive my position as 

an MLA is to represent my constituents, represent the views of 

my constituents.  And certainly there are times when some of 

my moral views may not necessarily be agreed to by a number 

of my constituents. 



2254 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 1993 

But I've been fortunate.  The constituency I represent happens 

to adhere to a lot of the moral views and the standard that I 

have represented.  And I'm just wondering, exactly what your 

view is when it comes to representing the constituency.  Do we 

represent and speak for our constituents?  Is that your 

observation?  Is that how you would observe the position of an 

MLA, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well the question, Mr. Chair, is 

certainly an interesting one, and one that has been hotly 

debated for as long as we've had these kinds of representative 

governments, where people like the member and I and all the 

rest of us are elected by constituents to come to a parliament to 

represent them. 

 

I believe it was Burke who said, the great Conservative, who 

said in a classic analysis that you, Mr. Member, are elected to 

come here and represent your constituents to the best of your 

ability.  You're not expected to reflect their views, you're 

expected to state your own.  They have elected the individual 

who sits in your chair, not to puppet their . . . or to mirror their 

views or to simply say what they would have you say, but to 

say what you believe and what you stand for. 

 

And if they don't like that, when the next election comes, 

they'll get rid of you and get somebody in there who they think 

more clearly or more accurately reflects their view. 

 

There are others, of course, and there are many, many of them 

who believe that we parliamentarians are simply here to 

express and to adhere to the wishes of the majority of our 

constituents -- which is sort of a government by public opinion 

polls or referenda or plebiscite or whatever we would . . . It's as 

though we were not individuals in our own right, exercising our 

own independent judgement on the important questions of the 

day, but merely here to pass on what our constituents think. 

 

I think probably the most practical answer to that debate, most 

accurate or the most comfortable solution is that we're both.  

We're here because our constituents have confidence in our 

judgement, in our ability, in our character, and our track record.  

So that they're comfortable sending us here to do the things that 

we do, and at the same time they want us to go back home and 

talk to them and listen to them and be persuaded by them and 

to take into account their views. 

 

And I know that that is not a satisfactory answer to the 

member's questions, but it is a question that has been debated 

for as long as I've been listening to these debates, and I think 

probably since we started to elect people to go to parliament to 

govern countries or provinces or what have you. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chairman. 

To the minister, as a couple of comments this weekend were 

made to me, Mr. Minister, that was a good political answer. 

Mr. Minister, one has to ask, and I guess . . . you made a 

comment about a person doing his job to the best of his ability.  

And as an MLA responsible for a seat in the province of 

Saskatchewan, as a Minister of Justice responsible for a broad 

area of the province of Saskatchewan, the judicial area, and 

certainly a number of other areas of government under your 

responsibility, Mr. Minister, in light of the discussion that has 

taken place, in light of the people's persuasion on this matter 

and people's views on this matter, I'm asking you, Mr. Minister, 

do you believe you're representing your constituents and the 

people of Saskatchewan to the best of your ability? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, I am.  I have probably had 

more conversations with more people on this Bill than anyone 

in this House has.  I say that with respect.  And that's natural, 

because I've had to carry this for so long and through such 

difficult times. 

 

It is my experience throughout that whole process that on this 

Bill as I propose it to this Assembly, the majority of our 

citizens favour it.  I think the majority of your caucus favours it 

in the terms in which I present it. 

 

I present this Bill to this Assembly as a Bill to prohibit 

discrimination in respect of employment, accommodation, and 

access to public services.  And I believe it is correct to say that 

if your caucus was satisfied that that's the extent of it, that that's 

all there was to it, you would support it.  I've said that just a 

few minutes ago; I say it again.  I've heard members of your 

caucus say so in debate during the second-reading stage on Bill 

38. 

 

(1515) 

 

Similarly with the public, when you put the question clearly in 

those terms -- here is what the Bill does, (a), (b), and (c) -- 

what's wrong with that?  Well there's nothing wrong with it.  

But they don't want to promote the homosexual lifestyle, they 

don't want it taught in schools, they don't want their children to 

become subject to those sort of influences, and on and on and 

on.  They don't want to see marriages, they don't want to . . . 

and the list . . . it's quite a long list as the member knows. 

 

I don't think the Bill does any of those things.  I know it doesn't 

do any of those things according to the best judgement that I 

have and that all of my advisers have.  And so on that basis I 

very comfortably and with complete integrity put before this 

House this Bill which is a limited Bill.  And I have already 

stated that as clearly as I'm capable of stating anything. 

 

And on that basis the people in my constituency are very much 

in favour of it.  They have concerns, many of which are 

articulated by the member.  But when I tell them the answer to 

those concerns, my view with respect to that, my judgement 

with respect to those concerns, as I will tell the hon. member, 

then they are in favour of it.  So I believe that when I stand 

here supporting Bill 38, I am in fact reflecting the view of 



June 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2255 

the majority of my constituents. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you're right.  When we just 

discussed the issues of housing and employment and looking at 

strengthening, if you will, the ability . . . especially of 

individuals with a homosexual persuasion to any discrimination 

based on their sexual orientation regarding housing and 

employment, I think I raised the question the other day:  I'm 

wondering how many specific cases, if any, have really come 

before the Human Rights Commission where people have been 

refused employment or have been refused housing because of 

their sexual orientation, I wonder.  Are there any specific 

numbers?  Or is there any real reason why we should be taking 

the Human Rights Code right now and amending it and 

changing it to address those issues.  What are the real 

concerns?  Are there any numbers or cases to back up the 

requests being made by the government at this date? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, and to the member, we don't 

have any experience at it of course, because there's no basis on 

which people can make complaints at the moment.  In other 

jurisdictions the experience has been that about 2 per cent of 

the complaints made to the commission are made under the 

heading "sexual orientation".  So that would give you some 

measure of what we might expect in this province. 

 

I want to also say to the member that if you have any doubt as 

to problems faced by gay and lesbian people with respect to 

discrimination, you have only to talk to a gay or lesbian person.  

You have only to question them.  You have only to ask them 

what has been the experience of them and the people that they 

know.  And they will tell you.  They will tell you stories that 

will really, not impress you, but will hurt you, will cause you to 

feel great sympathy.  For many of them the danger is so real 

that they live lives keeping their sexuality a secret, absolutely 

unable to come out of the closet, as it were, to live honest, open 

lives in that sense.  They have to live a secret; live a lie. 

 

For those who have come out of the closet and who are 

identified, they have . . . many, many of them have personally 

suffered the hurt of discrimination, particularly in respect of 

employment.  And if they haven't suffered it personally, they'll 

be able to tell you of a close friend who has suffered it.  And 

these are sad stories. 

 

I have no statistical information about what percentage or how 

many or anything like that, but the anecdotal evidence is really 

quite impressive, quite touching, moving, and something that, 

as I've said, we simply have to respond to. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, what I'd like to know is who was 

the real . . . or was there a group or individual, or what was the 

real push behind the Bill?  Who was really pushing the Bill? 

 

And we've gone through a fair bit of debate as to why we've 

got the Bill.  But obviously the reason it's before 

the House is somebody has obviously been lobbying for this 

Bill; otherwise I can't see why you and your colleagues and 

your government would even have brought Bill 38 forward at 

this time.  Who was really pushing for the Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The push comes from many, many 

different directions.  This has been an item on the agenda of the 

New Democratic Party for some considerable time.  We have 

resolutions from our constituencies and resolutions from our 

conventions with respect to this subject. 

 

We have also met as a caucus, and prior to 1982 as a 

government, with representatives of the gay and lesbian 

community who have made this presentation to us.  And I 

believe such representations were also made to the former 

government.  So there has been lobbying or requests from that 

source. 

 

We also have quite a wide variety of organizations that have 

lobbied us.  Over 40 women's groups, for example, in the 

election campaign in 1991 came together to priorize a list of 

recommended changes that they would lobby for in the 

upcoming government's term of office, whether that was an 

NDP government or a Conservative government or Liberal 

government.  And sexual orientation was one of the items that 

they agreed to put on their agenda. 

 

The . . . oh, all kinds of groups -- the Saskatchewan Action 

Committee on the Status of Women, the Regina YWCA, the 

United Church of Canada, and labour organizations, 

individually and as a federation, and on and on.  There's all 

kinds of groups that come from . . . All of the human rights 

associations -- the Saskatchewan association of human rights, 

the coalition for human equality, the Canadian and the 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Commissions, the Saskatchewan 

association of human rights, I think I mentioned that.  And then 

any number of gay and lesbian people and parents and families 

of gay and lesbian people. 

 

So we've really had a fair volume of suggestion on this point, 

of petition on this point.  There is no active lobby going on, in 

the sense that we're not being pressed daily or weekly.  We 

don't have the galleries full of people who are pressing us hard 

on this matter.  But it's simply an agenda item, which over the 

years our party has accepted as being a legitimate agenda item 

and one worthy of the government's consideration.  And we 

bring it forward in Bill 38 because we believe that it's the right 

thing to do and it is something that is in fact overdue. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I would appreciated it if you 

would take the time to send a copy of all the individuals and 

groups that have approached you as minister and your 

government.  And if you want to in that include positions that 

have been forward and lobbies that have taken place in the last, 

say last 6 or 8 years, feel free to do that.  I'd appreciate to see 

the list of all the individuals and groups that have done that. 

 

You also, Mr. Minister, made a comment about the 



2256 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 1993 

fact that this piece of legislation -- and certainly debate has 

taken place within your party, and a number of resolutions have 

come to the floor over the years in your party regarding the 

amendments to the Human Rights Code.  I'm wondering, Mr. 

Minister, on how many occasions, if any, did that type of . . . 

pardon me, resolution passed through the . . . after debate, did 

at any time, did a resolution regarding amending the Human 

Rights Code pass in your conventions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- It's my understanding that it has, but I 

can't give the member any detail as to how many times or any 

dates.  But speaking generally to the member's question, we'd 

be glad to provide the information that the member requests.  

We'll provide that if it's okay by letter when we're able to put 

the information together. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Well, Mr. Minister, I 

appreciate that because I think when we've had the same debate 

take place in the Assembly, and we've raised the question on 

the floor, a number of your members have always indicated -- 

and I believe the Premier even mentioned it one time -- that 

that resolution has never passed our convention.  And so it's 

interesting. 

 

It'd be interesting I suppose a little bit of research just to see 

indeed who is right here.  And when you begin to . . . when you 

hear one comment on one side and another MLA making 

another comment, I guess we're all infallible; I think we are . . . 

or not infallible I should say.  And it would seem to me, Mr. 

Minister, that I think even within your party and the party you 

represent and the membership . . . and I catch it out in my own 

area, my own constituency, even from individuals that have 

approached me on the subject that at the end of the day will 

continue to support a candidate of NDP persuasion but have 

some strong feelings on this. 

 

It would seem to me that even in your lobby and certainly the 

persuasive powers that you have as a minister and as an 

individual and as a lawyer, that there are many people that 

would really still question what the necessity of the Bill . . . just 

the uncertainty that continues to exist out there as to the fact 

that this Bill down the road . . . and maybe even in the near 

future people may use the Bill to challenge and to get greater 

access.  And if you will, maybe one of the areas -- I believe it 

was Donna Greschner mentioned in one of her statements -- 

that certainly the Saskatchewan public are going to have to be 

educated so that there's a greater acceptance and we get 

ourselves away from this homophobia.  And if the chief 

commissioner of the Human Rights Commission is suggesting 

we're going to have put an educational program or format 

together . . . and I look at the Ontario argument, it seems, Mr. 

Minister, that there's already programs being put forward and 

suggestions certainly the Toronto school board has a position . . 

. or whether they've taken a position on it, but they've got a 

proposal put forward for an addition to their health curriculum 

or on the area of sex education of including a portion in the 

education program that deals with homosexuality and whether 

it should be acceptable.  And I think the 

perception that's being left out there, Mr. Minister, is that what 

we're doing is opening up the doors to greater acceptance of a 

lifestyle that I believe the majority -- and I think you used 2 per 

cent, if you will -- of the population have brought forward 

concerns regarding housing and employment.  And some of the 

stats I read indicate that if there's 1 per cent of the population 

really with the homosexual persuasion . . . 

 

When you look at the general population, Mr. Minister, I think 

people do have a right to feel that any time you tamper with or 

change legislation, that it is open for debate.  And there isn't 

one of us that can guarantee down the road that those changes, 

those amendments, will not be utilized or used as a means of 

trying to expand the door and accessibility to a number there, 

as I've brought forward. 

 

And I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could comment on 

this. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, Mr. Chair, I want to stress to the 

member that the 2 per cent figure is . . . it's important to 

understand what that is, what I was saying.  I said it is the 

experience of other jurisdictions that of the total complaints 

received by the Human Rights Commission, 2 per cent of them 

fall under the heading of sexual orientation.  So if there's a 

thousand complaints, then 20 of them would be sexual 

orientation and so on. 

 

The other point that I wanted to deal with, which the member 

mentioned, is what Ms. Greschner is said to have said about the 

need to educate the public.  And I would point out to the 

member that the ability of the Human Rights Commission to do 

anything respecting education is quite limited by section 25 of 

the Human Rights Code.  And I want to just quote that.  They 

have a mandate to: 

 

 develop and conduct educational programs designed to 

eliminate discriminatory practices related to . . . (the various 

grounds); 

 

Let me just repeat that: 

 

 develop and conduct educational programs designed to 

eliminate discriminatory practices (discriminatory practices) 

related to race, creed, religion, colour . . . (etc. etc., and 

sexual orientation); 

 

(1530) 

 

So that it is . . . we talk about discriminatory practices; you're 

talking then about . . . by definition about the discriminatory 

practices that are set out in this Bill, and it is therefore to 

eliminate the prohibitions against discrimination.  

Employment, accommodation, and access to public services -- 

that is the limit of the mandate given to the Human Rights 

Commission.  Anything beyond that, they're outside their 

mandate and they ought not to be doing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- In my capacity as assistant House 

Leader, I'm going to move the consideration of 



June 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2257 

this Bill in Committee of the Whole be adjourned . . . to 

progress this Bill. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

Bill No. 55 -- An Act to amend The Workers' Compensation 

Act, 1979 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. 

Chairman.  Seated to my left is the deputy minister of Labour, 

Merran Proctor; immediately behind Ms. Proctor is the 

chairman of the Workers' Compensation Board, Stan Cameron; 

immediately behind me is Jeff Parr.  And that's all that was 

there, yes, when I looked. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Mr. 

Minister, we finally bring this Bill to Committee of the Whole 

where we can actually get down to some of the suggested 

changes that have been put forward to you through second 

reading debates, and through the correspondence that you've 

had with various organizations, as well as through some of the 

negotiations that we understand have gone on with some of the 

people who are the principal players and beneficiaries of this 

Bill, and of course those who feel that they will be the ones that 

will be harmed in some way by the Bill. 

 

We will be taking the time, Minister, to go through the 

amendments with you, and hopefully seeing the light of day 

with the amendments that we propose, you will encourage your 

government back-benchers to support those amendments. 

 

In view of the fact that it is traditional for governments to 

somehow resist suggestions by opposition, we have made it 

clear to you and to the world what the position of opposition is.  

We have even released the amendments through a news release 

so that you could have an idea what they're all about publicly.  

And we did that for a very express purpose, Minister.  And I'll 

tell you very bluntly that we did it because we favour doing 

this thing right more than we are concerned about the politics 

of who gets the credit for having contributed to this Bill. 

 

We did it that way so that you could steal our ideas.  We make 

no bones about that.  We want you to steal our ideas.  We want 

you to put it into your own words; put it into amendments; 

bring forth those amendments; take the credit for it; make 

yourself look good.  It's fine with us.  We want you to do that.  

We encourage you to do that.  But to make sure that things 

aren't missed, we will of course present our own amendments 

to make sure that they do get on the record so that the general 

public will know that the proper effort has in fact been made. 

 

Under Bill 55 we have talked to you at some length, Minister, 

about the downloading costs that are involved.  And you 

obviously are aware of the feeling of those people that have 

talked to you about that, as well as those things that we've 

mentioned in our 

second reading speech.  We talked to you about the potential of 

the Bill, downloading medicare costs onto the business 

community and onto the workers' compensation premiums, 

rather than to be paid in the traditional ways that medicare 

costs have been paid in our province over the years. 

 

It's hoped of course always that the potential effect will never 

be felt in the maximum way that they can be, and that in fact 

the costs won't be as bad.  But we do see that those people that 

make that point have got a legitimate point to be made. 

 

We also see that the vocational rehabilitation, which is 

absolutely essential to injured workers, can also, the way the 

Act has been worded, fall into that category of potential abuse 

where we would find that people would be retrained not just for 

a vocational rehabilitation related to their work injury but in 

fact might be further advanced to becoming an upgrading of 

education in a general way. 

 

And we used the example of upgrading people from a grade 8 

to a grade 12 simply to get them into a better job, where in fact 

the injury had nothing to do with the fact that the person had 

quit school at grade 8 and that in the new world that we live in 

no one with a grade 8 could get a job any longer if they were 

injured in such a way that they couldn't use their hands and 

their backs so to speak. 

 

In other words, the physical labour jobs are no longer available 

and so one would require a higher education to begin with to 

get the better quality job that goes with the change that's 

needed as a result of both the changes in our society as well as 

the fact that an injury had promoted that. 

 

We worried out loud to you, Minister, about the potential for 

increased costs in the area of job searches.  Here again it is 

essential that job searches be done to help folks to get 

re-established, and we see that as a genuine need and a genuine 

thing to be protected on behalf of workers. 

 

Yet again though, the legislation itself is worded in such a 

loose way that it appears to us that abuse could occur and that 

there could be job searches that would be far over and above 

and beyond what would be required in terms of replacing or 

placing an injured worker into a new field, that in fact it might 

serve the purpose of taking away the Canada Manpower and 

Immigration present role of finding people work in the 

workplace. 

 

And so that potential for abuse has got folks worried and we 

think that legislation can actually be written up that takes out 

some of these doubts and some of these fears and some of the 

potential abuses. 

 

The higher costs to business of course has been estimated 

between ten and a half to 300 per cent.  The fact that that range 

would be so great tells us that there must be something lacking 

in the way the legislation itself is written or presented because 

surely if ten and a half per cent is a realistic figure, then there 

shouldn't 



2258 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 1993 

be an open door for people to speculate that it could go to 300 

per cent. 

 

Obviously there are apparently no stopgaps, no safety nets, no 

guards in the legislation that would stop these costs from 

escalating out of control, even out of control of yourself as 

minister in charge. 

 

And so that's got people very concerned, especially in the 

business community end of it.  And to be quite frank about it, 

some of the workers I've talked about earlier and people that 

I've talked to are worried about this as well, because they know 

very well that if the costs in fact get out of hand, even though 

it's to their benefit, that can't go on for very long. 

 

And in fact what would happen is that it would backfire, that 

employers would simply either go out of business or they 

would stop hiring or they would start to discriminate against 

injured workers who were being brought back into the 

workplace and they would start to call them accident prone and 

blacklist them basically from the workforce.  So they don't 

want that backlash.  They want the security of knowing that 

this thing's going to benefit them without destroying the very 

jobs that they need in order to have a good life. 

 

The fact that we could have longer claims and claims carried 

on for a longer period of time or go back retroactively has got 

folks worried.  In fact we have pointed out to you that Judge 

Muir himself has made some comments publicly that he is 

concerned about the potential abuse of that part of the 

legislation.  And we think that it would be incumbent upon you 

as minister to listen to that advice and to again put into the 

legislation some kind of a stopgap, some kind of a safety net, 

so that these things can't be abused. 

 

We also worry about the costs and the balances of the whole 

process.  We mentioned the educational potential problem 

under the rehabilitation part of it, but it can also be classified as 

a separate problem area.  And we have identified that and 

discussed it in some length with you in the first few days. 

 

And I think having recapped those four general areas, I would 

like to ask you the very specific question: will you be 

introducing, Minister, amendments to this legislation in order 

to address these problems and to correct the fears in the 

country? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I thank the member from Maple 

Creek for his comments.  The Clerk has had in hand and is now 

in fact I think delivering to the member from Maple Creek 

proposed amendments, proposed House amendments.  Some of 

the amendments will cover some of the questions which you 

had raised. 

 

I will just make a general comment while the member finalizes 

discussions with the Clerk.  Let me say that the basis of this 

legislation, the basis of this scheme is an agreement between a 

bargain, if you like -- rather than a contract -- a bargain 

between employer and employees.  Employers gave up their 

right to sue . . . 

employees gave up their right to sue.  Employers, in 

compensation to that, contributed to a fund. 

 

That was the original bargain struck around the turn of the 

century when workers' compensation was first established in 

England; it remains the basis of all workers' compensation 

schemes all around the world.  And accordingly it is a 

reasonable way to discuss these matters, to judge most of these 

issues according to what would fulfil that bargain. 

 

I take by way of example, the matter of upgrading.  The 

member raised a concern that workers may upgrade to a higher 

level of skill than they had before the injury took place.  And 

they do so at the expense of the employer. 

 

Let me say with respect to that, the practice which is intended 

is fairly straightforward.  Workers who are injured and unable 

to perform their trade for employment are entitled to be 

upgraded to a level of skill which has about the same earning 

power as that which they've had to abandon because of the 

injury.  Now that may result in very little training in some cases 

where workers had a high level of skill but a low income.  It 

may result in a great deal of training where workers had a high 

income but not much of a general education and no general 

skills. 

 

(1545) 

 

In any case however the guide remains the same.  A worker, 

who is injured and who is unable to carry on his employment, 

is entitled to be upgraded with a level of skill which is roughly 

equivalent in earning power to that which he's had to abandon, 

he or she has had to abandon.  I would add as well that in all 

cases we will go to whatever lengths are reasonable and indeed 

possible to reach agreement with workers.  We believe they are 

much more likely to be rehabilitated and be rehabilitated at an 

early date if they're pursuing a vocation which they're 

interested in rather than one they're forced into. 

 

So in all cases, we will be going to whatever lengths are 

possible to reach agreement with injured workers to choose a 

vocation, a vocational rehabilitation which interests them.  And 

thus someone who is interested in computers, who is interested 

in learning to repair computers, will not be forced into a 

creative writing program, by way of example.  And I don't 

mean to be critical of either one of those two roles.  I just point 

out that we're going to try to find things which are of interest to 

workers. 

 

The member from Maple Creek will note you will now have 

had an opportunity to review the amendments. And some of the 

comments which you had raised are indeed covered in the 

House amendments which you have.  Specifically, I recall the 

member from Maple Creek raising the issue of the objects of 

the Act, which were the subject of critical comment in a 

memorandum over the signature of Judge Muir. 

 

I'm not sure it was ever published outside.  I believe the 

memorandum was never intended by Judge Muir 



June 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2259 

to be anything other than an internal document, and I don't 

think he ever intended it to go beyond simply being circulated 

among his committee.  Nevertheless it has been circulated, and 

you will find in the House amendments a section, section 4, in 

which the objects of the Act are deleted. 

 

I don't intend to go through all the amendments at the moment.  

I was quickly flipping through some notes which were prepared 

for my benefit, to see if there's anything else in here which I 

can recall you mentioning which are covered off in here. 

 

You raised the question of the assessments and whether the 

assessments would be 10.5 per cent or 200.  I point out for the 

benefit of the member and all members in the House, the 

confusion is unfortunate, and really I think was unnecessary.  

What happened was that the former board, or someone 

connected with the former board, commissioned an actuarial 

study of their understanding of the Muir report.  I don't think 

they properly understood the Muir report.  In commissioning 

the actuarial study, they certainly did not understand the 

department's position with respect to the report, because we 

hadn't finalized it. 

 

It was that actuarial study of their understanding of the Muir 

report which resulted in an estimate of a 200 per cent increase.  

The member will want to refer to the study by Price 

Waterhouse.  That's the one which was done . . . that was done 

of the legislation. 

 

Now that study has resulted in at least . . . has at least been the 

inspiration for one House amendment, at least one House 

amendment which makes it clear that these sections are not 

retroactive, that people who were injured before today's date, 

before the date the Bill is proclaimed enforced by order in 

council, people who were injured before that date will have 

their claims judged under the former legislation.  They'll have it 

judged under what we think is a more balanced and fair 

interpretation of existing legislation than was done in past 

years, but they'll be judged under former legislation.  Only 

workers whose accidents occur after the prescribed time, after 

the Bill is proclaimed, will have their cases judged under new 

legislation. 

 

So the member will now have had these House amendments.  I 

can go through them if the member prefers and give a brief 

explanation of each amendment so you know what we're doing, 

but I'll leave that to the judgement of the member opposite to 

request if you want it. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Minister.  I will take you up on 

your offer in due course, but not immediately.  I note that the 

member from Greystone has some questions that she would 

like to ask, so I'm going to defer to her for a little while.  And 

when she's finished, then we can get into the nitty-gritty of our 

amendments and yours as well. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As you were 

making reference earlier, Mr. Minister, to the purpose of the 

Saskatchewan Workers' 

Compensation Act and some of its history, I want to go over 

that a bit more.  The compensation Act was passed in part due 

to the concerns of employers about legal liability for on-the-job 

injuries to their employees.  So in a sense this Act belongs, not 

simply to the workers, but to the employers who are faced with 

the responsibility for injuries incurred by people in their 

employ on the job site. 

 

From that perspective the Workers' Compensation Board has 

acted as a judiciary body between the employers and the 

employees to evaluate claims and to provide compensation for 

employees for time lost from work.  It was not established to 

provide compensation for pain and suffering, nor was it 

established as a vehicle to replace unemployment insurance, 

social assistance, or job retraining.  And through decisions of 

the board in precedents set there's been an evolution of the 

Workers' Compensation Board which has certainly made it far 

more encompassing in scope than it was originally intended. 

 

The greatest concerns raised with me by business, both 

individual business owners and representative groups, is that 

the proposed amendments to this legislation make it far too 

open-ended from the workers' perspective.  And people in the 

business community as well as the public sector employees 

recognize that there have been problems with the bureaucracy 

of the Workers' Compensation Board. 

 

These employers, the people who actually finance this system 

for their protection against injury claims, feel that more 

consultation is needed in order to make the system more 

responsive.  However they do not feel that the scope of changes 

proposed is acceptable to them as employers, nor is it in the 

long-term best interests, do they think, of the Saskatchewan 

workforce. 

 

I want you to know that I, after much consultation, concur with 

the business community that the fast-track approach to this 

legislation by your government is considered by them and by 

me as disrespectful of the community of employers in 

Saskatchewan.  And some people would call it irresponsible as 

well.  And the concerns being raised are justifiable and I 

believe deserve to be dealt with completely before this Bill is 

passed. 

 

I'm wondering why it is that the movement has to be so fast on 

this Bill.  Despite your government's assurances that it's going 

to be consultative, we have major representatives from the 

public and private sectors responsible for the lion's share of 

employment of this province saying that this Bill has not been 

properly evaluated for its financial cost.  And it begs the 

question, what if business is right?  What if you are wrong? 

 

I mean, how can government in good conscience move forward 

with this legislation without subjecting it to scrutiny that all 

parties can agree will be impartial and objective. 



2260 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 1993 

That's a question I'd like for you to answer please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Chairman, this Bill has been four 

years in the making.  When I hear the Liberal member from 

Saskatoon Greystone describe this as too rushed, I am 

reminded of the comments of Tommy Douglas when on 

national television someone accused him of being a Liberal in a 

hurry, his comment was, any Liberal in motion would look like 

a Liberal in a hurry. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- And I honestly say that to the 

member from Saskatoon Greystone.  Any motion at all in this 

area looks to some members of the business community as if 

you were in a hurry.  There are some spokespersons for the 

business community which want nothing done with this.  

Knowing that that is not acceptable, what they have done is 

instead to suggest that every last possibility of 

maladministration be removed in the legislation.  That simply 

isn't possible to do so. 

 

At the end of the day there has to be some trust in the 

competence of the administration of this Act.  That is 

fundamental to our government system.  And no legislation can 

be passed which will in all events and in all cases eliminate any 

possibility of bad administration.  At some point in time you've 

got to accept the fact that -- at least I think the Assembly has to 

accept the fact that the administration henceforth will be 

reasonably competent. 

 

This whole process began in 1989 under a committee set up by 

the current member . . . by the government led by the current 

member from Estevan, the PC government.  They set up a 

committee chaired by Judge Muir who, as a matter of interest, 

had chaired the previous three committees.  And this is not a 

man who I would describe as prone to undue haste.  We got the 

report actually after the election, but it was a report of a 

committee established before the election. 

 

The amendments which are here, reflect almost in total the 

recommendations of the committee established by the former 

government.  And they do so because there are some 

fundamental truths which no one can deny, and that is the 

system which has existed heretofore has not worked.  It has 

worked for the benefit of the employers, because they've got to 

keep their exemption from liability for their injured workers.  It 

has not worked for the benefit of the employees, because an 

unacceptably large number of them have not been properly 

compensated. 

 

When you repeat -- I was going to be more pejorative, but I'll 

say, when you repeat the criticisms of some spokespersons for 

the business community, you should keep in mind that their 

goal is never to see any changes.  They don't want to see the 

thing amended. 

 

The member opposite asks, what if I'm wrong?  Well I don't 

know if this process has been explained to the member from 

Greystone, but there's going to be a session next year and 

there'll be a session after that. 

 Legislation is an organic process.  It is not something that is 

chipped in stone and found on the side of Mount Sinai and will 

be passed forth unchanged to all future generations.  It is an 

organic thing. 

 

We believe, we believe that these series of amendments 

provide appropriate balance between the interests of employers 

in having a fund which has a cost which is acceptable and the 

interests of employees in being properly compensated.  We 

have gone to extraordinary lengths to try to assure that. 

 

The member opposite says that this legislation has never been 

properly costed.  Well then no proper costing will ever be 

possible.  If this process can't do it, then it simply can't be done.  

I just want to run past the member from Saskatoon Greystone, 

before you repeat all of the comments made by some 

representatives who claim to be representatives of the business 

community.  I just want to repeat for your benefit, what we've 

done. 

 

We retained as an adviser, the senior partner in Price 

Waterhouse in Saskatoon and got the benefits of the 

international resources of that chartered accounting firm.  We 

asked them to work with us in costing the legislation which 

they did.  And the process went on and was fine-tuned and 

some of these amendments are a result of fine-tuning in their 

thinking. 

 

We think in all cases we've erred on the conservative side.  If 

we are wrong we think we have overestimated the increase in 

costs which these amendments are going to bring.  But we have 

done everything humanly possible to cost them.  And as I say if 

this isn't an adequate system, then one doesn't exist.  But I think 

it is adequate. 

 

The member is opposed to bringing in the amendments now.  

So be it.  So be it.  If you want to ignore, as I think you are, if 

the Liberal member wants to ignore the needs of workers who 

are injured and aren't being compensated, that's your choice.  

But all I can say for the benefit of injured workers is, thank 

goodness you're where you are and not on this side of the 

Assembly. 

 

(1600) 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I know that 

most of your comments I should probably put in perspective 

because most are not worthy of responding to. 

 

But I do think that given your comments about my concerns or 

lack of concerns about employees don't come close to your 

total and complete lack of understanding that employees are 

employed people.  They're employed by someone, and 

primarily not by government.  They need employers.  And they 

need employers who are going to be in positions to be able to 

continue to employ people so they can have the dignity of 

work. 

 

The most serious concern is the lack of control over politics 

that this Act is going to inject into the Workers' 



June 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2261 

Compensation Board.  And there'll be far too much control left 

in the hands of the Minister of Labour, I might add, and far too 

much influence on the board from organized labour.  And there 

is no sensible reason for this concession, save your own 

political favouritism, given that only a small percentage of 

those employed in Saskatchewan private enterprise are union 

members. 

 

The powers bestowed by this amended Act upon the board and 

its bureaucracy is truly staggering.  And you know it.  Business 

will become a sitting duck for premium adjustments as the 

board can now penalize employers with higher premiums 

simply by forming an opinion that they have not, and I will 

quote: ". . . not taken sufficient precautions" in the workplace.  

Suddenly the board could decide -- they, solely on its opinion 

-- that one business should be paying higher premiums.  One 

shudders to think of the power of intimidation that could be 

exercised over business by labour representatives who sit on 

the WCB (Workers' Compensation Board).  And heaven help 

the business that challenges a labour movement for any reason 

when the WCB assessment time rolls around. 

 

A business is not saying that they want the right to be 

irresponsible, which is primarily what I hear you saying this 

afternoon.  Business is not saying that they're unwilling to 

share fairly in the costs of compensating those injured on the 

job.  Business is saying that they want to know exactly what 

they are getting into before the bills start rolling in. 

 

And it was your Premier this morning in Saskatoon, sir, at the 

north Saskatoon businessmens' lunch . . . or breakfast, that 

ended up saying, and I quote:  That the only way to approach 

things is through cooperation or confrontation.  In your 

remarks this afternoon towards business people who are very 

concerned about this, are not ones which approach anywhere 

near an approach of cooperation. 

 

Now in meeting with Saskatoon MLAs, all of whom, with the 

exception of myself, are part of your government, the 

Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce stressed that they wanted to 

see some upper cap on the costs of WCB.  And they indicated 

that they wanted a review process after a period of time to see 

whose predictions were coming closest to the mark -- those of 

the Mercer study or those of the Price Waterhouse report.  I 

don't think that's unreasonable. 

 

At those meetings, MLAs in your government apparently told 

chamber representatives that the leading number of complaints 

with which they are faced from constituents involved worker 

compensation cases.  Now I can certainly attest to that, Mr. 

Minister, because people come into my office with files three 

and four inches thick, files that date back five and six and even 

more years.  But the problem has more to do with the 

bureaucracy of Workers' Compensation, the way with which 

people are dealt, than it has to do with the Act itself, and this is 

extremely convoluted in this complex piece of legislation. 

And I admit that we spend far more time . . . that if we spent far 

more time and had more problems in dealing with people 

frustrated over Workers' Compensation than probably any other 

body at all -- and I think most people here who . . . or 

particularly in Regina and Saskatoon would say the same thing. 

 

I believe that the problems are more systemic than anything 

else.  And I don't know how this really addresses that at all.  

The Workers' Compensation Board seems to have been very 

confrontational with people, very adversarial with people -- an 

us-against-them mentality -- which does little to foster 

cooperation and problem solving with injured workers.  And 

Saskatchewan employers are spending millions of dollars each 

year in premiums during very difficult economic times for 

business, and this legislation will mean more costs for them to 

absorb. 

 

And I know that you say, well it's simply a small percentage.  

But as we're here longer this afternoon, I'm going to use an 

example for you so that perhaps someone in the NDP can 

understand something about business.  There are no guarantees 

that the proposed changes to the system will make it more 

effective or more responsive than it is today -- no guarantees at 

all that it can make things better directly for people.  In fact 

there are many areas in which this legislation will serve to 

lengthen and likely complicate the process, adding 

considerable expense to the system. 

 

Many of the changes have the effect of encouraging individuals 

to rely on workers' compensation as job training, as a vehicle, 

or a welfare model, rather than the compensation for time off 

work which it was intended to be.  Historically an injured 

worker would be placed on workers' compensation until a 

qualified physician deemed that he or she was capable of 

working.  Now, under your proposed amendments, deeming is 

no longer acceptable, and it will be the decision of the WCB 

adjudicator or the board itself which determines whether a 

worker should return to work. 

 

In past years physicians have had access to all the information 

regarding past injury, all the past-injury files, to give them full 

information from which to work.  While one certainly wants to 

be fair to those who are injured on the job, it seems highly 

unreasonable to have medical professionals making evaluations 

on the seriousness of an injury if previous history cannot even 

be used in the process. 

 

And in the worst-case scenario, Mr. Minister, we can have 

prospective employees concealing chronic medical conditions 

or previous injuries from employers and then accepting 

employment which would knowingly aggravate those 

conditions.  Now I'm not saying that this would be done in 

order to deceive an employer, but the potential is there.  And 

that too is something that should be addressed, is potential for 

wrongdoing. 

 

This is more likely to happen as jobs become more scarce.  

And I think you can likely understand that.  Employees are less 

likely to be forthright about 



2262 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 1993 

 previous injuries or chronic conditions.  And should this be the 

case, and an on-the-job injury occurs which aggravates a 

previous condition, an employee could end up being the 

beneficiary of compensation benefits and retraining which are 

disproportionate to the extent and liability of the injury actually 

incurred on the job. 

 

Now I cannot say whether this will be the case any more than 

the authors of this Bill can say that it will not.  But I believe 

that there is reasonable cause for doubt about what the financial 

costs of this amended legislation will be. 

 

Somehow in just 20 months since the election, you government 

members have got it into your heads that the interpretation of 

this situation -- and your interpretation only -- is the only 

plausible interpretation.  And if the government says a deal is a 

bad deal, then you can rip and snip and there go the legislative 

scissors.  If the government decides the workers' compensation 

legislation must be changed, then slam bam goes the legislative 

hammer.  And if the government says, don't worry, business 

can afford the cost, then ka-ching, ka-ching, legislation is 

passed and business gets the Bill. 

 

Now we've consulted with many, many people in the business 

community on this and it sounds as though those individuals 

are the ones with whom you don't want to consult.  Your 

Premier and yourself have now made reference -- you today, 

sir, have made reference -- to the fact that these people don't 

represent anybody. 

 

In speaking with people of the Saskatoon Chamber of 

Commerce, we are finding that government is not being very 

forthright in its dealings, and it seems that a promise was made 

to business that any business legislation affecting economic 

development would be run by a special committee to the 

legislature.  And I'd like your comment on that. 

 

It seems that the Labour minister feels that this is old 

legislation, so it doesn't have to be reviewed by that committee 

to whom that promise was made.  I say that it doesn't make for 

goodwill, Mr. Minister, it doesn't make for trust, no matter how 

you slice it. 

 

And I really don't believe that the solution to the problem lies 

in putting an end to deeming, or increasing premiums to 

employers.  For the past decade we had a Conservative 

administration which had a very hard-hearted side to it.  And if 

it weren't for a member . . . if you weren't a member of the 

inner circle during that time, or a member of the Conservative 

upper crust, chances of any problems you brought to 

government fell on deaf ears, and particularly if you were a 

member of the working class. 

 

Now I would like your comments to some of what I have 

stated, in particular the promise that was made to people in 

business, of things affecting economic development within the 

province. 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We may 

have had a Conservative administration which was 

hard-hearted and cared nothing about workers. We seem to 

have a Liberal opposition which has exactly the same approach 

to legislation. 

I have not yet heard the member from Saskatoon Greystone 

discuss the concerns of workers.  What I have heard her parade 

before this legislature is frankly some highly suspect 

assumptions which I think she's lifted directly from lobbyists 

on behalf of the business community. 

 

I say to the member from Saskatoon Greystone, I've met with 

most of those business people.  I have spoken to well-attended 

meetings of business people in every city in this province.  I've 

done something I don't think you have done. I've gone out to 

talk to them and invited them to meetings in every city in the 

province.  I know what their views are and I know the nonsense 

which was used to frighten them by some of the people who 

call themselves representatives and leaders of that business 

community. And it was nonsense. 

 

The member, just by way of example, and it's only an example, 

the . . . Nothing like a telephone to break the spell.  Nothing 

like a cellular telephone to break the spell.  One always has the 

fear that it's your telephone that's going off; you've forgotten to 

turn yours off. 

 

I say to the member from Saskatoon Greystone, I met with 

them.  I know what their concerns are.  I have listened to the 

concerns of the Canadian federation of business and other 

groups.  This legislation, so far as it is humanly possible, meets 

those concerns. 

 

The member raised a number of issues in her commentary.  For 

instance, she raised deeming, that deeming was abolished.  

That's nonsense.  Have you read the new section and the old 

section?  There's not a lot of difference. 

 

Let me explain for the member opposite who doesn't seem to 

understand the origin of deeming.  Deeming was not an 

inherent part of legislation.  Prior to 1978 -- I made these 

comments on second reading but they seem to be worth 

repeating; I'm not sure the member caught them -- prior to 1978 

this was a compensation scheme just like SGI (Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance).  If you're injured, you get 

compensation and you go.  Deeming was never a part of that, 

like it's not a part of an SGI torts claim. 

 

After 1978 the scheme was changed.  It was changed from a 

compensation scheme to a rehabilitation scheme.  The name 

was unchanged but that's about all that was unchanged.  It 

remained The Workers' Compensation Act.  It might better 

have been called, after 1978, the injured workers' rehabilitation 

Act because that's what it was. 

 

Deeming was introduced for the first time at that time to deal 

with what admittedly would be a very rare case, the case of the 

worker who won't accept any rehabilitation.  It was a new 

feature at that time. 



June 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2263 

What happened after 1982 during this hard-hearted 

Conservative regime, which it seems would be perpetuated by 

an equally hard-hearted Liberal regime since you don't want to 

change the legislation, what happened is that the rehabilitation 

system was taken out of it and a large number of people were 

deemed to be capable of jobs, which theoretically they were 

capable of doing but which they might not have the training for 

or which might not be available. 

 

Deeming is retained in the legislation but it goes back to its 

proper role.  It's proper role is to deal with the exceptional case, 

the worker who won't accept rehabilitation or who won't look 

for work once they are rehabilitated.  And that's all it's designed 

to do.  It's still there. 

 

(1615) 

 

I invite the member opposite, before she makes her comments, 

to read the legislation and read the old legislation because 

many of the ills of which you complain have always been 

there.  And I invite her to look at the practice of the Workers' 

Compensation under a number of regimes, under the current 

NDP regime, under the Tory regime, and if you have a very 

good memory, you can still remember the last time this 

province was unfortunate enough to ever be visited by Liberals.  

And it was most of those practices were in existence when the 

Liberals were there. 

 

Many of the things of which you complain have been there 

since time immemorial and they aren't new.  So I invite the 

member to look at the legislation and look at past practices.  So 

many of the things you complain of haven't changed. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well I shan't get into a history rewriting as 

the NDP always does.  We can get into that some other time 

since you've never as a CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation) or NDP Government ever, ever, been in power 

when it hasn't followed a recession.  So now finally you're just 

beginning to know what real life is all about for everybody. 

 

I mentioned, Mr. Minister, earlier that in fact the previous 

administration, there is no question that there are people in this 

province who did feel a lot of harm during that time and were 

not recognized, and I have noticed change.  And I want to give 

credit to such departments as the Department of Social Services 

for taking a much more humane approach, for treating people, I 

think, with a little more respect. 

 

And I'm not sure that this attitude has permeated the Workers' 

Compensation Board however.  And I really have some 

concerns that the government in its intention to reduce the 

number of complaints about Workers' Compensation from 

people, may be doing it the wrong way and may be going too 

far. 

 

Now as a prominent member in Saskatoon, of the Saskatoon 

chamber, has said, if you get to the point where there aren't any 

complaints, it means you've gone too far.  And, Mr. Speaker, 

there are thousands of 

people in the business community who are employers of 

workers in this province who sincerely have apprehensions 

about your piece of legislation. 

 

So let's just stop for a moment.  I had indicated earlier that I 

would try to provide you with some information, and all of 

your colleagues on that side of the House, to learn what 

business actually does and what it means to the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Let's think about the men and the women and the companies 

with choices to make and with money to invest.  There are 

fewer and fewer of them all the time.  And let's, each of us in 

this Assembly, give some sober thought to what goes through 

the minds of these people when they are thinking about taking 

a risk. 

 

Now I don't know how I can get you to understand what is 

going on in the minds of entrepreneurs in Saskatchewan today.  

But I want to give you a bit of an idea of what kind of an 

impact all of these little changes have collectively on a 

business.  And I'm going to tell you a story based on actual 

fact, of a couple who decided to make an investment in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

As any experienced entrepreneurs might do, they shopped 

around until they found a profitable operation that was for sale.  

Using their experience and their business skills, they found an 

operation which should have, if all factors stayed relatively 

consistent, continued to return a modest salary and a 10 per 

cent return on their $200,000 investment. 

 

Upon buying this business in 1990, the operation has a proven 

history of profits.  About one year into the operation the GST 

(goods and services tax) came into play.  Only 7 per cent, said 

the federal government.  With the economy in tough shape, the 

operator felt that an increase in prices wouldn't be wise, so this 

particular business owner decided to absorb the GST within his 

existing prices in his restaurant. 

 

Now the worst part was that sales didn't increase.  The volume 

of the business stayed the same.  But guess what?  Seven per 

cent of that volume now went somewhere else.  It went to the 

government.  An automatic 7 per cent drop in profits. 

 

Now then the volume of sales began to drop as people had less 

money in their pockets as a result of the GST and a worsening 

economy.  Then came increases in the price of liquor and beer, 

which forced a price increase to customers and in turn resulted 

in decreased consumption.  The net loss was approximately 10 

per cent after two years, or virtually all of the annual profit. 

 

Now while all this was going on, jobs became more scarce, 

customers had less and less disposable income.  They still came 

in regularly but they spent less.  Now this business owner 

began to work more hours, tightened the controls on his 

operation, made his suppliers sharpen their pencils, cut costs 

here, reduced staff there, in an effort to keep drawing his wage 

and generating a very slim profit. 



2264 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 1993 

Next the government announced an increase to the minimum 

wage -- only 35 cents an hour, they said.  But added to the 

other employer costs including increases to unemployment 

insurance premiums, the regular workers' compensation, and 

CPP (Canada Pension Plan), a $5.35 wage was now costing $6 

per hour to the business person.  On an annual payroll of 

$250,000, that was an additional $25,000 cost. 

 

Now as the direct result of government intervention, the 

business was now losing $20,000 a year.  Back to the expense 

sheet.  More staff cuts.  In other words, more people, workers, 

losing their jobs, to do nothing but try to protect the bottom line 

so this business could stay afloat.  No longer was our 

small-business friend expecting to show us a profit, he was 

now seriously concerned about doing very simple things.  It's 

called meeting the payroll to pay the people who work for you, 

and paying the rent. 

 

The tax bill arrived from the city, and guess what?  An 

increase.  Provincial government has debt problems; business 

has to pay more.  Power bill.  SaskPower bills were up, 

SaskEnergy increase, telephone bills went higher, gasoline was 

more expensive, and then an increase to the PST (provincial 

sales tax). 

 

More and more of his customers are unemployed.  Less and 

less money in their pockets.  So our business person has now 

tried to renegotiate with the landlord.  Look, he says, the 

Premier tells me that when a deal isn't good for all parties 

involved, they have to come back to the table and make a new 

arrangement.  I'm losing my shirt here and I can't pay as much 

rent as I agreed to three years ago.  I didn't anticipate all of 

these taxes, he says.  End of quote.  And the landlord says, 

sorry, a deal is a deal is a deal. 

 

Now this gentleman then went off to his financiers and says, I 

need to renegotiate, Mr. Banker.  Sorry, say the private lenders; 

we're having tough times too and we need those payments. 

 

And now the government said he should expect an increase.  

To what?  The workers' compensation.  But, says the Minister 

of Labour on April 29, 1993, quote: 

 

 . . . with the 10 per cent increase . . . the business people in 

this province (will still be) more than capable of competing 

with an assessment that low. 

 

You know what, Mr. Minister?  That just isn't the case.  

Because small-business people don't trust your government, or 

any other government for that matter, to keep its promises or to 

come in on the numbers as they say they will be, and there is 

no reason why they should. 

 

So when an actuarial accountant tells the business coalition that 

changes to the Act could cost $200 million, while your people 

say it will only cost $20 million, our small-business owner asks 

himself, who should he believe?  And trust me, it's not going to 

be government. 

So just what does this really mean to the business person?  

What does it mean to the family I've been talking about?  Well 

it means that the long arm and the greedy fingers of 

government have gotten just a little too far into the personal 

pockets of these people.  Because it means that they have had 

one too many letters from the government pronouncing 

changes to their bottom line.  One too many phone calls from 

the GST collectors, one too many suggestions from the 

inspector of health and safety or electricity or fire or liquor or 

whatever, to make the whole thing worth the hassle.  And it 

means they're getting tired of filling out forms and sending 

cheques to the government.  It means the magnanimous gesture 

of dropping the 1 per cent tax on corporate profits doesn't mean 

anything because government has already taken away every 

single dollar of profit that they have made. 

 

And it has taken away something far more valuable, Mr. 

Minister.  This government with its thoughtless approach to 

economic development and its complete and utter lack of 

understanding of entrepreneurial motivation has taken away 

business people's spirit.  And that, sir, cannot be legislated back 

into place. 

 

Now this province has been built on two things:  it's been built 

on agriculture and it's been built on small business.  And one of 

them is on the ropes and the government's legislative agenda is 

destroying the other one. 

 

And what the government's ham-handed approach to business 

means to the small business person I've been talking about is 

that they are very, very close, despite loving the people here 

and wanting to be with their neighbours, they have come very 

close to having to give up on Saskatchewan.  It means that 

because of all of these insignificant, these perceived 

insignificant offloads that your government and other levels of 

government have unceremoniously dumped in the lap of these 

people, there may soon be a change in the economy of 

Saskatoon. 

 

And I know that you're not, Mr. Minister, from Saskatoon, but 

some members in this legislature are, so perhaps they should 

listen to what this change will actually mean to the city they 

represent.  Well I'll lay that out for you, too.  And I'd like 

people to really start paying attention because this is reality 

talking. 

 

This one small business, the actual business to which I'm 

referring, puts $900,000 per year through the Saskatchewan 

economy -- $900,000.  It puts out in wages, not including any 

salary to the owner, almost a quarter of a million dollars a year 

to 25 full-time and part-time employees, many of whom are on 

minimum wage but who also earn substantial tips. 

 

That business person presently pays $2,500 in premiums to 

Workers' Compensation.  He cannot afford to pay more 

because he's losing money now, Mr. Minister, thanks in large 

part to changes which are entirely beyond his control, entirely 

outside the reaches of his business acumen.  He has borrowed 

against his personal collateral, but he is at the point 



June 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2265 

where he is not prepared to go further into debt if one more 

variable changes.  And with this Act, the government has just 

changed the variable. 

 

So I ask you, when we're thinking in these terms about what 

that actually means to 25 employees, what it actually means to 

the economy of a place like Saskatoon, what it actually means 

in terms of a taxpayer who contributes to social programs in the 

province of Saskatchewan and where they are very, very good 

citizens in the city of Saskatoon, in the province of 

Saskatchewan, is it really worth it? 

 

You say that this isn't going to make any difference at all, and 

I'm telling you that with this particular business it makes the 

complete and total difference.  Is it worth taking the risk of 

putting people out of business, even one person out of business, 

because of an obsessive agenda?  This is just another hit to the 

bottom line with no benefit to the business community.  Just 

another nail in the coffin of free enterprise.  And just one more 

very ignorant move that is going to cost men and women the 

dignity of employment. 

 

But injured workers will have more protection.  And at the end 

of the day when another small-business person pounds a "for 

sale" sign in the front lawn and takes his expertise or her 

energy and his will to take risks and moves to Alberta or B.C. 

(British Columbia), then your government can look over the 

province and smile, knowing that your majority just won 

another victory. 

 

But how many small business soldiers are you willing to 

sacrifice on the economic front lines until you realize that what 

you're doing is you're shooting your own troops?  And how 

many more corporate casualties will there have to be in 

Saskatchewan before your government acknowledges that 

economic development happens one job at a time and one 

business at a time? 

 

(1630) 

 

If you people are philosophically capable . . . or perhaps I guess 

I should put it in another way.  If you're philosophically 

incapable of being able to create wealth, perhaps you would at 

least do the province one small favour, and that is to get out of 

the way and stop destroying those businesses who have 

managed to survive in Saskatchewan. 

 

Or are you determined -- and I get the point from your 

comments earlier about business people -- are you determined 

to seek out every possible area in which you can create 

negative vibrations for potential investors?  Are you so 

incapable of understanding wealth creation that through 

legislation such as this, you're determined to plant land mines 

along the road to economic recovery?  Because that's what it 

appears to be. 

 

People in the private sector do not actually have to trip over 

one of the government's economic booby traps in order to be 

scared off.  They don't actually have to 

allow government to destroy them.  They just have to have the 

sense of fear and uncertainty that your government has now 

managed to plant in the mind of risk takers across the nation 

through this Bill and the FCL (Federated Co-operatives Ltd.) 

Bill and your excessive taxation measures. 

 

As people watch what is happening with the Federated Co-op 

deal -- and nobody questions what an abominable deal it was; 

nobody questions that -- as they watch the government 

embarking on its particular election preamble, they're all 

shaking their heads in disbelief, and you don't even know it. 

 

I mean we've got Mr. McKenna in New Brunswick who's just 

clapping his hands over your decision on the FCL deal.  You 

know, you've just managed to ensure that a heck of a lot more 

economic development goes to his province than it will come 

here. 

 

People who have the capacity to catalyse the Saskatchewan 

economy are becoming discouraged, Mr. Minister.  And they're 

disillusioned, and they are disinterested in building a future 

here.  And this is not gloom and doom.  It is merely a reflection 

of the lack of light at the end of the horizon that this 

government is painting for people, created by your Premier 

who sent a very wrong message, possibly backed up by 

ridiculous legislations. 

 

Now I have read this legislation. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Have you? 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Yes, I have indeed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- And I will tell you as much as . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Oh yes, I know.  I know that you 

should win the award for gratuity; that's for sure. 

 

And having read it, I don't trust it.  And I have read and heard 

the criticism of this legislation, and I believe it has credence, 

and that's why I'm raising these issues today. 

 

I have talked to the people who oppose it and people in the 

business community, the Saskatchewan business coalition who 

absolutely represents no one according to your Premier, and I 

understand and I do think that they have some valid concerns. 

 

And like them, I do not understand the rush, Mr. Minister. You 

keep saying that of course Liberals would never get anything 

done.  I don't know how anything ever did get done in Canada 

since the NDP have never been in power, if you start looking at 

the things that have been nationally done in the country. 

 

I don't understand why the government feels obligated to ram 

this through without allaying the concerns of the people who 

have raised concerns.  This is their Act.  It's their Act.  The 

system belongs in large part to the employers.  They pay for 

every dime of 



2266 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 1993 

it.  And you as government are ignoring their concerns. 

 

And I believe you have an obligation.  You have an obligation 

to people to not put an affront to democracy.  You have an 

obligation to take the time with this, to put it through the proper 

process to ensure that you can quantify the effects that the 

changes will have.  Business is not willing to gamble any more 

with your government, and the Premier should not expect it of 

them. 

 

Mr. Minister, I am urging you to please take heed of what 

people have raised with you as their concerns.  To go back to 

the business community and to local governments, to SUMA 

(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) and SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) and others 

in the public sector and to address their many, many serious 

and substantive concerns as a gesture of respect for their 

importance as employers in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I believe that if you fail to do so, how can you continue to 

pretend that job creation is a priority?  How can your 

government pretend that it cares about people being able to 

have work when you so obviously don't care about the job 

creators.  And if you want the cooperation of business in 

Saskatchewan from here on in, if you truly care about the 

economic future of this province, then I suggest that you do not 

make this piece of legislation a philosophical battleground 

because you have absolutely nothing to gain, and every worker 

and employer in Saskatchewan will have a great deal to lose. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Anybody who thinks there's any 

difference between Liberals and Conservatives just missed that 

last speech, because it's apparent there isn't.  It's apparent that 

the difference between Liberals and Conservatives is one's in 

and one's out, and that's the only difference.  What you have 

described as an approach to workers' compensation is what the 

Conservatives did for 10 years -- virtually 10 years in office.  

That's what they did. 

 

Let us just talk for a moment about who has a businesslike 

approach to government.  If you want to reduce it to a personal 

level, Madam Member, I've met a payroll twice a month every 

month for 10 years before I was appointed as a minister.  I have 

done that since I left university.  I shall be very, very interested 

to hear the business experience of the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone.  I shall be very interested in that. 

 

Let us not however make this a personal matter.  Let us talk 

about approach to government.  This is the party which has ran 

government basically on a sound businesslike basis.  We pay as 

we go.  That's what we did after the war when all manner of 

Liberal and Conservative governments were running up huge 

deficits. 

 

Now it is true that for the seven lean years which the Liberals 

were in office in this province there were no deficits.  That, 

however, is an exception to the Canadian experience.  By and 

large there wasn't any 

difference between Liberals and Conservatives in office.  Both 

parties ran governments into the ground, and that is apparently 

what your approach would be.  With respect to this particular 

piece of legislation, our approach certainly is different than 

yours. 

 

Madam Minister, your comment that this Act belongs to 

employers is shallow to the point of being offensive.  This Act 

does not belong to employers; this belongs to the people of 

Saskatchewan, as does this government belong to the people of 

Saskatchewan.  We are not the handmaidens of business, we 

are not the handmaidens of unions, we are not the handmaidens 

of workers.  We are servants of the public, and we should 

remember that when we do their business. 

 

Madam Minister, there is this legislation . . . this legislation is a 

balance.  It strikes a balance between employers and 

employees.  It strikes a balance because it sets up a system 

whereby Saskatchewan will be able to retain the lowest 

assessment in Canada and a system whereby workers will be 

fairly compensated.  And that's a balance. 

 

This legislation does not belong to the workers.  And as long as 

that is your approach to this legislation, then there's no 

possibility of agreement between us -- none at all.  We say this 

legislation belongs to the public of Saskatchewan, not the 

employers, any more than the government belongs to the 

employers, or this Chamber.  It belongs to the people. 

 

Madam Minister, our approach to economic development is 

very, very different than the Liberal-Conservative approach, 

and I see there is no difference.  The approach of the old line 

parties, as my father and grandfather used to correctly call 

them, the approach of the old line parties is to do whatever the 

monied interests want. 

 

Well frankly, Madam Member, our approach is a little 

different.  We believe that if the economy . . . and this 

legislation should not be seen as a tool for economic 

development.  But let's talk about it.  This is a scheme for 

compensating injured workers. It's not a tool for economic 

development any more than medicare is. 

 

But let's talk about it in the context of economic development.  

We believe that economic development is only going to take 

place when employers and employees -- the workers, the 

management -- realize that we are in a lifeboat and we've all 

got to work together.  Employers contributing what they can 

employ.  Employees contributing what they can contribute.  

We believe we're only going to succeed when we have a 

genuine partnership. 

 

This legislation is part of that partnership.  This legislation 

which strikes a balance which fairly compensates workers 

while providing the lowest assessment in Canada for employers 

strikes a balance.  And that's our approach to economic 

development. 

 

If you of the old line parties believe that economic 

development is best takes place by giving one group in society 

whatever they want, well go ahead.  But it's 



June 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2267 

not our approach.  Our approach is that we represent everyone.  

We represent employees.  We also represent the employers.  

We represent the workers and the management.  And this 

legislation reflects that. 

 

It is of interest to me, and I think it will be of interest to others, 

to note that not once has the word "workers" appeared in your 

comments except when referring to the title of the Bill.  It's 

business wants this and business wants that and business wants 

this.  I'm sensitive to that as well. 

 

As I say, I met with well attended meetings of business people 

in every city in this province.  I made some comments for 

about half an hour but I listened to questions for about a half an 

hour or an hour.  I know what they want.  What do they want?  

They want to make a buck.  That's what they want.  They want 

their businesses to succeed. 

 

What do the workers want?  They want good, well-paying jobs.  

They're both saying the same thing.  They both want the same 

thing.  This legislation provides that.  It provides low 

assessments, and it also provides a reasonable level of 

compensation.  This kind of approach is the basis of a genuine 

partnership between these two groups without which we cannot 

succeed. 

 

I say to the member opposite, you really ought to broaden your 

horizons.  And if I may say so, you also ought to broaden the 

sources of your information.  As well as having talked to a few 

representatives of the business community, you also ought to 

talk to some injured workers.  Aha, now isn't that an interesting 

idea, that we would actually consult the people whose 

legislation this is designed to benefit.  Now isn't that a novel 

notion. 

 

I am making an assumption that the member has yet to mention 

any comment ever made by injured workers.  I think that's 

more than an assumption.  Because while it may or may not 

have appeared so, I was listening to the member's comments.  I 

didn't hear you discuss in detail the aspirations of injured 

workers.  I didn't hear the member opposite discussing in detail 

the hopes, the aspirations, of workers and employers.  What I 

heard her passing on was comments which I've heard ad 

nauseam from a very few representatives of the business 

community. 

 

The member earlier talked about the code of regulatory 

conduct.  I might add just in case it's necessary for anyone's 

benefit but yours, there was no commitment ever to put all 

legislation affecting business through a special committee of 

the legislature.  In our view, virtually all the legislation going 

before this legislature would have to go before the committee. 

 

We did promise full and fair consultation.  There was fuller and 

fairer consultation with respect to this Bill than any I have ever 

seen in the 18 years I have been in this legislature.  We gave 

them -- not copies of the Bill because that would offend the 

parliamentary practice -- but we gave them drafts which were 

very close to it. 

We asked for their comments.  Then when those comments 

were incorporated, we recirculated the drafts and got their 

comments again. 

 

I met with every representative of the business community who 

asked to meet with me -- bar none.  I met with the people who I 

think are scripting your comments a great many times.  I know 

what they want.  Part of what they want is incorporated in these 

Bills; part can never be.  Because part of what they want is an 

indefinite adjournment of the legislation.  As surely as you 

solve . . . Some of these people remind me of the Chinese 

dragon.  When you cut off one head, two grow back in its 

place.  That's the way they approach this legislation.  I solve 

one problem; they got two more for me to solve.  I solve those 

two; there's four. 

 

What's their game? -- to resolve all the problems?  Of course 

not.  Their game is an indefinite postponement of the 

legislation.  Well that's not part of our legislative agenda.  We 

don't think that's part of our commitment to the public of this 

province to have fair, compassionate government which 

represents in a fair way the interests of all the people of 

Saskatchewan.  So if you want to represent just one segment, 

and I'm going to say, a small portion of the business 

community, you can hop right to it. 

 

But that's not what this government does.  This government 

represents everyone.  We talk to injured workers; we listen to 

them; and I hope our approach reflects their comments.  We 

talk to unorganized workers and we listen, and I hope our 

approach reflects their hopes and aspirations.  We talked to 

trade unions, and I have pointed out we talked to the business 

community.  This represents a fair balance. 

 

(1645) 

 

I believe, Madam Minister, this is what government should do.  

Government should not come to this . . . members should not 

come to this legislature and talk about an Act which is designed 

to compensate injured workers and say it belongs to employers.  

It doesn't belong to employers at all.  It belongs to the public.  

And until you understand that, there is very little room for 

agreement between us, Madam Member. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, there is 

nothing more old line than the behaviour of your party.  And if 

we're talking about catering to special-interest groups, I mean 

you people deserve the Academy Award on it. 

 

You make reference to the '30s and the '40s and how you had 

to come in and rescue the province of Saskatchewan.  Well the 

'30s happened to be the Depression, and granted the 

Conservatives did not do a good job, but the war years, the war 

years if you would bother reading Canadian history, Mr. 

Minister, would tell you why it was that every single 

government in Canada was in the position it was economically, 

and why every single administration following those war years 

did well.  It wouldn't have 



2268 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 1993 

mattered who was in in the boom years. 

 

Similarly, it doesn't take great genius to balance the books 

during the '70s, Mr. Minister, when oil and gas prices, oil and 

gas prices and potash . . . We were booming in the 1970s. 

 

It does take some acumen, however, to be able to balance the 

budget through seven solid years of recession.  And what I find 

very amusing, Mr. Minister, is how you people continuously 

try to rewrite history.  Why don't we really look at what the 

debt per gross provincial product was in the 1970s and under 

your administration it went up.  Why didn't you spend some of 

the monies we had around to reduce the debt . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . No, you balanced the budgets but the debt 

went up.  Well lookit -- all you have to do is read and you can 

find it out. 

 

Mr. Minister, I would just like you to know that not only have I 

met with injured workers, I have viewed their tapes with them.  

I have met with them both in my constituency office and in my 

office here, and I am talking today . . . and I have mentioned 

workers.  When I talk about economic development, every time 

I mention it in this Assembly, Mr. Minister, economic 

development is for people in order to be employed.  Economic 

development takes place often times not because of what 

government does, to do anything except facilitate the 

environment where people who are risk takers, business 

people, can ensure that there will be jobs for people who 

require jobs out there.  And one of the things you've not been 

able to be very good at, except in the '70s, as far as job 

creation, was the bureaucracy. 

 

So I wouldn't take too much credit as far as being people who 

do not cater to special-interest groups.  Your own Premier has 

made mention how your entire party is made up of 

special-interest groups and that's what makes it so difficult for 

him to be the Leader of the New Democratic Party.  I find this 

all rather amusing.  You are the masters, sir, at being able to 

interfere. 

 

And I do agree that legislation that is done in this legislature is 

supposed to be for the people of Saskatchewan.  And what I'm 

suggesting to you is that this particular legislation is not only 

going to harm business people -- and I said it on several 

occasions, and you can read Hansard tomorrow if you would 

care to take the time -- I am talking about people having the 

dignity of employment.  Those are the people who are 

employed by employers.  And that's what this should be about 

-- ensuring that people do not lose their businesses and 

ensuring that people do not lose their jobs.  That's what this is 

about. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well all I can say to the member 

opposite is as long as you continue to put your comments in the 

fashion in which you do, which is a direct lift from the 

comments made by representatives of the business community, 

not many of those workers are going to identify with the party 

which you lead. 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I didn't note that 

the member from Greystone was quite finished.  And it was 

particularly of interest to me today to see the member from 

Greystone finally realize that there was some good politics in 

this Bill.  I've had material dated May 12 in my hand most of 

the afternoon, just checking through it.  And I will indicate to 

you, Minister, that we have tabled copies of this material with 

the Clerks and we have had a copy sent over to you so that you 

will know that we in fact have had the information that you 

yourself alluded to earlier and we will of course refer to in time 

as we go through this Bill. 

 

The point I wanted to make is that the views of the business 

community and the views of Judge Muir were not only 

available to us but to the member from Greystone, and we're 

rather surprised that it took this long before there was a defence 

from that quarter on behalf of the business community. 

 

So having said that, we want to get on, Minister, with the 

business of trying to make Saskatchewan a better place to live 

in.  And having said that, I take a little offence at your remark 

earlier that the Liberals and the Conservatives are exactly the 

same because I see our amendments on the Table; I don't see 

any from the member from Greystone.  And a considerable 

amount of work has gone into this, and I'd rather not be 

compared to someone that hasn't provided any amendments. 

 

So having said that, Minister, we do have to get on with the 

questioning of this Bill from the Conservative perspective, 

which I hope will reflect a genuine concern for both parties 

concerned with this Bill, namely of course the business 

community that has to live with the cost and of course the 

working people who have to live with the results of injuries. 

 

And I think it wouldn't hurt for me to re-echo their point of 

view just one more time, in that I have had many calls from 

people who have had problems with Workers' Compensation 

from the point of view of being injured and having problems 

getting their injuries not only medically corrected but also 

getting the system to work so that they are recognized and that 

their needs financially are addressed and their needs for 

rehabilitation are addressed properly, and there are other needs 

as well that go with it. 

 

So having done that, I've gained some perspective from the 

other side of the coin, I guess.  And I want to say that in all 

fairness to many of the people that work in your department, 

they have been very good to me as an MLA trying to address 

some of these situations.  We found very good cooperation, and 

we appreciate that. And we thank those people for that effort 

on our behalf and on behalf of the people who are injured. 

 

It does tell me that perhaps sometimes people who are not 

being fairly treated might not be getting fairly treated simply 

because they don't go through the necessary procedure of 

getting the attention that they need, because we have had, as I 

said, some reasonably good results at having problems 

resolved. 



June 7, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2269 

And not that everything's coming up sunny and roses all the 

time, but there seems to be a way that we can resolve the needs 

of a lot of the folks that have problems.  Having said that, then 

it makes me wonder why we had to have this legislation go as 

far as it has and sort of annoy so many people. 

 

So in regards to that, I want to say that we are going to get on 

with the amendments because we want to try to get our point 

across.  I hope that you will take some time to study the 

material that I sent across.  I'm sure that you have read it.  

Being the minister, you've obviously had it in your possession 

from the folks that have provided it to us.  But it does 

legitimize the position that we are taking on this Bill. 

 

I don't think that we really need to go into a whole lot of 

questions and answers any further, Minister, because I think 

probably with the things we've done in second readings as well 

as the preamble that you went through with the member from 

Greystone as well as the questions you've answered for myself 

both in this public forum and in some private discussions that 

we've had with yourself and several of your assistants, we have 

had a lot of answers to the questions already.  Now we need to 

clean the Bill up or try to, and try to make it something that 

people can live with. 

 

So I'm going to suggest to the chairman that we have 

introduced our amendments, the minister has introduced his, 

and if you can allow us a little glance our way as we go 

through the clauses so that we can get into each one of the 

amendments at the proper place, we would be happy to do that 

and address each one and get it done on the record the way that 

it's supposed to be. 

 

So if you'd like to just wrap up a few general comments on the 

clause 1 and the reflections that I have made about Bill 55, then 

we can get on to each of the clauses and the amendments. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much.  I first of all 

want to thank the member for his kind comments about the 

staff of the department.  We sometimes forget in our political 

comments that these are non-partisan people who serve all 

governments.  And I thank the member for his kind comments 

about the cooperative staff. 

 

I also, like the member opposite, I also had reasonable success 

in dealing with -- before I was minister, I might add -- had 

reasonable success in dealing with the WCB with cases I have.  

However one shouldn't have to need the services of a member 

as effective as the member from Maple Creek or Churchill 

Downs, to get a problem resolved -- to get a problem resolved. 

 

The fact that we are involved to the extent that we are suggests 

a problem.  When our offices begin to fill up with people who 

need our help, I think it's a warning sign there's a problem in 

the bureaucracy.  But again, I close as I began, by thanking the 

member for his kind comments. 

We have had some opportunity to consider the amendments, 

not all of them as fully as we'd like.  If we seem to be rejecting 

them, it isn't that we don't appreciate the effort that went into 

them.  It's simply that we have a different approach to this and 

perhaps a different understanding. 

 

I'll just make one other comment to the members opposite -- I 

think members opposite will know this -- and that is that the 

Muir committee did not quite complete its report.  They're 

reviewing a number of things which were left undone in their 

last report.  And if anything comes up which takes us by 

surprise, I'm going to be referring that to them as well for 

comments.  So in all likelihood this Act will be back here next 

year and we can pick up the discussion then with respect to 

items about which we're now only speculating. 

 

The Chair: -- I appreciate the fact that there will be coming 

forward some House amendments as well as a number of 

amendments moved by the opposition, and that you've made 

these available to the Chair in advance so that they can be 

checked for permissibility, and I will do my best then. 

 

We'll deal with those individually as we go along and to enable 

all of them to be considered individually as they're presented 

by the members. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 agreed to. 

 

Clause 3 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Minister, we 

have, as you will have noted, more than one amendment to 

clause 3.  Clause 3 of the printed Bill amendment, clause 3 of 

the printed Bill goes: 

 

 (a) By deleting clause (c) thereof; and 

 

 (b) By re-lettering clauses (d) through (g) thereof as clauses 

(c) through (f) respectively. 

 

And I would so move that that amendment be made.  And I 

would like to make a comment as to why we are doing this. 

 

Under section 3(b) defines employer association.  It was under 

a similar provision that the Minister of Labour designated the 

unrepresentative mechanical contractors as the employer 

association for almost the entire construction industry.  This 

definition is especially disturbing as it allows recognition of an 

employer organization made up of people who are not 

employers at all, whether or not they are employers.  And we 

suggest that that part has to be deleted from the Bill.  And I 

think that's what we are doing in our amendment. 

 

It apparently is close to 5 o'clock, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The Chair: -- Would the minister like to respond?  We 



2270 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 1993 

do have another 65 seconds. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- In my well-known brevity, I think I 

can do it in that.  I say to members opposite that we inserted 

this because we were having difficulty with the past practice of 

the board, and in part that was due to the rather narrow 

definition of what a health professional is and who they may 

get advice from.  So the section itself was inserted in order that 

the advice which the board may get might be as broad as 

possible. 

 

I recognize the concern which the member has.  I don't think it 

will in fact be realized in the practice of the board, and I will be 

urging the Assembly to vote against it. 

 

Amendment negatived. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


