




















































Hansard: March 08, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 167 

 March 8, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that 

I shall on Wednesday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

 Regarding the Department of Executive Council's purchase 

of polling: (1) what are the extent of monies allotted to or 

spent on public opinion surveys prior to this session; (2) to 

which firms were the surveys awarded; (3) during what 

periods was this work conducted; (4) what were the questions 

asked; (5) what were the results of these surveys. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

I would like to take this opportunity to introduce to you and 

through you to members of the Assembly a former member of 

the legislature.  Sitting behind the rail on the government side 

today is former member from Kinistino, Don Cody, who was a 

MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) for Kinistino for a 

number of years and former member of Executive Council. 

 

Just a couple of words, Mr. Speaker, with respect to Don.  I'm 

sure all members will recall his days in the legislature and his 

hard work on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan.  What's 

been brought to my attention over the years is how Don really 

did stand out in a crowd when he was a member of this 

Assembly, canary yellow sports jackets, navy blue, lime green, 

I guess were the order of the day.  I'd like all members to 

welcome Don. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce to you and to the Assembly in the west gallery, Mrs. 

Eileen Clunie.  Eileen was from Tisdale and is now from 

Saskatoon.  But Eileen was my official agent in the last 

election and I wish everyone to give her a welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you and 

through you to the members of the legislature again Mr. Don 

Cody who was the elected representative for Kinistino for 

many, many years.  And certainly I'd just like to add to my 

colleague from Prince Albert Northcote that Don was a very 

colourful individual during those years as a representative and 

worked very hard and diligently for the people of the Kinistino 

constituency. 

 

We thank him for those years of dedication and I'd like to 

welcome him here to the Assembly today and to Regina. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like 

the Assembly to welcome through you in your Speaker's 

gallery, Mr. Myron Luczka and two gentlemen who are 

accompanying him today.  Myron ran for the Saskatchewan 

Liberal Party in the last election and is very knowledgeable and 

works in the labour movement. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, it's a pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to the other members of the 

Assembly, seated in your gallery, Svitlana Melnyk, who is a 

visiting school principal from Odessa in Ukraine.  She's 

accompanied by George Zevebecky and Vera Labach, 

employees of Sask Ed. 

 

Svitlana was a participant in the Canada-Ukraine conference in 

1991, which was attended as well by our Myron Kowalsky and 

the former Minister of Education.  I'd like you to welcome 

Svitlana Melnyk to our Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's very much a 

pleasure for me, Mr. Speaker, to echo the words of the minister 

and welcome Svitlana Melnyk from Odessa in Ukraine.  I had 

the distinct pleasure of being in Ukraine at the same time at this 

conference, and it was during that time that the coup occurred.  

We were all getting off a train in Lviv when we found out that 

the coup had happened.  We were kind of glad that Boris 

Yeltsin stepped on the tank a day later. 
 

(The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.) 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman . . . or Mr. Speaker.  

I too want to welcome the visitors here from the Ukraine.  The 

Odessa is where my grandfather lived, in a city called Chortiza.  

He moved from there to here in 1904 and I was there in Kiev 

last February, and in September again.  And I just want to 

welcome these people from the Ukraine to the Assembly here 

today. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Closure of Elbow School 
 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Over the next 

few days, teachers, administrators, directors, and all those with 

a stake in our province's education system will be celebrating 

Education Week.  Unfortunately the NDP (New Democratic 

Party) government is giving these people very little reason to 

celebrate. 
 

My question is to the Minister of Education.  Madam Minister, 

your government's haphazard preoccupation with the closure of 

rural schools has caused a great deal of anxiety and concern 

among teachers, parents, and directors.  Short of your 

government's strong . . . or standard political rhetoric, Madam 

Minister, can you tell this Assembly what your plan is for the K 

to 12 schools in this province?  Can you tell us how many 

schools will 



168 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1993 

eventually close? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, as the member opposite 

knows, the configuration of the school system in rural 

Saskatchewan is within the jurisdiction of the local school 

boards.  I would like to point out that the teachers and the 

stakeholders in the education field in this province have done a 

tremendous job and continue to do a very creative job in 

dealing with the funding cut-backs that have been brought 

about by the state of the finances that we were left with 

following your administration. 

 

I would also like to add that there were less schools closed in 

this year than there were the last . . . even with funding 

cut-backs than there were in the last year of your 

administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, indeed education . . . 

schools are in the purview of the local school boards, but when 

the department through the minister cuts funding to them, she 

is having a direct impact and it's time she took some leadership 

on this issue.  She's hiding behind the debt again, but as my 

colleague showed in his speech to the throne, the debt was 

mainly accumulated by the previous NDP government. 

 

Madam Minister, school closures are already taking place.  In 

fact your government's divide-and-conquer policy is pitting 

community against community, and local boards against 

regional boards.  Your throne speech spoke of bringing people 

together, but your actions are tearing them apart.  There are 

many examples of this; Whitewood is one. 

 

But I wish to draw your attention to the closure of the school at 

Elbow.  Your budget cuts have forced the regional board to 

make difficult decisions and the local board says it is a wrong 

decision, Madam Minister.  The people of Elbow are asking 

just how much the government will save as a result of closing 

the Elbow School, and can you provide that information, 

Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, as the member opposite 

knows and as I've stated previously, the configuration of the 

school system is within the jurisdiction of the local school 

divisions in the province.  I do not have any jurisdiction over 

that. 

 

The school division board members are elected by the people 

in the school division that they are closest to to serve their 

interests.  And they address that responsibility very well in 

most cases.  And I expect that in the Outlook School Division 

where Elbow is located, that the same kind of common sense 

will prevail. 

 

I would like to point out that the interest on the debt that we 

were left with after your administration last year was twice -- 

$760 million -- twice the amount that we allocated to school 

boards K to 12 in this province last year.  If they hadn't run up 

that debt, we wouldn't be asking the education community to 

make these 

adjustments. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- There's one point there, Madam 

Minister, in which I will agree with you: no responsibility and 

no leadership in education from you and the department. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, the people of Elbow 

are wondering if your actions will indeed save money.  In fact 

they think it will cost more money.  The manager of the Elbow 

Credit Union said, and I'll quote:  it's not a fiscally responsible 

way of spending money. 

 

Elbow parents are wondering if you know what you're doing, 

Madam Minister.  During the last session you committed to this 

Assembly that the cost of repairing the roof and relocating 

students from Elbow and Strongfield to Loreburn would be 

438,000.  On August 6 in this House you repeatedly stated that 

it would be no more than 438,000. 

 

Madam Minister, would you care to stand in this Assembly and 

reconfirm that statement?  Would you do that now please? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, last year we allocated 

certain sums for maintenance only; we did no new capital 

construction last year.  I don't recall the specific numbers that 

the member is referring to but I will undertake to provide them. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, you clearly stated -- 

it's recorded in Hansard -- that that move would cost no more 

than $438,000.  And yet over the Christmas period somehow 

that number jumped.  That cost is now in the range of $1.4 

million, not 438.  You stated in this House that those . . . there 

was no capital projects; that would only be emergency funding. 

 

That's a big difference -- 1.4 million to $438,000.  If the 

difference in cost is due to facility expenditures, I'm wondering 

if you can square with your department's ban on capital 

expenditures. 

 

Madam Minister, your department is allowing for emergency 

expenditures only.  How can the difference in costs for 

construction for this facility . . . What's the reason? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, in terms of capital 

construction, prior to the last election the previous 

administration went out and made promises for over $51 

million worth of new construction which they never budgeted 

for.  We were forced to put those projects on hold because the 

money was not available.  And what we did was allocate funds 

for what we called, and what the school divisions are calling, 

emergency funding only -- roof repairs, portable, relocatable 

additions where there's a space problem -- and that is what we 

budgeted for last year. 



March 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 169 

We wouldn't be in this kind of a crunch, and the school 

divisions wouldn't be forced to make these kind of decisions, if 

we weren't left with the aftermath of waste and 

mismanagement of your administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- But, Madam Minister, you said there 

was going to be no capital construction in your statements last 

summer when we were sitting in this House, and how do you 

square that away with what is actually going on there?  Just 

emergency funding is what you said -- roofs and leaks.  In 

some areas of this province we have schools with fire orders 

against them.  Why are those not emergencies?  You don't wish 

to fund them. 

 

Madam Minister, you're being inconsistent and your 

inconsistencies are very transparent and they're causing a great 

deal of concern around this province.  The local board in 

Elbow is having to take the regional board to court because of 

your actions, pitting community against community.  And that's 

the new NDP slogan. 

 

Madam Minister, did you attempt to resolve this problem 

before forcing it into the courts?  Or did you just wash your 

hands of the whole situation like your government has done 

with agriculture, like it's about to do with health?  Did you do 

anything to try and avoid this confrontation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure what the 

hon. member refers to as a confrontation.  But we made 

amendments last year to The Education Act to clarify the 

process that school divisions and local school boards should . . 

. the procedures that they should follow in the event that they 

feel a need to make a change in the configuration of their local 

school system.  We tried to clear that for them and clarify that 

for them, at their request, after consultation with school boards 

and stakeholders in the education system. 

 

Again I say that we wouldn't be faced, and local school 

divisions wouldn't be faced, with these kind of challenges if we 

hadn't been left to deal with the fiscal problems that their 

administration left us with. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, you may not call going 

to court a confrontation, but in a lot of people's mind that is 

indeed exactly what it is. 
 

Madam Minister, the move from 438,000 to 1.4 million, when 

did that occur and why? 
 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman . . . Mr. Speaker, we do 

not, the department, the province does not interfere in the 

affairs of school divisions where they have a local board which 

is duly elected to manage the affairs within that school 

division.  When there is a funding request that comes forward 

in areas where the province pays a portion of it, then we are 

restricted to our interest in that portion.  Otherwise the local 

school division makes their own decisions in that respect. 

They're accountable 

to their ratepayers, and that's the way it should be.  If you had 

been accountable to the people that voted for you, they 

wouldn't be faced with the problems they have. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, are you saying you had 

no involvement in $1.4 million that went to this school? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, we had a limited amount 

of money available for maintenance and emergency repairs 

which includes such things as where there are occupational 

health and safety warnings, where there is a crowding or an 

enrolment problem.  We have done our best to work with 

school divisions to meet their requests in those emergency 

situations. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I just want to ask the members 

to please come to order.  Come to order! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, since you won't 

answer where the 1.4 million came from or what it was spent 

on, can every school board expect to receive the same kind of 

consideration if they have overcrowding in their schools? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, we do not -- being the 

province, the Department of Education -- we do not become 

involved with affairs that properly belong within the 

jurisdiction of the properly elected school division board that's 

elected by the local ratepayers to manage their affairs.  That 

board is accountable to the people that elect them.  The largest 

portion of the money that they spend comes from the 

ratepayers in the local school division, and that's who they 

should be accountable to.  We do not interfere in those 

decisions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, I agree again with the 

minister that there is no responsibility there on her part because 

there's no leadership on her part.  Is she telling this House 

today that if a school board puts in a B-1 request for capital 

funding to do with closing, that she will honour that request? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, last year, after the 

budget, when the amount that was available for emergency 

repairs was announced, and we used an established list that was 

established by the facilities branch in the department during 

your administration, and we worked with those school boards, 

gave them the approval early in May.  They went ahead, based 

upon consultations within their own school divisions, to use the 

money and . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Will the member from Morse please 

come to order. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We worked 

throughout the balance of the year with the local school 

divisions who identified that kind of situation in their facilities 

to address the problems in the most efficient possible way. 



170 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1993 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, did you 

make this decision in May of last year to fund the move of the 

Elbow and Strongfield schools to Loreburn for $1.4 million? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, the original approvals for 

the global amount that would be available was made in the 

spring of the year.  Throughout the balance of that year we 

worked with local school divisions to refine those requests and 

to make sure that not only the provincial portion of the 

financial contribution but their own, the local contribution to 

the project, was done in the most rational way, always at the 

request of the local school division which represents the people 

it serves. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, you're disclaiming any 

responsibility for this issue but I'm sure that you're acquainted 

with The Education Act.  Section 10.01 gives you or your 

appointment the power to inquire into and report on appeals, 

complaints, differences, or disagreements arising from the 

decision of a board of education.  The Act allows you to make 

a decision on that matter, Madam Minister. 

 

Madam Minister, we are not advocating intervention but 

support.  Rather than having boards and communities fighting 

against each other in court, could you not have helped resolve 

the problems you created?  How many more legal suits must be 

launched before you do something? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, this is not a situation that 

has been created by the province, the department, or the 

ministry of Education.  This is a dispute at the local level which 

the Act is very clear, sets out jurisdictions for each of the 

players at the local level -- the local school board, the division 

board, what their responsibilities are, what the processes are. 

 

We would not invoke the section that the member refers to, 

section 10.01, unless it was a matter of very dire emergency.  

Because we believe in the process that local ratepayers are 

responsible to elect their representatives to the division board, 

and that the decision should be left at that level.  We would not 

interfere. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, educators, directors, 

parents, can all be proud that they are celebrating Education 

Week.  Madam Minister, the people of Saskatchewan will be 

recognizing something else during this week and that's your 

government's complete betrayal of education.  Let me read you 

a statement which your Premier made during the election: 

 

 Increased education spending is a priority of the NDP.  All I 

can say is we simply must find the funds, the money. 

 

He also said in the Moose Jaw Times-Herald, and I quote: 

 

 Don't let any government tell you they don't have enough 

funds for education.  The money is there. 

 

Madam Minister, with your statements about the lack of 

money, are you now contradicting your Premier?  Are you 

saying your government does not have enough funds for 

education? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, education remains -- 

always has been -- and remains a very high priority for this 

government.  We recognize that the education and training of 

our young people and retraining of adults in the current 

atmosphere is a very important priority. 

 

We have been left with a huge deficit.  We have to deal with 

that.  The education community has been very supportive and 

understanding in the way that they have dealt with the funding 

problems that they have been faced with as a result of trying to 

deal with, come to grips with, the deficit situation. 

 

The people in the education community recognize that they are 

part of Saskatchewan.  They want to make a contribution to the 

recovery of this province from the disastrous 10 years of your 

administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Union Preference in Crown Corporation Contracts 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On the weekend, 

Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure of addressing the Canadian 

Federation of Labour in Saskatoon.  We had an open and frank 

discussion about government policies and where the official 

opposition stands on these issues. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, I and many in the business community 

were greatly disturbed by the pronouncement from the Premier 

following that same meeting, that his NDP government will be 

favouring union . . . (inaudible) . . . contractors in Crown 

corporation contracts. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier.  Is 

your true belief that trade unions are the best qualified, as you 

said in the Saskatoon paper,  or is it your belief that trade 

unions should get the work because they supported you in the 

last election?  Isn't that the real reason, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  What the 

Premier said to the conference was what I said to the 

conference and what we have been saying about the issue, and 

that is that both business and labour have raised with us the 

question of union-only contracting. 

 

What we said is that we are reviewing the matter and will, as 

soon as can be done, be consulting with both communities and 

making a decision.  We merely stated the matter was under 

consideration.  No policy pronouncement was made. 



March 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 171 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Minister, 

I can understand that the Premier wouldn't want to answer 

when you have directly contradicted one another over the past 

weekend. 

 

I'll direct my question again to the Premier.  I'm sure that even 

you would agree that this is another fracturing of your promises 

of open tendering because you will close participation in 

non-union workers and favour those that support your political 

agenda.  That's not open tendering, Mr. Premier; that's political 

patronage. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier.  Can the Premier 

tell us if this is part of the pay-off to the unions in addition to 

the pro-union legislation that is about to be introduced in this 

Assembly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  What we 

seek to promote in this province is not a pay-off to anyone, nor 

to take sides with anyone.  What we seek to promote in the area 

of contracting, as in other areas, is a partnership -- a partnership 

between business and labour which will result in a successful 

and efficient economy. 

 

I know that the members opposite sought to promote . . . sought 

to divide and conquer when they were in office.  That's not the 

approach of this government.  We seek to have business and 

labour working together as partners, and we think that's what 

they want. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I can guarantee you 

that you will hear more from the opposition and from the 

business community on this matter in the days to come.  Rest 

assured of that, Mr. Minister, because your remarks will 

generate that kind of response. 

 

Nationalization of Energy and Mines 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to address a further 

question on the Canadian Federation of Labour's meeting to the 

Minister of Energy and Mines.  Mr. Minister, I attended a 

meeting where you told 30 or 40 delegates that your 

government is considering the nationalization of the industries 

under your purview.  In your comments you implied that your 

government did not have the capacity to borrow enough money 

to accomplish a re-nationalization, but that it would look to do 

so if feasible. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister:  Mr. Minister, I ask 

you as the Minister of Energy and Mines, is it your 

government's long-term plan to spend billions of borrowed 

money just like you did in the '60s to buy mines that are 

already in existence?  Is that your plan, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- No, that's not the plan. 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm glad that you've 

clarified that, Mr. Minister, because you left me and many of 

the people at that gathering with the distinct impression that 

you would, if you had the capacity, that your government 

would make the same mistakes in the 1990s that you did in the 

1960s, and that your premier made in the l960s. 

 

I just wonder now, Mr. Speaker, if the labour people you spoke 

to, Mr. Minister, on the weekend will be equally pleased with 

the remark you just made.  I doubt it. 

 

Mr. Minister, the investment and business communities are 

already sitting on pins and needles because of your 

government's incompetence.  And the musings about buying 

billions of dollars of existing private businesses do not help, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister, to bolster your 

confidence, Mr. Minister, would you do that?  Would you 

bolster the confidence of the business community by making a 

commitment in this Assembly that your government will not 

repeat the disastrous nationalization policies of the 1960s?  

Will you make that commitment firmly here today once and for 

all, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well I thank the hon. member for his 

supplementary question.  Apparently he was listening out of a 

different ear than I was at the Canadian Federation of Labour 

conference on the weekend.  I did not have the same 

interpretation as the hon. member.  And I can assure the hon. 

member that this government will not repeat any kind of 

policies that will mean disaster on the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan as did the policies of the Devine government 

over the past 10 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- I want to remind the Minister of Energy and 

Mines that he is not to refer to people by their personal names 

but by their constituency. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

International Women's Day 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, today is International 

Women's Day.  March 8 is recognized around the world as a 

day to commemorate women's struggles and to celebrate 

women's achievements.  International Women's Day recognizes 

women's historic struggles for better pay and decent working 

conditions.  It is also the day we pay tribute to women's efforts 

to attain political equality and social justice.  Finally, 

International Women's Day is a time for us to honour the 

countless women around the world who have dedicated their 

time and energy to working for peace. 
 

This year's theme for International Women's Day is "Women's 

rights are human rights."  This means that women's concerns 

must be addressed in the overall context of human rights.  We 

need to recognize that gender inequality and sex discrimination 

practices violate women's human rights.  Governments around 

the  



172 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1993 

world need to be more vigilant in safeguarding women's 

fundamental rights.  This is particularly true in the area of 

violence against women. 

 

Mr. Speaker, International Women's Day is also an appropriate 

time to turn our attention to the rights of women workers.  1991 

census data released last week revealed that 60 per cent of 

Canadian women are in the paid labour force.  Almost 80 per 

cent of women below the ages of 25 to 44 are working for 

wages.  More than two-thirds of all women with children at 

home are in the paid labour force. 

 

The changing face of the labour market has important policy 

implications for governments.  We need to take action on the 

issue of employment equity for women and other 

disadvantaged groups.  We need to re-evaluate and renew our 

commitment to child care services.  We need to find ways to 

put an end to the all too pervasive problem of sexual 

harassment in the workplace. 

 

And I wish to say this also, Mr. Speaker:  while women in the 

paid labour force need support and recognition, so do women 

whose full-time work is unpaid.  It is essential that we as a 

society respect and value the contribution of women whose 

primary work is in the home and in the community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is appropriate that on International Women's 

Day we commit ourselves to work together for the economic, 

social, and political equality of women.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, on 

behalf of my colleagues in the opposition, we would like to 

take this opportunity also to recognize the International 

Women's Day. 

 

This day is recognized as a time to celebrate the achievement 

and struggles of women throughout the world.  We support 

women's rights to live with dignity, and we ask all people to 

take the time to recognize International Women's Day. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Do you wish to speak to this?  Does the 

member from Saskatoon Greystone have leave to make a 

comment? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On this day, 

some 80 years ago, 15,000 women marched through the streets 

of New York city demanding safe working conditions, equal 

pay, the right for women to vote, and decent working hours.  

Since that march occurred, progress has been made in many, 

many areas.  We now have women leading political parties, 

being appointed to the bench, employed in almost every other 

occupation once regarded only as a male domain. 

 

But there is still work to do.  Women still earn 66 per cent of 

men's wages; women are still predominant in what is 

called the pink arena -- service industry-related jobs; child care 

spaces are inadequate.  Home-makers' work is still 

unrecognized and pensions for them do not yet exist. 

 

We need to encourage women to get involved at whatever level 

they can in order to bring about changes to the system so that a 

different perspective can be heard. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 8 -- An Act to amend The Uniform Building and 

Accessibility Standards Act and to make Related 

Amendments to Certain Other Acts 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that an Act to 

amend The Uniform Building and Accessibility Standards Act 

be now introduced and read for the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 9 -- An Act to amend The Emergency Planning Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that An Act to 

amend The Emergency Planning Act be now introduced and 

read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 10 -- An Act to Protect Municipal Property 

Taxpayers in the Province of Saskatchewan through the 

repeal of The Hospital Revenue Act 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move that first 

reading of a Bill to Protect Municipal Property Taxpayers in 

the Province of Saskatchewan through the repeal of The 

Hospital Revenue Act be now introduced and read the first 

time. 

 

The Speaker: -- What's the member's point of order? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, it is my understanding 

that this Bill deals with taxation and the ability to raise money.  

I wonder whether or not, Mr. Speaker, you would rule on 

whether or not this would be considered to be a money Bill. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Since we have no knowledge of 

whether it . . . what is in the Bill, I think what we should do is 

let the Bill proceed, and I will have a look at it and come back 

with a ruling later on. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, 

I wonder if I might ask leave of the House to make a brief 

statement pertaining to the Canadian women's curling 

championships. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 



March 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 173 

Canadian Women's Curling Champions 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thanks 

to the members of the House.  Mr. Speaker, as everybody here 

knows, Saskatchewan is honoured to be the home of the 1993 

Scott Tournament of Hearts Canadian women's curling 

champions, and a marvellous job too. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- For the first time since 1980, 

Saskatchewan competed in the tournament's final -- too long a 

wait, Mr. Speaker -- and then went on to win the title of Team 

Canada.  Skip, Sandra Peterson, and her team, are to be 

commended for the hard work and dedication that led to this 

achievement. 

 

On behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, and I'm sure the 

members of this House, I'd like to extend the warmest 

congratulations to Sandra Peterson, and her Callie rink mates, 

Jan Betker, Joan McCusker, Marcia Gudereit, and the team's 

fifth, Anita Ford.  We wish Team Canada, now Team Canada, 

continued success as they advance to the world championships 

in Geneva, Switzerland later this month.  And we hope at some 

appropriate time to honour their great achievement before the 

legislature with all the members present. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm sure the members will join me in extending 

congratulations and best wishes for that world championship 

title to Sandra and Team Canada. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Yes, Mr. Premier, 

the opposition joins with you wholeheartedly in extending 

congratulations to Sandra and her team.  I think many, many of 

us who have the slightest interest at all in sports and certainly 

some of us who are not, simply because we had a 

Saskatchewan representative out there doing her best for 

Saskatchewan, we were all glued to the TV set, I'm sure, and 

hanging on every shot.  And it'll take a long time for me, Mr. 

Speaker, to forget that last shot that Sandra made when she not 

only took that rock out but had enough of a roll to win.  And 

she is on a roll.  And I suspect, Mr. Speaker, that she will 

become and her team will become the world champions. 

 

But before I take my seat, Mr. Speaker, I would also say, let's 

give three cheers for Randy Woytowich that he will also be 

able to duplicate the feat that Sandra and her gang did. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as it relates to two 

written questions, no. 78 and 79, I hereby table the answers. 

 

The Speaker: -- Questions 78 and 79 are tabled. 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as it relates to motions 

for returns (not debatable), items number 1 to 101, I would 

request they be converted to motions for return (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Motions for return (debatable). 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Ms. Stanger, seconded by Mr. 

Renaud, and the amendment thereto moved by Mr. Boyd. 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  The 

Assembly would recall the discussion that we had on Friday 

and where the discussion left off in the debate.  I was outlining 

at that time the progress of the previous administration and its 

track record directly and related to farm income. 

 

Today I want to carry on that discussion but in another vein 

and that is the connection the previous administration has with 

the present federal government, and the goals and aspirations 

that government has for agriculture and the problems it leaves 

for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Clearly and unequivocally, for the past few years under the 

leadership of Brian Mulroney the federal government has 

undertaken the area of deregulation in the area of agriculture -- 

without question the deregulation of the transportation area, 

deregulation of marketing, and deregulation of regulatory 

review in terms of grading and that for agriculture. 

 

(1445) 

 

These have serious impacts for agriculture in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker.  Let's first talk about the deregulation of 

transportation.  As the argument has taken place under the 

guise of the federal government who continue to push for a 

change in method of payment, and as my colleagues clearly 

outlined in a debate earlier on that took place -- an emergency 

debate that took place in this House -- outlined the federal 

government's objective of making a change to the method of 

payment.  Clearly and unequivocally, to make a change like 

this to the grain transportation system will lead to a deregulated 

system that similarly exists in the state of Montana.  Clearly 

that is not the face of rural Saskatchewan that we want. 

 

And I raise the same question that I asked on Friday, in terms 

of the previous administration that ruled here in the province 

for 10 years, where was the previous administration during this 

debate of transportation?  Where were they?  Did they say 

anything?  Did they raise an eye or did they criticize the federal 

government? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Not a word. 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Not a word.  Not a word. 



174 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1993 

An Hon. Member: -- Silent support. 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Silent support to a change of deregulation of 

the transportation system that would see literally the demise of 

rural Saskatchewan -- literally -- and money taken out of 

farmers' hands.  And they argue about short-term things and 

politics, where we tried to take a view that it's much more long 

term that will protect rural Saskatchewan. 

 

The other question of deregulation that has popped up recently 

by the federal government, that of deregulating of grain 

standards or standards of grading in Canada.  This has 

dramatic, serious implication for Canada and the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

One of the things that we have prided ourselves on, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of being an exporter of high-quality grain, is 

our standards.  We are the only country in the world that can 

ship a boatload of grain to China or wherever, they will pay for 

it before shipment.  They know the quality of that grain and 

they do it on a single sample of that ship -- a single sample, Mr. 

Speaker.  They know the integrity of our system. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- As opposed to every carload from the 

U.S. (United States). 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- As my member has said, as opposed to 

every carload . . . every shipload that is sent from United 

States.  From United States, they will not even pay a nickel 

until they have unloaded the ship entirely, to make sure what 

the grade standard is. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the federal government brought down a 

regulatory review committee review on the side of the grain 

commission.  They've talked about changes, changes I feel, Mr. 

Speaker, that will attack our high standards, that will loosen the 

rules, that we will not be in the same competitive position that 

we have been to sell our grains into the world market. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, that is dangerous.  And I ask the question 

again, as we know this has been going on for several years: 

where was the previous provincial administration?  Where 

were they?  Silent support.  Silent support. 

 

Now the latest attack in terms of deregulation, Mr. Speaker, has 

come in the area of the Canadian Wheat Board.  The new 

Minister of Agriculture, who is now also the minister of state 

responsible for the Canadian Wheat Board, has stated barley 

will go off the board.  That is a serious mistake, Mr. Speaker, a 

serious mistake. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- And who'd he appoint to the Wheat 

Board? 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- That's right.  As the member from Kinistino 

has outlined, who has he appointed?  Mr. Ken Beswick, the 

federal government has appointed.  Clearly one who is in 

charge -- the fox is in charge of the chicken coop. 

 

An attack like that, Mr. Speaker, to the Canadian Wheat 

Board, I think clearly shows what the federal government 

thinks of the Canadian Wheat Board.  A vehicle that has 

worked effectively well for many, many years for producers in 

Saskatchewan, throughout western Canada, that has provided 

protection.  And there are areas that the Canadian Wheat Board 

can enter into, I think, that can do greater benefits to the 

producers of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Australian Wheat Board is looking at examples now where 

they're involved in value added industry.  Why can't the 

Canadian Wheat Board do that?  That goes against the 

philosophy of the federal government and the old provincial 

one. 

 

As my next question is going to be again as I've said before: 

where have the previous administration been when we 

discussed these issues?  Silent support.  Velcro lips. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this short-sighted view of agriculture, this attempt 

to deregulate the system in terms of agriculture simply for the 

corporate interest or agribusiness without the input of farmers, 

without the input of producers, spells serious trouble for 

agriculture in Saskatchewan. 

 

And we as a government must react to that.  We must develop 

policies by which we can deal with that change that is coming, 

how we can stop that change, and how we best can develop 

agriculture policies for our producers in Saskatchewan. 

 

And we've undertaken that, as I outlined in the early part of my 

speech on Friday, Mr. Speaker, past -- the question of a vision 

document going out and talking to the producers of 

Saskatchewan.  Talking about these various issues.  Talking 

about developing a partnership -- not a competition amongst 

producers, but working together in terms of a partnership. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- We need to build an agriculture that is 

strong, based on cooperation between a federal and provincial 

government, and producers out there that will have the kind of 

agriculture and rural economy that we need for a healthy and 

stable rural Saskatchewan for the year 2000. 

 

In the question of the role of government, we see a role for 

government in terms of bringing those people together; 

brightening policies of cooperation together where we're not 

fighting; where we need to discuss how we can strengthen the 

institutions that are out there that have benefited producers.  

The question of the Canadian Wheat Board, how we can 

strengthen its role to protect producers.  How we can 

strengthen the grain commission. 

 

And I think too we also have to look to the livestock industry 

because it is under attack under deregulation in terms of the 

grading standards.  And I'm afraid when they talk about . . . the 

federal government talks about privatization of the grading 

industry in the area of livestock, that we will see an industry 

that will simply react to grade standards that exist south of the 

border or some place else to meet a certain market.  And I'm 

afraid 



March 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 175 

then that producers, particularly livestock producers, cannot 

react to that kind of market.  We must have stability in the 

livestock market because again, particularly in the hog 

industry, we have a product that other people want. 

 

And how other countries are trying to attack that is to attack 

our standards and bring us down to their level.  And I say 

shame.  That is not the way we should do it. 

 

We need also to look at the area of cooperation and cooperative 

development.  The major cooperatives in this country in terms 

of the province, Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, Federated Co-ops, 

and the Credit Union Central system play a very active role in 

the economy of Saskatchewan. 

 

And we want to look at opportunities by which we can work 

with those people to build the kind of Saskatchewan we want.  

We don't need to be bringing in the Peter Pocklington's of the 

world.  We don't need to be doing these kind of things.  Our 

strength has always come from within.  And that's the kind of 

things that we need to be looking at.  And that's what we're 

talking about. 

 

The cooperative system is talking about the area of land tenure.  

They feel it is important, as we do.  And the question of 

working and the question of community-based land trusts -- 

long term. 

 

We cannot continue to refinance and refinance land within 

generations.  This senseless activity has to end.  So we have to 

be looking at things like this. 

 

The other area too where we can build on strengths is the 

question of adding value to product produced within 

Saskatchewan.  There are opportunities there in terms of labour 

employment, opportunities of using those products that we 

produce, adding value to it, and selling it to other countries. 

 

We are seeing examples of that through the Saskatchewan 

Research Council, through the POS (protein/oil/starch) pilot 

plant in Saskatoon where they are looking at new benefits from 

crops that we presently grow and how we can use those things 

in industrial base.  Something nobody else is doing.  The 

question of herbs and spices and items like this -- another 

activity that we can use that can provide benefit for 

Saskatchewan people.  These are the kinds of things that we're 

talking about. 

 

But as I've said earlier, these cannot be done within a scope of 

a short-term view.  You cannot be thinking and continue to say 

this is next year country. 

 

Farmers are now talking themselves, how can I make sure that 

people are living within this community 5 years or 10 years 

down the road?  Older farmers are worried that they will not 

have people to take over their farms. 

 

Younger people after 10 years of federal and provincial 

government rule that has simply decimated agriculture are now 

saying, we can't continue farming.  This is not the kind of 

direction we want to go. 

We look at the question of farm income support and looking at 

the kind of program that will be ideal for the province of 

Saskatchewan.  And that's why we're going out and talking to 

farmers in terms of a farm support committee.  Consultation. 

 

The other day the member from Kindersley talked about the 

wonders of GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) '91, how 

wonderful it was.  I know that the member from Kindersley 

comes from an area where a great deal of durum is grown.  

And I wonder how many producers were happy with the 

overpayment in durum, how many received bills instead of 

cheques in '91 GRIP. 

 

That is the problem with GRIP '91, '92.  We need to develop 

the program that is ideal for Saskatchewan, not ideal for the 

federal government's treasuries and not ideal for political 

expediency to get a government elected in one year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Mr. Speaker, as I've outlined, this is the 

kind of direction and vision that exists within the throne 

speech, as I talked about earlier, the documents in terms of 

economic development, the areas of wellness and health care, 

and, as I have talked about, the area of agriculture -- the 

journey of renewal.  To continue this journey of renewal, to 

build the kind of Saskatchewan we need, the kind of strength 

we need to rebuild it, to put the heart and soul that we need for 

a strong Saskatchewan to enter the 21st century. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was greatly honoured to vote in favour of this 

throne speech in the motion, but at the same time I will not be 

able to vote for the amendment that was proposed by the 

members opposite.  I think they do a disservice to the province 

of Saskatchewan.  They left the ashes behind.  They fail to 

recognize what has gone on.  In fact some of them take the 

attitude 10 years have not gone on, as one has outlined, that the 

debt was due to a government before 1982.  And I feel that is 

truly a neglect of responsibility for what has taken place. 

 

We as a government must look forward.  We must look 

forward into the future, Mr. Speaker, to have the kind of 

direction that will get us over the short term and, I think, to a 

very positive, bright, long term for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Once again I am 

pleased and honoured to stand in my place as the representative 

for the Saltcoats constituency and enter the debate against the 

amendment and in support of the throne speech, because it 

vows to re-invent Saskatchewan's future.  It charts the path of 

renewal and rebuilding, where before there was only rubble 

and moving vans. 

 

I want to congratulate the mover of the throne speech, the 



176 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1993 

member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster, and the seconder, the 

member from Kelsey-Tisdale, both fine colleagues and good 

friends. Great speeches.  Of course that's no surprise, because 

political movements like ours attract people of intelligence and 

vision. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- I would like to compliment Mr. Speaker for 

his firm hand guiding an often unruly Assembly.  I want to 

thank you for your guidance and leadership over the past year.  

I look forward to more of the same, and you can count on my 

cooperation during this session, Mr. Speaker. 

 

At this point, on behalf of the Saltcoats constituents, I would 

like to recognize the contributions and accomplishments of 

three former members of this Assembly -- Mr. Perkins, Mr. 

Broten, and Mr. Thurston -- who have recently passed away.  I 

wish to extend my condolences to the families of these 

distinguished members. 

 

Also, on behalf of my constituents who spent many hours in 

front of their TV sets last week watching the Scott Tournament 

of Hearts, I would like to extend congratulations to the Sandra 

Peterson rink representing Saskatchewan on winning the 

tournament and going on to represent Canada at the world 

championships. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- Mr. Speaker, I am proud to represent the 

people of the Saltcoats constituency and I want to spend a few 

minutes explaining why I feel this way.  The key trait that I 

wish to illustrate is their keen sense of community.  

Constituents in Saltcoats are rallying around the spirit of 

community and cooperation. 

 

Last session during members' statements, I reported to this 

Assembly that Rita Swanson of Churchbridge received national 

recognition because she was successful in having her design 

chosen by the Royal Canadian Mint for the new Canadian 

one-dollar coin.  Rita had the honour of participating in the 

official unveiling ceremonies of the new coin design on 

Parliament Hill in Ottawa last summer. 

 

As a result of Rita's accomplishment, she was honoured by her 

community at a reception held in recognition of her artistic 

ability and national achievement. 

 

As a follow-up to those events, the community of 

Churchbridge is now planning to construct two large replicas of 

the coin design and erect them along the western and eastern 

entries to the town of Churchbridge.  Not only will this project 

feature Churchbridge as the home of Rita Swanson, designer of 

the new dollar coin, but will serve as a tourist attraction to 

anyone travelling the Yellowhead highway.  This is just 

another example of people working together to promote and 

strengthen their local community. 

 

I would further like to congratulate a number of my 

constituents for their contribution to their communities, to their 

people, and by extension to our province and 

ultimately to our country.  These constituents have been 

recognized by their communities and will be receiving a 

Canada 125 medal very shortly.  These constituents to whom I 

refer are Irene Adams, from Langenburg; Nyla Beckton from 

Esterhazy; Jeannine Howie from Tantallon; Dr. James Jowsey 

from Saltcoats; Elvid Lewis from Bangor; Judy Talbot from 

Dubuc; Wilfred Thies from Churchbridge; and Wilf Walker 

from Esterhazy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- Once again, congratulations and thank you 

for your unselfish contributions. 

 

On a larger scale, another example of the spirit of community 

and cooperation and caring and sharing is the annual Kinsmen 

Telemiracle which once again this year was successful in 

reaching its goal, raising over $2.1 million. 

 

Many of my constituents are involved in this organization, and 

there are dozens more who volunteer their time and efforts in 

making Telemiracle the success that it is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I didn't mention an incident 

involving a young hockey player from Stockholm, Reg Banga.  

You may or you may not know that Reg Banga was injured in 

an unfortunate hockey accident in January of this year and has 

been paralysed from the neck down and is presently in the 

Regina Plains Hospital. 

 

Just to show you the kind of community spirit that's out there in 

my constituency and indeed across the province, local 

communities in the constituency have organized benefit hockey 

games and events around the benefit fund for Reg Banga.  At a 

hockey game in Esterhazy, a regular league game, over 

$11,000 was raised.  The Yorkton media became involved and 

shared the benefits of a media-MLA game, and each family 

received over $800.  The other recipient was the Todd Hubbs 

family. 

 

The credit union system is becoming involved across the 

province.  And the local credit unions of Stockholm and 

Esterhazy have initiated a jersey . . . a hockey jersey auction 

which will be held in Esterhazy on April 17 starting at 12 

o'clock, all benefits going to the Reg Banga trust fund.  And I 

would invite all members and indeed any interested people 

from across Saskatchewan to attend.  I would like to wish Reg 

well in his recovery and wish him all the best in the years to 

come. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm a prairie boy.  Like many prairie boys, I've 

always been fascinated by the sea.  In fact the records are full 

of Saskatchewan natives who have served with distinction in 

our navy and merchant marine in peace and in wartime. 

 

People will say it is because both the Prairies and the ocean 

offer unlimited horizons.  And I suppose that's true.  Even 

though we are thousands of miles away in any direction from 

an ocean, we're still fascinated and we still sometimes tend to 

think in nautical terms. 

 

When I was thinking of getting into politics I looked at our 



March 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 177 

province and thought of it in terms of a ship on a voyage, an 

easy comparison to make when we realize that Saskatchewan 

was at sea from 1982 to 1991.  More than that, Mr. Speaker, we 

had been lost at sea with a captain who had no sea legs and no 

compass. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- And the more the previous captain said we 

were on course, the more lost we became.  But the captain's 

friends didn't care where we were going because they were 

getting fat eating the ship's supplies and having a high old time. 

 

The ship wandered aimlessly on a sea of rolling waves 

comprised of debt, waste, greed, and mismanagement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the 1980s Saskatchewan was the economic 

Titanic of Canada.  Fortunately in October of 1991, the old 

captain went down by himself -- without the ship.  Even more 

fortunately a new captain with a new crew took over, just 

before our ship hit the iceberg.  This story is on the way to 

having a happy ending, unlike the original. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is because I believed in the long-term value of 

programs introduced by the CCF (Cooperative Commonwealth 

Federation)-NDP in Saskatchewan and because I was 

enthusiastic in support of the leadership qualities of our current 

leader, the member from Saskatoon Riversdale, that I got 

involved and decided to run for office. 

 

It was a perilous voyage our Premier was setting off on.  He 

knew it; we all knew it.  But I wanted to be part of the crew 

that would turn this ship around and put it on course and bring 

it into port.  And for my Conservative friends over there, I 

remind them that port is French for "left." 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- And, Mr. Speaker, this ship no longer lists to 

the right. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am committed to this journey of renewal.  I've 

signed up for the duration because renewal of our province 

depends on its successful completion. 

 

I want to talk about some of the signs that indicate that our 

journey is on course.  Mr. Speaker, as long as I can remember, 

NDP-CCF governments have made it a point to keep their 

promises.  It could be because our first leader, J.S. 

Woodsworth, and our first provincial premier, Tommy, were 

both ministers of the church.  They had some pretty strong 

ideas about the consequences of breaking promises.  So they 

said what they were going to do and then they did it. 

 

I remember Allan Blakeney travelling the province in the 

1970s with a list of promises made and promises kept.  As he 

said, you might not like what we do, but you're not going to be 

surprised at what we do. 

 

As for those members of the opposition with no memory, I will 

just say that I and most other people in Saskatchewan 

remember their promise to eliminate the sales tax.  In my 

dictionary, eliminate does not mean the same thing as 

harmonize.  And that promise was just one of the barrel full 

they made and broke. 

 

This government made some election promises too, and we're 

keeping them.  I say that categorically and bluntly.  I say it 

particularly to the member from Saskatoon Greystone who 

imagined her own list of promises, then became quite self 

_righteous in talking about how they've been broken.  She is 

good at that, I've noticed -- being self-righteous. 

 

What were some of those promises?  What did we say that we 

would do if elected?  Here's one:  we said we would open the 

books and provide an independent audit of the province's 

financial affairs, to cut government waste and mismanagement.  

Did we keep that promise?  You bet we did. 

 

Nearly all the recommendations of the Gass Commission are 

already in place and the things we've done to eliminate waste 

and mismanagement are as long as all our arms put together.  

We talked about the big things we were doing last session -- 

the big-buck savings.  But we're saving pennies too. 

 

The Public Service Commission has reorganized itself from 

five divisions to four at a substantial savings.  It has also 

reduced its mailing expenses by $50,000.  The Public Service 

Commission reduced its systems budget by 167,000 over the 

past three years. 

 

The Saskatchewan Communications Network phone lines at its 

University of Regina classroom were switched to government 

centrex service at a savings of a thousand dollars per year.  And 

SCN's (Saskatchewan Communications Network Corporation) 

maintenance contract for its satellite receiver equipment was 

renegotiated for a savings of $5,600 a year. 

 

We're still a far cry from 15 billion, Mr. Speaker.  But as I said 

earlier, we're sailing in the right direction. 

 

Here are just a couple more, and there are dozens I could 

choose from.  The Department of Rural Development 

eliminated one associate deputy position at a cost of $100,000.  

The Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat cancelled its 

news-clipping service, saving $800 per month.  Do the pennies 

and the dollars will take care of the deficit, as the old saying 

goes. 

 

Campaign promises, Mr. Speaker.  We promised to repeal the 

harmonized sales tax, and that was done.  Establish a new, 

community-based health care system -- the wellness model.  

We promised that. And the member from Rosthern knows we 

delivered on that one. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we promised and we delivered.  In some cases we 

are in the process of delivering, as with the Partnership for 

Renewal.  It was promised and it's under way.  Tommy knew, 

J.S. Woodsworth and Allan Blakeney knew, and we know that 

it's easier to keep track of what you've said if you tell the truth, 

and that has been done. 

 

(1515) 



178 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1993 

And now, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn my attention to 

agriculture.  Agriculture continues to be one of the greatest 

concerns in the Saltcoats riding.  Over the last number of years, 

we've seen a drastic offloading in agriculture by the federal 

government onto the backs of producers and the provincial 

governments. 

 

My colleague from Shaunavon dealt with those issues very 

thoroughly during his address, Mr. Speaker, but I just want to 

remind the members opposite that things like the demise of the 

western grain stabilization program; the disappearance of the 

two-price system for wheat; the removal of oats from the 

Canadian Wheat Board; the move to completely eliminate 

barley from the Canadian Wheat Board; the withdrawal of 

funding for spot loss hail and crop insurance; and the 

undermining of the Crow benefits, are all just some of the 

offloading measures for which their eastern kissing cousins are 

responsible. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- In my day-to-day discussions with farmers 

across the constituency, they continually point out to me the 

immediate cash shortage they are facing.  They also realize the 

inadequacies of the support programs presently in place and the 

need for the federal government to fulfil its promise to deliver a 

third line of defence in order to provide cash flow for spring 

seeding. 

 

There's a lot of worry and stress in the farm community, Mr. 

Speaker, and we, as a province, need the help of the federal 

government to get the farmers past this critical point. 

 

Our government has taken the initiative to look at the 

second-line support programs in order to come up with 

programs which would provide adequate help and be designed 

to meet the real needs of farmers.  We have appointed a new 

Farm Support Review Committee to guide us in developing 

new safety nets. 

 

This committee has grass roots farmer representation which is 

what farmers were asking for, unlike the previous GRIP review 

committee.  The committee began its work in January and is 

asking for public input over the next few months.  Individual 

farmers may present briefs or ideas to this committee at 

meetings across the province, or they may submit them to the 

committee in writing. 

 

In 1992 our government enacted the farm land leaseback 

program to assist farm families in financial difficulties.  Many 

financial institutions have been active in providing six-year 

leasebacks, and we are encouraging the federal government to 

direct the Farm Credit Corporation to cooperate and comply 

with our program. 

 

Saskatchewan has again this year taken a leadership role in 

agriculture by circulating a consultation paper called "Forging 

Partnerships in Agriculture" whereby we seek to engage 

farmers and farm organizations in positive dialogue leading to 

a new agricultural strategy which would hopefully achieve a 

commercially viable, self-sufficient, and sustainable agriculture 

industry in Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I want to take a few minutes to explain the 

 proposed changes to the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, 

an issue that has come to light in the last three or four weeks 

because of a questionable and disgusting mailing which took 

place about the same time.  I understand that this may be a 

difficult and controversial subject for some people across this 

province, including those in my constituency of Saltcoats.  

Hopefully I can provide some clarification as to the intent of 

the legislation. 

 

It is most disturbing to find that some individuals are more 

interested in promoting anger than in providing any factual 

information.  The promotion of discrimination, rather than 

understanding and tolerance, is most unfortunate -- most 

unfortunate, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to alleviate some of the 

concerns which have been raised by individuals trying to 

interpret and read more into this proposed legislation than 

actually exists. 

 

Contrary to misleading statements, the proposed amendments 

will provide the same legal protection from unfair and often 

vicious discrimination for all Saskatchewan residents.  

Currently those of different sexual orientation do not have legal 

recourse if they are fired, evicted from public housing, or if 

they are denied public services, i.e., taxis, restaurants, 

university classes. 

 

Unfortunately this type of discrimination does exist and 

therefore necessitates the proposed legislation.  This legislation 

will also make the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code more 

consistent with those of other provinces.  It is interesting to 

note that Quebec included this particular type of legislation in 

1977.  Other provinces which have also included sexual 

orientation in their codes are Manitoba, Ontario, New 

Brunswick, Nova Scotia, British Columbia, and the Yukon 

Territory. 

 

This inclusion has not had the dire and negative consequences 

that some people like to claim.  As well, the federal 

government has introduced legislation to include sexual 

orientation in the Canadian Human Rights Code. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd also like to point out that there have not been 

any proposals to change the traditional definition of marriage 

and family status.  In other words, the changes will not legalize 

same-sex marriages or provide spousal benefits for 

homosexuals. 

 

Neither will the proposed amendment have an impact on 

adoption rights and procedures.  Adoptions are governed by 

The Adoption Act and will remain the discretion of a judge of 

the Court of Queen's Bench, with the input . . . or with input 

from the birth parents considered.  The best interest of the child 

is of prime importance in every case. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government does not wish to weaken the 

family, family values, or traditional family lifestyles in any 

way.  Nor will this amendment dictate our school curriculum 

which will still remain in the hands of local school boards in 

conjunction with the Department of Education.  In fact, there is 

a proposed amendment to the Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Code to include family status to prevent discrimination against 

persons with children, an amendment to prevent discrimination 

against those in receipt of public assistance. 



March 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 179 

I want to assure you, Mr. Speaker, and the people of 

Saskatchewan, that this proposed legislation is not providing 

any special or preferential treatment to homosexuals, or 

promoting a particular lifestyle.  It is designed to allow our 

fellow human beings to live without fear of discrimination and 

allow everyone to be treated with consideration, respect, and 

equality. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- I was glad to see the members from Cut 

Knife-Lloydminster and Qu'Appelle-Lumsden speak in favour 

of the human rights legislation.  I was sorry that the member 

from Saskatoon Greystone did not take advantage of her 

opportunity to support it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many other initiatives that our 

government has undertaken in the areas of education, economic 

development and job creation, health care, social justice, and 

the environment, just to name a few.  Time does not allow me 

to deal adequately with all of these very important issues.  

However my colleagues have and will discuss these topics 

thoroughly in their address in reply. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I am committed to this journey of 

renewal.  I knew when I boarded the ship in October of 1991 

that the journey would take at least four years.  I also knew 

there would be turbulence along the way.  Mr. Speaker, I don't 

profess to be a sea pilot or a navigator or a swimmer, but I 

think that I'm a heck of an oarsman and a heck of a crew 

member.  And I, along with my colleagues, with the help of all 

the Saskatchewan people, will do all that we possibly can to get 

this ship on even keel and to its proper destination.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I had almost fallen 

asleep in the last speech so I'll have to apologize for getting up 

so slowly.  This NDP one-term government bent on rural 

revenge now attempts damage control, Mr. Speaker, on their 

own supporters who are feeling betrayed and deceived. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to first of all, before I go into 

the rest of the throne speech and what it does or doesn't do, 

acknowledge the good people from the Maple Creek 

constituency.  I'm very happy to be their representative, and as 

I've told many of them, while we may not be on the side of the 

government we might actually do more good for the people in 

our constituency and for the province by attempting to keep the 

government from doing too many things that will totally 

destroy our province. 

 

I had the privilege, Mr. Speaker, of hearing the Lieutenant 

Governor deliver the address in her usual dignified and 

professional manner and way, and immediately set out to hear 

from my constituents.  I went from this Chamber on February 

25 directly to the community of Hazlet, a fine, small 

community in my constituency, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it was quite a thing to have about 120 people gather on a 

Thursday evening in a small town like Hazlet to talk about the 

throne speech and what the government is 

doing and planning to do.  Mr. Speaker, I want the government 

to know that the people who showed up in Hazlet are a good 

reflection of all of the people of the Maple Creek constituency 

and I suspect of all of the people in Saskatchewan.  They are 

very hard-working people, they are very sincere and caring 

people, and, Mr. Speaker, they are a worried people, a very, 

very worried and concerned people. 

 

They want to know what the government has planned and they 

want to know what was in the throne speech.  And I had to tell 

them, Mr. Speaker, the truth -- not much, not much at all, no 

good news, an empty document, probably the emptiest throne 

speech that has been presented in this House in the last 10 or 11 

years. 

 

We see in this throne speech the threat of more tax increases 

and that worries my people, Mr. Speaker.  We see references to 

some kind of review of the energy industry and that sends 

shivers down the backs of many of the people employed in that 

industry in my constituency.  We see no reference, we see no 

hope, no help for agriculture or rural Saskatchewan, probably 

the most important industry, as many of the members of the 

government themselves have stood in their places and said 

during this very same reply to the throne speech.  They have 

announced their recognition in their own ways from their back 

benches that rural Saskatchewan and agriculture are important 

and yet we have a throne speech that gives nothing whatsoever 

in recognition to that most important industry.  A sad day for 

our province, Mr. Speaker.  And quite frankly, that angers my 

people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You take the Maple Creek constituency, it lives and it dies on 

two industries: agriculture and energy.  And the one industry is 

threatened with some kind of a review while the other is 

ignored in the throne speech.  Is it any wonder that my people 

ask me what the government thinks it's up to?  Mr. Speaker, I 

say it is a sad day when in this legislature a Speech from the 

Throne dismisses agriculture and dismisses rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

There are many, many people who believe -- and I am one of 

them, Mr. Speaker -- who believe that this government has a 

secret agenda to destroy rural Saskatchewan.  I believe that 

when you look at the range of government policies and see how 

they all result in the destruction of rural communities, it cannot 

be an accident.  There is in fact a plan, but it is a secret plan. 

 

The education policy of this government is one of forcing 

communities to fight over who will keep their schools and even 

who will keep their school boards. 

 

(1530) 

 

And as we are going into the final days of this throne speech, 

we can refer back to the other speeches that have been 

delivered and the question periods and those things that have 

happened over the past few days, and already my colleagues, 

especially the colleague from Souris-Cannington, has pointed 

out some of the devastation that has been going on in the 

educational system in our province over the past year. 



180 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1993 

And it's disheartening to hear the Minister of Education not 

take the problems seriously, or pretend that she has no 

responsibility, or say in fact that she has no control and no 

jurisdiction.  I sort of wondered at one point earlier today, Mr. 

Speaker, why we didn't just put a fence post in her seat and pay 

that $80,000. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I just want to remind the 

member that those kinds of comments are not tolerated in the 

Legislative Assembly.  And I would just ask him to refrain 

from making those kinds of comparisons. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Please accept my apologies to the Assembly, 

Mr. Speaker.  I have to admit that I get carried away sometimes 

when I deal with the problems of rural Saskatchewan. 

 

The health policy, Mr. Speaker.  Another area that we have to 

talk about is one of forcing communities to fight over who will 

keep their hospitals and their doctors.  The very same plan that 

is being used in education, also being used in the health care 

system.  "Divide and conquer" was used earlier today. That's 

one way of looking at it. 

 

But the reality, Mr. Speaker, in the health area is that we are 

now going to have a shift of responsibility in terms of the 

government being able to lay blame for the problems in rural 

Saskatchewan on the newly formed boards.  While in fact the 

minister, when things go wrong, will duck responsibility 

saying, it's your fault, you did it to one another. 

 

And I don't think that's what the people of Saskatchewan really 

want.  And I believe in the days to come that they will be 

voicing their very strong opinions against the process. 

 

And as we discover those protests we will be happy, Mr. 

Speaker, to deliver them to the minister in charge of Health. 

 

The highways policy used to force communities to fight over 

who will keep their roads.  Because here again we are saying 

we have so many dollars, we're putting it out into the rural 

community, and you choose which roads you want to build or 

not build. 

 

And again if it goes right, the minister will accept for himself 

the credit.  But if things go wrong, he'll say, it's your fault, you 

made the choices. 

 

The entire policy of the government is directed to deceiving 

rural Saskatchewan and dividing it against itself.  And then the 

Premier will stand up and say, well they couldn't cooperate, so 

they died.  Don't blame me. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier had better realize that the rural 

people well understand where the blame must go. 

 

I speak to reeves and councillors on a very regular basis, Mr. 

Speaker.  At least a couple of times a week I visit with one or 

two of them.  It has been a very important part of my life to be 

involved with the people in local government.  And I have very 

much enjoyed the experience, as well as having attained a 

considerable education in how people have to work together in 

order to achieve good for 

communities big and small. 

 

And they all see the pattern developing, Mr. Speaker.  

Environmental regulations and taxes threatened that will nail 

rural communities and drive farmers off of the land, to almost a 

zero benefit for the environment itself. 

 

Things like forcing people to bury fuel tanks in the place of all 

those that are already there that are not wore out.  Things like 

forcing people to dig them up and perhaps put them above 

ground, when only a few years ago we were told very 

emphatically that we had to bury these tanks because they were 

a fire hazard. 

 

Insurance companies and regulators within the industry told us 

loud and clear that if we didn't bury our fuel tanks, we were a 

risk to the communities.  And so many individuals, as many 

companies that provide the services of supplying fuel, went to 

the trouble and the cost and the expense to bury fuel tanks.  

Lots of farmers buried them on their farms, thinking that if it's 

a danger in towns or their communities, it must also be a 

danger to them. 

 

And they took that advice seriously and they buried those 

tanks.  Now of course the regulations are being re-examined 

and we are being told that the folks who supply fuel in our 

small towns must now go to the expense of changing their fuel 

tanks. And my farmer friends are saying, are we next? 

 

And of course they have to be concerned.  Why wouldn't they 

be?  What you do to our city friends and to our town folks most 

likely will be demanded of all of the people in society, and 

farmers will probably be next.  And who can afford this kind of 

change, Mr. Speaker?  I leave that question to the government. 

 

Utility rates increase.  That cannot be supported by small 

centres already in economic crisis.  Political welfare, designed 

not to help but hurt rural Saskatchewan, all in the name of 

trying to win a federal seat or two for the NDP.  Purely a 

political move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the promise to force rural communities and rural 

municipalities out of existence, whether they like it or not.  Mr. 

Speaker, there has been a knee-jerk response in some quarters 

favouring chopping down rural municipalities and hospital 

boards, for example.  And even the business community has 

become a part of that response, hearing this NDP government's 

claim that if we get rid of local government, we can save some 

money. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I challenge the Premier to show me one, just 

one rural municipality that runs a deficit budget.  It does not 

happen.  I challenge the Premier to lay before the people his 

studies and information that shows that there will be any 

savings at all.  There will be none. 

 

The vast majority of local governments in rural Saskatchewan 

is done on a volunteer basis, Mr. Speaker, and the cost of 

governing is very little.  Those governments receive the 

smallest of all remunerations of any administrative group in our 

society.  Nothing close to what they sacrifice by leaving their 

homes and their businesses on the days that they work for their 

friends and their neighbours. 



March 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 181 

But the government is creating a smokescreen, Mr. Speaker.  

The fact is that the more local that the government is, the more 

accountable it is and the less likely there will be tax increases 

and spending programs that cannot be properly supported.  It's 

the old story, Mr. Speaker, of being able to keep an eye on 

those things that are within your vision range. 

 

In a small community everybody knows everybody else, and 

when government gets too big and too far away from home, not 

only can't anybody watch it, but half the time nobody can 

understand it.  And that's when the programs start to get 

injected that take away the accountability and also lend 

themselves towards costing more money for more bureaucracy 

and more communications and all of those things that go with 

it. 

 

Having government as close to the people as possible has 

always resulted in more efficient and more effective 

government, Mr. Speaker, not the other way around.  So I 

invite those who have bought into the NDP argument about 

getting rid of local governments, I invite them to challenge the 

Premier to prove his case, document where the savings will 

come from -- show me.  He cannot do it because there are no 

meaningful savings to be had in that policy.  We need 

reductions in provincial spending and that is the only way we 

will deal with the challenges we face. 

 

I can tell you as a former reeve that local governments have 

been taking it on the chin with cut-backs from both the 

previous government and now with this government.  But this 

government has not reduced its own spending by one penny.  It 

has increased its spending by a billion dollars.  The 

municipalities, both rural and urban, have reduced spending but 

the provincial government has dramatically increased spending. 

 

So do not get into this fairy tale that you will save some money 

by eliminating local governments.  Mr. Speaker, how can 

anyone in Saskatchewan believe a single word contained in this 

throne speech, much less a single word that the members echo 

at local meetings and at public forums?  Today they tell you 

one thing and tomorrow they'll tell you something totally 

different.  And when asked about it, they conveniently can't 

remember. 

 

After the course of deception the NDP have taken for the 

Saskatchewan people, or should I say the ride that the people 

have been taken on, who can believe a word that falls from 

their lips.  Mr. Speaker, the NDP members across the floor 

have no regard or respect for the Saskatchewan people.  They 

gave the Saskatchewan people no credit whatsoever.  Do they 

really think, do they really believe that the people have 

forgotten the promises that they made previous to forming 

government?  Do they honestly believe that they have the 

mandate to inflict such pain on the people of our province? 

 

This NDP government has inflicted more pain on the people of 

Saskatchewan in 16 months than any government in the history 

of this province, than any government, any government ever in 

the history of Saskatchewan. 

Last session the Saskatchewan people survived the NDP tax 

grab, the largest tax grab in the history of this province.  I 

should probably qualify that statement, Mr. Speaker.  What I 

should have said is Saskatchewan people who are still in the 

province survived the NDP tax grab. 

 

A lot of people have moved or are considering leaving.  They 

are most likely waiting for the NDP's budget to see if they can 

afford to stay in Saskatchewan for another year.  But the 

reality, Mr. Speaker, is that in some of our small towns, and 

I've talked to some of these people, if they could possibly sell 

their house or get rid of some of their assets, it would only be 

minutes before they'd be in their vehicles and gone.  Alberta 

may not be that attractive these days according to some reports, 

but our people say that compared to what we have, it looks 

pretty good. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP government has already increased every 

tax imaginable.  Last session they even created a new one -- a 

10 per cent deficit reduction surtax.  They have increased every 

utility rate. In most cases they have increased these rates twice, 

SaskTel being the only exception. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am only referring to those increases which have 

been made public.  I wonder how many of the people of 

Saskatchewan realized that the NDP increased the fees 

associated with getting married and divorced, last year.  I 

didn't, quite honestly, know that until just the other day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all of the increases would not have been so hard 

for the public to swallow if the NDP hadn't said, no more taxes.  

And enough is enough, they boasted.  Prior to the election: no 

more taxes, enough is enough.  What a great way to go out 

politicking. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, an election in the United States recently 

echoed the words, read my lips.  The man who said that was 

remembered for a whole four years.  The people didn't forget.  

They didn't get snowed over, did they?  They remembered 

exactly what was said, and the people of Saskatchewan will 

remember: no more taxes, enough is enough.  In four years 

time they're going to say, read our lips; you're a one-term 

government and you're out. 

 

(1545) 

 

In NDP land, no more taxes translates into increased rates 

twice in one year.  For example, the gas and the power rates.  

Twice in one year, Mr. Speaker.  And this NDP government 

that unilaterally opposed harmonization because Saskatchewan 

people were taxed out hasn't stopped its endless tax and rate 

increases since forming government.  Saskatchewan people are 

prepared for yet another round come budget day. 

 

They are prepared because the members across the way have 

not stopped talking about additional tax increases since their 

last gouge at the people's pocketbooks.  Someone asked me at 

the Hazlet meeting: what do you expect in the budget?  I said, 

well I'm not privy to know what's in the budget but if I were 

you I'd hang on to my pocketbook. 



182 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1993 

And that certainly seems to be the trend that the government is 

trying to establish in the minds of the people with the gloom 

and doom messages that they are sending out throughout the 

provinces. 

 

And then they wonder why business interests from outside the 

province hasn't come clamouring at our door asking for ways to 

get settled into Saskatchewan.  The highest taxes anywhere and 

more to come.  No hope, only despair, and yet they're amazed 

that business doesn't come flocking to our door. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- No leadership. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- My colleague echoed it right.  No leadership.  

That's what it's really all about. 

 

But as I said, prior to forming government the members across 

the way said, no more taxes. 

 

Then they straight out opposed harmonization.  They opposed 

7 cents on the price of a hamburger, Mr. Speaker.  They 

claimed it would destroy Saskatchewan.  They claimed that the 

people who lost their jobs . . . that businesses would close, that 

the people would lose their jobs and that the children would go 

hungry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they chose to eliminate harmonization, a selective 

tax, a tax that affected high income earners.  They chose to 

eliminate 7 cents on the price of a hamburger and chose to 

increase the price for heating a home twice -- twice in one year, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And let's talk about that for a minute.  Let's talk about a low 

income family, Mr. Speaker.  How often, Mr. Speaker, do low 

income families treat themselves to a restaurant dinner?  Not 

often, Mr. Speaker.  It's not often that they can afford to do so. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, how often do low income families pay their 

heating bills?  Every month, Mr. Speaker.  How often do they 

pay their phone bill?  Every month, Mr. Speaker.  How often 

do they pay their natural gas bill?  Well if they still want to 

heat their home next month, it had better be paid this month. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, our low income people in Saskatchewan 

now do not have a choice.  They cannot choose as to whether 

or not they will heat their homes.  They can't.  They live in 

Saskatchewan.  They have to heat their homes because we have 

this phenomenon -- this phenomenon, Mr. Speaker, that the 

NDP seem to have forgotten about.  It's called winter.  And it 

does get down to 40 below.  And if you don't heat your home, 

you're going to freeze to death. 

 

So you've got them cold if you increase their prices on their 

heat and on their power.  They have to have it.  And so you can 

tax them through that utility and they can't get away from it.  

They have to pay it.  They don't have a choice. 

 

What is the alternative, Mr. Speaker?  Well government had a 

choice.  They did not have to increase the utility rates.  They 

did not have to increase the cost of insuring a vehicle.  They 

did it last year. 

They could have done a number of things, Mr. Speaker.  But 

they could have left those taxations in areas where people 

could make a choice.  In the harmonization program, at least if 

you didn't want to buy a yacht you could say no, the tax on it's 

too high.  But in the wintertime you will still have to pay to 

heat your home, and if the tax is there you're going to pay it, in 

spite of the fact that our Crown corporations in that area 

showed profits last year. 

 

Hard to justify when I go out to my constituency, Mr. Speaker 

-- very hard to justify.  In fact I just won't try because it just 

isn't fair.  SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) has a 

$45 million rate stabilization fund and a profit of $15 million, 

Mr. Speaker.  Last year SGI's rates were increased as much as 

10 per cent. 

 

Who do the NDP think they're fooling?  They're not fooling the 

people, Mr. Speaker.  The people of Saskatchewan will 

remember the NDP government's betrayal and the constant 

grab at their pocketbook.  They will remember the NDP's 

empty promises.  I can assure you of that.  Because nowadays 

people remember for four years. 

 

I'm curious to know how many of the back-bencher NDP 

MLAs knew that upon forming government all of the election 

promises that they were elected on would be broken.  I'll bet 

that most of them honestly believed when they ran in the 

election, Mr. Speaker, that the things that they were promising 

on behalf of their party would be done.  I wonder how they 

square that with the folks back home now. 

 

How many of the folks across the floor knew that their 

colleagues in cabinet would kill each and every promise that 

was made to the Saskatchewan people?  There are many 

unhappy NDP MLAs out there, but not as many as unhappy 

constituents, Mr. Speaker -- particularly, Mr. Speaker, 

constituents represented by NDP MLAs, because they expected 

more from those people.  They elected them to be in the 

government side; they elected them to keep their promises.  

These people were completely duped, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let me give you an example of just how unhappy these people 

are.  Our office received a call from a Maidstone area person.  

One of the constituents out there was nominated by her 

neighbours to find out how many signatures it would take to 

remove their MLA from government.  She actually wanted to 

know how they would or how they could force a by-election in 

their area. 

 

Now that's an unhappy constituent, Mr. Speaker.  The people in 

that area feel completely betrayed.  I would like to know how 

many of our rural NDP MLAs realize the reinstatement . . . or 

the resentment, rather, out there in their constituencies.  I think 

some of the rural NDP members should get out into the country 

and talk to the people for a change.  Listen to the people.  The 

people feel rural Saskatchewan is under attack, and I have to 

agree with that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Of course I wasn't surprised by the NDP's revenge on rural 

Saskatchewan.  None of my colleagues were surprised.  We 

expected it.  But I'll tell you who was 



March 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 183 

 surprised, Mr. Speaker.  Those who live in rural Saskatchewan 

were surprised.  After all, some of them helped to elect and 

voted for this government and its members.  They believed the 

empty promises, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the NDP should have told them the truth.  They should 

have told the people that they would embark in a wholesale 

destruction of rural Saskatchewan.  They should have told them 

that they would totally abandon rural Saskatchewan with any 

agricultural policy, with any benefits. 

 

They should have told them, Mr. Speaker, that they would 

forsake all of the financial responsibilities that would bring to 

the province the millions of federal dollars that both Manitoba 

and Alberta are presently enjoying.  They should have told 

them that they would be the kind of financiers -- I was going to 

say cheapskates, but that would be too strong -- the kind of 

financiers who would not spend 9 million provincial dollars to 

get $65 million into the hands of farmers. 

 

I was talking to the Hon. Bill McKnight, the Minister of 

Energy and Mines for this country, the former minister of 

Agriculture, and he explained to me a little bit about how that 

process would have worked, Mr. Speaker.  And I think maybe I 

should quickly go over that. 

 

I wonder if the people realize how easy it would have been for 

this government to simply take a half a step back and grab off 

$65 million that would have went directly into the pockets of 

Saskatchewan farmers this past year, and which incidentally, 

I'm told, is till on the table for the taking. 

 

The provincial government's share would have been $9 million 

up front.  And the federal government would have allowed 

them to pay their extra 14,000 out of the 24,000 . . . or 23 

million -- I'd better say millions.  They would have allowed 

them to pay that in two years time after this money and the '91, 

'92 GRIP programs had both totally played themselves through. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that would have meant that the federal 

government was putting up $14 million of the provincial 

government's share along with their own share.  And for the $9 

million up front by the provincial government, $65 million then 

would have gone to the farming industry, to the farmers and 

ranchers out in the country. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I don't think that you have to be a 

mathematical genius in this world of politics in Saskatchewan 

to know that if you put $65 million in the hands of farmers 

these days, that they would probably spend it all.  They have to.  

They've got to seed a crop.  They're trying to do it on the basis 

of $2 wheat, half of it frozen, with markets shrivelling up. 

 

Interestingly enough, I read in the paper this morning, Mr. 

Speaker, that the Canadian Wheat Board is having tremendous 

difficulty marketing our grain because of the frost.  They may 

even have to sell it below the price that they set for the pool, 

and again that may cause a deficit.  All the more reason why 

that $65 million starts to look more and more attractive, Mr. 

Speaker. 

Because as I said, it doesn't take a mathematical genius to 

figure out that if you spend $65 million -- and these people 

would be spending it; they'd be paying off their bills from 

harvest last fall, as well as they'd probably be paying for some 

of the things they need to put the crop in this spring like maybe 

some good seed that has good germination, because a lot of it 

that's frozen isn't good enough to be used for seed -- that 

money would have generated itself right through our economy 

three to seven more times.  That's the spin-off cycle of dollars 

that are spent by the agricultural industry throughout our 

society. 

 

Now tell me that spinning $65 million three to seven times 

through the economy would not generate $9 million in revenue 

back to the government through the collections of various kinds 

of taxes.  It has to have generated more than that by the 

economic spin-off that would have come as a benefit to all of 

our province.  And with the kind of high taxation that we 

experience now, I'm absolutely convinced that the government 

would in fact have ended up with many times more than the $9 

million investment. 

 

And the tragedy of it, Mr. Speaker, is that, the Hon. Bill 

McKnight tells me, that this offer was still available.  And this 

uncaring government continues on its path of blindness, 

ignoring that money and those dollars.  And then they sit there 

and make pious speeches about how we should cooperate -- as 

an opposition we should cooperate with them, as though we 

have $9 million in our pockets.  Well where is the 

responsibility here? 

 

This is an uncaring government, Mr. Speaker, that is 

conducting an assault on rural Saskatchewan -- an assault that 

cannot be justified and an assault that is having far reaching 

effects. 

 

I want to draw to your attention an example of the kind of 

effects we are now experiencing.  In the city of Swift Current 

we've read in the local newspaper that the credit unions are in 

serious, serious financial trouble.  Two major institutions there 

are now being asked to amalgamate because, I am told, Credit 

Union Central couldn't afford to back both of them 

independently. 

 

(1600) 

 

In order to get Credit Union Central's backing and to be able to 

sustain that backing on the monies involved that the creditors 

and the depositors have there, the Credit Union Central is 

saying that they will have to amalgamate. 

 

I'm not saying that $65 million would have cured all of the 

problems there.  Certainly not.  But certainly a share of that 

money would have gone to that community. 

 

I guess as a side note, something that really frightens me is the 

fact that the deputy minister of Finance was in direct control of 

one of those credit unions over a number of years as the 

president of that board.  I surely hope he brings to government 

a better plan than he left those credit unions with. 

 

It is frightening to the people to the point, Mr. Speaker, 



184 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1993 

where we have already experienced a run on the money at 

those institutions.  People who used to normally cash their 

cheques and leave most of the money in the credit union, only 

taking the amount of cash they needed immediately, now are 

cashing their cheques and taking all cash. 

 

I'm not sure if all of the reports are true, but I have been told 

that cheques up to $10,000 have been cashed for cash and 

people take a chance on walking out the door carrying that kind 

of money rather than to leave it in the credit unions.  That's an 

overreaction, I feel, and I want to point that out very clearly 

that I personally don't think that the money is in jeopardy in the 

credit union system.  Unfortunately there is no confidence in 

the people and they are doing these things whether I assure 

them or whether anybody else does. 

 

The run on money became so heavy that I am told that one day 

the credit unions -- the one credit union -- had to close its doors 

for an hour during business hours while they sent a truck across 

town to get another load of money.  That's serious stuff, Mr. 

Speaker.  We haven't heard of that sort of thing in 

Saskatchewan since the Dirty Thirties, and I only read about 

them.  I've never seen it in my lifetime before.  And yet it's 

happening. 

 

And does our Premier, Mr. Speaker, stand up in this Assembly 

and say to the people of Swift Current, I will back your credit 

union with the provincial government's treasury?  Not a peep; 

not a word.  The only thing that could be done to bring about 

economic stability to those two great institutions is ignored by 

our government.  And I say that that is something that we have 

to have very soon.  Because that problem won't go away by 

itself. 

 

The deputy minister of Finance left it in such a way that it 

cannot resolve itself.  Only amalgamation and other measures 

taken by those institutions and a guarantee by the Premier that 

will put confidence into the people's minds so that they will 

feel safe and secure to leave their money in those institutions, 

only that will work. 

 

Without money to work with, they'll have to go broke.  If 

there's no confidence for the people to put the money in there, 

then they have to run without capital.  And a bank without 

capital is a bank that will have to close its doors, and a credit 

union is a bank in every sense of the word in those respects. 

 

I want to talk, Mr. Speaker, for a minute about the wellness 

model.  It's important to the people of our constituency.  The 

wellness model, Mr. Speaker, is a front.  The wellness model is 

an NDP cover for closing rural hospitals.  Plain and simple.  

What is worse, Mr. Speaker, is that the NDP government will 

be closing rural hospitals, or that they will be forcing the local 

boards to take the heat for it, might be a better way to put it. 

 

Because the new program with local boards that will have 

members appointed by the minister -- not elected as we, the 

official opposition requested last session, but hand-picked 

people by the Minister of Health to carry out their dirty work. 

 

Rural hospital and rural health professionals are 

outraged.  They feel that they are being forced into joining new 

health districts, and they're outraged that many of the people 

that provide the services now have already been told that 

they're fired. 

 

I have several letters, Mr. Speaker, and it is disheartening to 

read of the effects that will happen to our communities by the 

firings of the very people that could help to bring about 

wellness to the very people who this program is supposedly 

designed to help -- counsellors, social workers, dieticians.  

People who talk to other people about their health, and show 

them how to live a healthy lifestyle, those very people that 

could convince our young people perhaps not to smoke, as a 

result saving millions of dollars in the health care system in the 

future, all of those people have been laid off.  They've gotten 

their notices.  April 1, I think, is the effective date. 

 

Is it the intention of the government, Mr. Speaker, to perhaps 

try to force the local communities into funding the rehiring of 

those people?  But of course not, that would be downloading, 

and this government wouldn't do that, would they?  They 

wouldn't force the municipalities to make a decision either to 

cough up their dollars or lose their services, or would they?  

We will find out in the days to come, Mr. Speaker, the answer 

to that question.  And for my rural friends I fear the worst. 

 

The rural health professionals are outraged, as I've said, Mr. 

Speaker, because they feel that they are being forced to join 

these new health districts.  The government is using interesting 

tactics.  Let me use the regional counselling service issue as an 

example. 

 

They are going to be eliminated, and the NDP rationale for 

cutting this program is that the new health district will be 

providing these services which include nursing and social 

services and dietaries and health recorders and diagnostic 

imaging and medical transcriptions.  The new health districts 

will be providing these services, but the Minister of Health is 

forgetting that there's only one new health district in the entire 

province so far. 

 

So what's going to happen in the interim?  In order for rural 

hospitals to regain their services they so desperately need, 

they'll be forced to join this new health district now. 

 

There's a word that describes forcing people to do things that 

they don't want to do, which we were told the other day is 

unparliamentary.  And unfortunately I had written my notes 

before that ruling was made.  So it lies there in black and white 

as I skate around it.  But the people of the province know what 

it is.  They know what it is when you're forced through 

manipulation to do something against your will. 

 

They know what it's like if a person has a child that is 

kidnapped and someone says, give me $100,000 or I won't give 

that child back alive.  The same word that applies there also 

applies to this kind of strategy. 

 

Another area under attack by this NDP government is our rural 

school system, Mr. Speaker.  The NDP government started a 

low-key campaign to convince people of the need to close 

schools.  Rural schools.  Not city schools, only the rural ones.  

And the list of rural revenge goes on. 



March 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 185 

All through the last session the rural revenge was the battle-cry 

of the NDP government.  And I wish it were over.  But it 

doesn't seem that that's to be the way of it yet. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP government has reduced municipal 

revenue-sharing.  They've eliminated Crown lease surface 

rights fees; increased breeder fees by 31 per cent.  They 

cancelled Fair Share; increased all the pasture rental fees; 

capped fuel rebates on farmers; brought back purple gas.  Can 

you imagine that?  I never thought a government would ever go 

back that far in history to dig up a program that the 

communities, and the people that lived in them, found so 

absolutely repugnant as this one. 

 

Over the years people have said time and time again that this 

was a folly that they would never tolerate.  And here it is back 

again. 

 

Well I have barely scratched the surface here, Mr. Speaker, of 

all of the things that have been increased in costs and all of the 

things that this government has said it wouldn't do.  But this 

government is doing its best to tear down rural Saskatchewan.  

They are driving folks out of their towns and out of their 

villages.  They deny the people of Saskatchewan the federal 

money that other provinces enjoy because they won't spend a 

few dollars in order to make millions back.  It's choices, bad 

choices, that have gotten us into such serious trouble. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they are preparing to redraw the electoral 

boundaries to reduce the number of seats.  I'll bet my bottom 

dollar that those seats that will be eliminated will not be in the 

urban centres. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP government has stated that it plans to 

eliminate the Department of Rural Development.  The 

government let this little bit of information slip out at the 

SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 

convention last week . . . or last year rather, a convention 

which is about to start this week -- tomorrow, in fact.  

Registration begins tonight. 

 

The NDP intend to eliminate the Department of Rural 

Development and large numbers of municipalities.  The NDP 

told the SARM convention last year through the speech from 

its minister that it is reviewing these areas internally and that 

these changes will happen whether or not the municipalities 

support it. 

 

The government said it intends to take the same action against 

towns and villages.  I'm not sure if the NDP back-bencher 

MLAs, who sit idly by while their powerful cabinet colleagues 

tear apart rural Saskatchewan, truly understand what's 

happening, Mr. Speaker.  It is important for the rural NDP 

MLAs to understand how serious this will be.  I really don't 

think that any of them want to just throw their seats away, even 

though most of them might be eliminated through the 

redistribution of the boundaries. 

 

First, eliminating municipalities without their consent is a very 

direct and dangerous attack on people's rights.  How can it be 

that the NDP Premier and the NDP Minister of Rural 

Development and the member from Prince Albert Northcote 

believe that they are close to rural residents -- 

closer to them than rural residents, reeves, and mayors and 

councillors themselves would be? 

 

When is the last time the member from Saskatoon Riversdale 

was in a rural community?  Mr. Speaker, even when he does 

visit a rural area, he doesn't realize it.  I seem to recall that the 

NDP Premier visited Chamberlain and to this day he denies 

that he was even there.  Now, Mr. Speaker, it's a pretty small 

town, but it's there.  There are people and they remember 

seeing him, right there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you live in rural Saskatchewan you never see 

this man.  Lately he has been calling for a first ministers' 

conference on federal offloading.  History may repeat itself.  

Last year he was in Ottawa more often than anywhere else.  

Who knows, we may not even see him again until the next 

election rolls around, if we're lucky. 

 

I wonder how the members opposite would react if Ottawa said 

it wanted to consolidate us into Manitoba because it would be 

more effective and more efficient.  Then imagine if Ottawa told 

the NDP Premier that it didn't matter what he thought, it was 

going to happen no matter what.  He would never stand for 

that.  The people of Saskatchewan cannot stand for the 

elimination of the Department of Rural Development and the 

entire RM (rural municipality) system. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need a department whose mandate is to work 

with rural people, to preserve and promote the rural way of life, 

especially in these trying times.  Rural Development is no 

wishy-washy outfit, Mr. Speaker, with vague goals.  In fact it 

has won the international reputation of innovative economic 

models, and the best support system in the world.  It was the 

people of Rural Development who implemented the rural 

development corporation program, working side by side with 

municipal councillors and community leaders. 

 

It was through this department that the old ag rep was replaced 

by the professional extension agrologist, involved in many 

areas of economic development and support for Saskatchewan's 

rural people.  It was through the Rural Development 

department that rural service centres were built throughout the 

province.  A network of communication between universities, 

between experimental programs, and the people who have to 

employ them for not only their livelihood, but to produce the 

food that everyone needs as an essential element to their 

livelihood. 

 

The department is necessary to provide efficient, coordinated 

representation for rural areas throughout the government.  

There has to be a meeting place for health, education, 

economic development, infrastructure support, community 

development, and other things in rural Saskatchewan.  A 

coordinating, central, focal point, that's what we're talking 

about, Mr. Speaker.  And Rural Development as a department 

is the only way that you can effectively provide that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this has been the mandate of the department and 

the attitude of the government.  From that attitude sprang such 

things as rural natural gas distribution, which 



186 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1993 

benefits towns, villages, and farms to this day.  From it came 

the private telephone line service, distance education planning, 

and many other innovative . . . and innovations that benefit the 

entire province. 

 

No, the Department of Rural Development has not existed just 

to serve SARM, the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities, and the rural municipalities themselves, as this 

government seems to think.  It has been committed to a better 

future for our children.  Are we to do away with this, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker? 

 

It is astonishing that the NDP Premier that came to power 

promising to listen to people and to be more democratic, has so 

quickly established an uncompromising record of disdain for 

the people and total disregard for the democratic structures 

within our society. 

 

First the NDP member from Saskatoon Riversdale said that it 

didn't matter who or how many supported energy research.  He 

was going to break that agreement, throw it away, get rid of it.  

Well he kept his word there.  He broke that agreement and then 

he restructured it, pretending that it was his and the NDP's idea.  

The sad thing is that many NDP members truly believe this.  

They think it was their idea now, with the exception of maybe 

the member from Rosemont who truly dislikes it. 

 

Time and time again we see the NDP government throw the 

AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.) agreement out as an 

example of its economic development and job-creation record.  

This is truly a flip-flop beyond imagination, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

The NDP Premier also turned his back on the people in regards 

to the funding of abortions.  It does not matter that the people 

voted overwhelmingly against the funding of abortions; 

demanded a say in the constitutional amendment and want 

balanced budgets.  They were only plebiscites, he said.  It does 

not matter how the people feel about spending money on a 

third French education system in tough times. 

 

To make matters worse, the review which will determine the 

fate of Rural Development are now being conducted in secret.  

The NDP never told anyone it was going to do away with 

municipal government.  Not before the election.  They haven't 

gone out looking for more public input into this matter.  They 

have not sought the public's input, the input of reeves or 

mayors or councillors, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The deed will be planned in secret and executed over public 

protest.  This is not a government the people voted for.  The 

people voted for no more taxes and every other promise that 

the NDP campaigned on. 

 

The member from Saskatoon Riversdale can wave around as 

many election pamphlets as he wants.  He knows the people of 

Saskatchewan know and each and every one of the NDP 

members knows that they made these promises.  They 

promised to stand behind rural Saskatchewan and rural 

families.  If they had not, why would any rural person ever 

have voted for them? 

 

The throne speech now contains very little for rural 

Saskatchewan and farm families.  As a matter of fact, one of 

the only promises contained was, and I quote: to rebuild the 

province's farm economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP had better rebuild because it's their 

wrong-headed policies that have torn it down -- wrong-headed 

policies, Mr. Speaker, such as getting out of the GRIP program.  

The residents of rural Saskatchewan have suffered enough, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker.  Let's give them some hope.  Instead of 

preaching doom and gloom, let's let them know that there is a 

little light at the end of the tunnel.  I have confidence in this 

province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in its people, and in their 

capabilities to survive, to even survive this government, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

I want to go back just for a minute in concluding my remarks 

and summarizing the reply that I prepared to the Speech from 

the Throne, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I have had conversations 

with my constituents and they've told me that they feel that the 

NDP have been dishonest with them.  They didn't keep the 

promises that they made before the election. They increased the 

taxes that they said they wouldn't. On and on the list will go.  

And they said the NDP is being unfair with them because they 

do not take the federal money that Manitoba and Alberta are 

taking for their farmers.  And they believe that that is unfair. 

 

And they have come to the point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where 

they feel that this NDP government just doesn't care what 

happens to rural Saskatchewan.  Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

can assure you that the government does have choices.  They 

have choices but they've refused to use them. 

 

Taxes are a specific issue that will be tied to all other 

components.  The increases are unfair, with spending cuts far 

lower than the tax increases, and the increases coming at a time 

when people can least afford them.  They say out there in the 

country that by using these fear tactics, the government is 

escaping responsibility for its bad choices, attempting to 

escape. 

 

The entire health care process is demonstratively unfair, 

treating people differently depending on the kind of illness, the 

location, and maybe even gender by now.  The health care 

process is dishonest with clearly false information being 

spread.  The government's choices in health care will not lead 

to cost savings for the taxpayer. 

 

That's what my constituents are telling me, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker.  They say that the government is totally abandoning 

agriculture and it is not fair that farm families are suffering 

from the Premier's admitted mistakes. 

 

The government is misleading the people about it's ability to 

help agriculture because they don't care if thousands of farmers 

go under.  Those are some of the things, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that my constituents have been telling me. 

 

There are some other things that our constituents are telling us.  

One of my constituents, for example, told me the other day that 

one of the biggest problems we have is the lack of 

communication between rural people and the people who live 

in our cities.  And I think he has a point, 



March 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 187 

although it's a difficult one to manage to solve. 

 

So I said to him: how would we go about explaining to the 

urban people what the problems in agriculture and the rural 

communities is?  He said, perhaps what we should do is to have 

the Premier say to the labour people -- I guess through the 

labour unions would be the best contact -- that in their 

negotiations that are presently going on, they ought to consider 

the possibility of taking the average of their last 15 year's 

wages, averaging that out and calling that average figure the 

figure that they would get paid next year. 

 

I can see some union leaders rising right off of their seats 

straight through that camera.  But the reality, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is that that is exactly what farmers are being offered 

through the GRIP program.  The average wage that you're 

going to get is the same as the average price of the grain that 

you're going to sell.  The average price of the grain you sell 

next year is going to be based, guaranteed under the revenue 

insurance program, on the last 15 year's sales prices averaged, 

and you take the average. 

 

Now if the wage earners want to understand why farmers are so 

frustrated and so upset and in such desperate, desperate 

financial trouble, take that average of your wages over the last 

15 years and call that your wage for next year, and do the 

mathematics at how you're going to pay your mortgage, how 

you're going to pay for your light and heat bill, and then you 

will have an understanding of what farmers are going through. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that that is a harsh pill to 

take in trying to get people to understand one another, but it 

may be the only way that people will understand, is if they put 

themselves into the other fellow's shoes, compare it to the way 

it would happen to you. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I know that Saskatchewan will survive this 

recession.  I only hope that we can survive this NDP 

government, its taxation policies, and its total lack of 

understanding of the people of Saskatchewan.  Thank you, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

welcome all members back to the Assembly.  I'd like to also 

welcome the staff back.  In particular, to welcome the new 

pages that we have here.  I'm sure you'll have a very interesting 

time in the Assembly, and hopefully you'll learn a great deal 

from it.  There are many stories from the past that you'll not 

have the opportunity to see.  But there are new stories that 

come from every Legislative Assembly sitting. 

 

And I think of today, when the member from Maple Creek was 

speaking, of the former member from Weyburn.  And in some 

respects I wish he was here today.  I know the member we have 

from Weyburn now is a very good member.  But it's the line 

that the member from Weyburn used to use when he came into 

the House and someone was speaking.  He would holler, that's 

the worst speech I ever heard. 

 

Now some of the members who sat in the last legislature 

would remember that.  And if the member from Weyburn . . . 

the previous member from Weyburn was here today, I think 

that his words would have never been more appropriately put 

than to the speaker from Maple Creek who was on his feet here 

just previous to me here today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I don't know what it is about the official 

opposition, but they don't quite seem to have the grasp of 

what's going on today in Saskatchewan.  And they have 

forgotten what created the situation we find ourselves in. 

 

And I suppose part of it could be frustrating, in a time when 

we've just gone through a very relatively short period of time 

ago, through an election where the New Democrats won a very 

heavy majority.  The Conservatives were almost decimated.  

And they must be thinking that they should be going up in the 

polls.  But I think it must be the frustration they feel because 

they're not increasing in popularity in the polls; they continue 

to plummet.  But they can't bolster their spirits in the 

Legislative Assembly to get that spirit there which they should 

be able to grab and they're just missing the boat a little. 

 

I want to respond to some of the things that the member of 

Maple Creek alluded to in his presentation here today.  I truly 

wish that Joan Duncan was back, because she at least could 

analyse the situation in an accurate way, even though it wasn't 

acceptable to the people of the province of Saskatchewan when 

she was in the provincial cabinet of the Conservative 

government.  But I wish she was back here to do the analysis 

that the member from Maple Creek today just seems incapable 

of putting forward. 

 

The member from Maple Creek said that we've dramatically 

increased our spending in the province of Saskatchewan.  Is 

that correct?  No, it's not correct.  In fact Saskatchewan was the 

only province in Canada in the 1992-93 budget period that 

reduced their expenditures.  The Government of Saskatchewan 

reduced their expenditures by 3 per cent.  I don't know why the 

member from Maple Creek wouldn't know that.  Why wouldn't 

he be aware that the government has reduced its expenditures?  

And why have we reduced our expenditures?  We've reduced 

our expenditures because of the devastating debt situation that 

the former Conservative government left the province of 

Saskatchewan in.  Shame on them for that. 

 

In fact in '92-93 we projected a deficit of $517 million.  We 

had to make cuts in expenditures because if we would have let 

the status quo continue on, we would have had a deficit in 

'92-93 of some billion dollars.  That's the road that the 

Conservative government was on.  Does a billion dollar deficit 

seem like a lot?  Well yes it is.  But it wasn't too much for the 

Conservatives. 

 

Back in the '86 period, where they projected a deficit in that 

particular year of some $289 million, I believe it was, the 

minister of Finance, the member from Weyburn, Lorne 

Hepworth, said that they were right on target, there was no 

problem in meeting that budget projection. 



188 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1993 

The election came and do you know what the deficit was? -- 

$1.2 billion.  That's why this government has taken the only 

direction available, and that is to cut expenditures and make 

sure that the revenues come in so that we can come to a 

position where we balance the budget in the province; not like 

the doomers and gloomers are preaching over there right now 

to let the economy of the province run wild and run the 

province into a situation where we'd have virtually no say in 

what we do in terms of delivery of government programs. 

 

The member also talked about the deficit reduction surtax.  

Well I want the member opposite to know that there was 

another name for that tax which is going broadly across 

Saskatchewan, and the name has nothing to do with the 

member from Estevan because his name does not only mean 

the member from Estevan -- many people called it the divine 

deficit tax. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member is trying 

to do something indirectly which he is not permitted to do 

directly, and therefore I caution him to not use the names of 

members of the House.  And if you want to refer to them to do 

so by their ridings. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well I appreciate that ruling, Mr. 

Speaker.  I know that when the members opposite use anguish 

in their speeches from now on that they'll be ruled out of order 

on that. 

 

The situation in the province of Saskatchewan is a very serious 

one, and we're willing to take very serious action as a 

provincial government so that we know that down the road, 

when you look down the tunnel, that there's a light there.  And 

up until October 21 of 1991, when people looked down that 

tunnel, they saw a light and knew it was a freight train coming; 

that it was loaded with Conservatives running over the people 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- By the actions that we take today, Mr. 

Speaker, there's a candle at the end of the tunnel.  And once we 

get through the tunnel by the program that's been set out 

through the Premier of this province and the members of the 

Legislative Assembly, the sun will again shine on the province 

of Saskatchewan and we can forget about that freight train that 

tried to run over the Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The other inaccuracy that was pointed out by the member from 

Maple Creek, when he talks about the province not putting up 

$9 million to get $65 million from the federal government.  

Well why would we believe your federal cousins in Ottawa, 

members of the Progressive Conservative Party?  It's an 

oxymoron itself, someone told me once. 

 

Federal offloading by unilateral reductions in federal payments 

to Saskatchewan, it's been a result of an annual loss of $538.1 

million in 1992-93 -- $538.1 million unilaterally offloaded on 

the province of Saskatchewan.  Even worse than offloaded, this 

is the reduction in federal payments to the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

Had we received what was due to the province of 

Saskatchewan from the federal government, we virtually 

wouldn't have had a deficit this year.  We would have had in 

the very first term of an NDP government in Saskatchewan a 

balanced budget.  That's something that never happened in 10 

budgets from the Progressive Conservatives of Saskatchewan, 

not once did they balance a budget.  Shame on you for that.  

Shame on you. 

 

What they did leave us with though, members of the Assembly, 

was interest payments last year of $760 million.  If you 

combined the $760 million in interest on the debt that was left 

by these people with the 538.1 million that was reduced by 

federal payments, we would have had a surplus budget this 

year of about $200 million-plus. 

 

I can't believe that members opposite can stand in this House 

with no shame and say that the NDP Government of 

Saskatchewan is doing wrong by the people of this province.  

We are determined to correct the course of the past.  We ask 

members of this Assembly from all parties to join with us and 

tell the federal government to honour their obligations to this 

province so we can bring back to the people of the province the 

standard and the programs that they are used to having under 

sound administrations, not in the administration that tried to 

decimate the province of Saskatchewan for their own personal 

greed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- In fact how bad was it?  In August of 

1992 -- that's well after the last election -- August 10 of 1992, 

Paul Jackson wrote in the paper with a headline, and the 

headline read, I quote: Many in the Tory hierarchy corrupt to 

the rotten core.  That's a quote from the newspaper. 

 

I want to tell you that the people of Saskatchewan will never 

forget the devastation left by the Conservative government, in 

the 10 budgets that they brought down to bring us to the 

situation today where we have to venture out on something 

very positive.  That something very positive, Mr. Speaker, 

that's our journey of renewal.  The journey of renewal will have 

tough decisions that go along with it.  But we have to make 

tough decisions as we go through life. 

 

Remember the great Chief Poundmaker.  Poundmaker once 

was telling a story to his band members about as you go 

through life you'll have decisions to make.  And he told the 

story about moving the tribe from one location to another and 

they came upon a fork in the road; some members went to the 

right, some members went to the left.  One particular member 

of the band sat down in the forks of the road because he 

couldn't make a decision.  And eventually the grass grew all up 

around and the member was lost. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are not prepared to have the people of 

Saskatchewan get lost by the grass growing around them.  

We'll make decisions to lead this province to a future that we 

can all be very proud of so that that light again shines on the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 



March 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 189 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- And it's normal, I think, to have people 

be apprehensive to change.  People like things to be the way 

they are, the way they have been.  But to get to where we want 

to go as a province, Mr. Speaker, with all people of the 

province of Saskatchewan, there have to be decisions made that 

make change happen.  Old solutions from the past will not 

necessarily meet the problems of the future.  We have to learn 

from mistakes.  And there were many mistakes made between 

1982 and 1991.  We've learned from those mistakes. 

 

At one point today, the member from Maple Creek was talking 

about the record of the '60s and implying that our government 

had something to do with those programs.  I'd correct him on 

the history of the province, and that for the majority of the '60s 

the Liberal government under Ross Thatcher was in power in 

the province of Saskatchewan.  And we did not support those 

policies but we learned from them. 

 

There was however some interesting initiatives that we are 

proud of during the 1960 period.  That was the introduction of 

medicare in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- We want to now extend, Mr. Speaker, to 

the next generation of health care in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  And I predict that people across North America 

will take a lead from what we do in health care here by the 

actions of members of this Assembly and from the NDP 

government that's currently putting that plan into place. 

 

In 1962, the changes that brought in medicare in the province 

of Saskatchewan, people were apprehensive about that.  There 

were KOD committees -- keep our doctors committees that 

opposed changes.  They had funding from the American 

Medical Association to stop medicare in its tracks. 

 

I see within the Conservative Party, Mr. Speaker, those same 

reactionary forces again preaching doom and gloom and 

destruction, when we should have support from all members of 

this House and carry the people of Saskatchewan forward into 

that next generation of health care.  They want the leadership 

and that's where we're going, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- What about some of our initiatives 

beyond the wellness model?  How about fiscal management in 

the face of fiscal terrorism by the federal government, as I've 

already outlined earlier and won't further elaborate on that. 

 

We've had the Gass Commission.  We've taken actions to make 

sure that the province is on a sound financial footing and that 

it's open and accountable, so that the people of this province 

can see the financial affairs that the government has to deal 

with, and through the government all people of this province 

have to deal with. 

In the department I'm responsible for, Mr. Speaker, we'll be 

putting together a comprehensive energy strategy to look at the 

future, to look at how we generate our energy and how we 

utilize our energy within the province.  Those are exciting 

initiatives that will bring us great returns in the future. 

 

We have the Saskatchewan Energy Conservation and 

Development Authority, also under my responsibility as a 

minister of the Crown, Mr. Speaker.  We will look and 

strategically plan how we fulfil our energy requirements past 

the year 2000, past the end of this decade.  That's much 

different than the previous administration where nothing was 

planned.  Deals were made on the backs of cigarette packages 

and match packages.  That's how the GigaText came about; 

that's how the Supercarts came about; that's how they 

devastated the economy of the province. 

 

(1645) 

 

We not only planned for the budget year that we're going into, 

Mr. Speaker, we have long-term plans for dealing with 

employment and the economy and energy strategies.  We want 

to search out with the people of the province all the alternatives 

that are available to us, not only making those decisions that 

are best for a few lite.  Decisions have to be made in the 

public interest of all, all people within Saskatchewan. 

 

I would want to say that we have some very specific goals, Mr. 

Speaker.  And one of the goals of this government is full 

employment.  Everybody who wants a job and needs a job 

should have a job.  That's what we're working toward.  We 

can't stand to see people when they leave the province because 

of the lack of opportunities left behind by the Conservative 

administration.  But we ask people to join with us in this 

journey of renewal. 

 

One of our other goals is to balance the budgets so we make 

sure that we're not spending away our children's future.  The 

previous premier of the province, the member from Estevan, 

once said deficits are nothing but deferred taxes.  And he's 

correct.  That's why we're going to balance the budgets in the 

province, so that we don't have this continual burden of interest 

on the debt. 

 

It'll take many years to address the debt, but we are taking 

immediate action to address the deficit budgets.  And once the 

deficit budgets are addressed, we will be able to look at retiring 

the debt.  That's positive action and those are positive goals, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we want to provide as another goal and objective of our 

government, is to provide economic stability within the 

province.  And that will come by funding megaprojects that are 

not planned.  It will come by investing in the communities, by 

investing in the businesses, and investing in the people who are 

the province of Saskatchewan, who want to be the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And all those out there who want to join us in this journey, we 

ask them to please do join.  Don't listen to the doom and gloom 

preached by the disillusioned members of the 



190 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1993 

official opposition.  If you listen to the leftovers from the last 

period, they would have you believe that Saskatchewan is not a 

good place to live.  They would have you believe that 

Saskatchewan is not a good place to do business.  They would 

have you believe that Saskatchewan is a ruined province, and 

they should know about that because they nearly ruined it, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Saskatchewan is not a ruined province.  We have a sound 

foundation.  We have a sound foundation in our people, we 

have a sound foundation in our resources, and we have a sound 

foundation in our economy in this province.  But we have to 

give it a chance to work.  We're giving it that chance to work 

by the actions and by the initiatives and by the leadership.  And 

we are providing leadership that was not taken by the previous 

government. 

 

I did not want to necessarily dwell on what had happened under 

the previous administration.  I don't think I've done that.  But 

we can never forget why the province of Saskatchewan is in the 

situation we find ourselves today. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- A legacy of debt. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- It is the legacy of debt, as the member 

from Kinistino points out, left by the Conservative 

administration.  But from this point onward, I want to speak in 

this Assembly of the positive initiatives, the positive decisions, 

the positive actions that are necessary to join in our journey of 

renewal.  Not just joining together as members of the 

Legislative Assembly, but we ask that all people who want to 

join in our journey of renewal to come together, to follow the 

leadership of the government, to question the leadership of the 

government when necessary, because we believe in that 

consultation. 

 

We don't think we're always right in terms of our own isolated 

decisions, and that's why we don't make isolated decisions.  We 

have the broadest consultation of any government in the history 

of the province of Saskatchewan.  And people don't always 

have to agree.  We want to hear the positives.  We want to hear 

the negatives.  And through that consultation process, Mr. 

Speaker, we will provide the leadership that will have the sun 

again shine on the province of Saskatchewan as all of us join in 

a journey of renewal for this once, and again to be, the greatest 

province in all of Canada, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and fellow 

members of the legislature.  I want to say at the outset that it's a 

pleasure to be back here and certainly I want to welcome all of 

the members of the legislature back to this particular session, 

and also the pages and also you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm sure with 

your guidance and leadership that we'll have a very fruitful 

session. 

 

I also want to say at the outset that I'm happy to enjoin in this 

particular debate on the throne speech, because I think as the 

elected representative from Kinistino the throne speech clearly 

identifies goals and a plan for the coming session and the year. 

I think in the wording of the throne speech there is an 

important theme . . . there is important themes, but one of the 

most important themes certainly is journey of renewal.  And I 

think those are very important words.  I think it is important to 

know that after the last 10 years that certainly we are reversing 

the direction of the province as a government, and I think it 

really is a journey of renewal for the people in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to tell you I think, Mr. Speaker, that each and every one 

of us in this particular legislature believe that the situation, the 

financial situation of the province, is very grave.  And each and 

every one of us may have a different approach on how the 

solution should be taken, but I want to tell you that the fact is 

everybody in this legislature understands the magnitude of the 

problem and also the financial strait-jacket that the province of 

Saskatchewan has been placed in. 

 

And this is not only a phenomena in Saskatchewan.  This of 

course is a problem that is facing all jurisdictions in Canada.  

It's facing . . . a problem the federal government is facing.  It's a 

problem that other major industrialized countries around the 

world are having to deal with.  So this is not a 

Saskatchewan-alone problem. 

 

I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that after we were elected in 

October of 1991 our government moved swiftly to try to return 

some accountability and honesty to the Government of 

Saskatchewan.  And that's why we implemented the Gass 

Financial Review Commission. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I'm proud to stand up here today and tell the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan that most of the 

recommendations of the Gass Financial Review Commission 

have been implemented, Mr. Speaker.  So we've taken very 

seriously what the people in the province of Saskatchewan 

have told us about accountability and honesty and we've put 

those recommendations into place.  And we're going to go 

further, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to tell you that my constituents certainly are very much 

aware of the financial problems facing this province.  And 

they're telling me, you have to take the tough, hard decisions.  

And they may not be politically favourable, Mr. Speaker, but 

they have to be taken and it takes political intestinal fortitude 

and it takes guts to get on with this -- something, Mr. Speaker, 

that the previous administration could not bring themselves 

around to do. 

 

It is very important to realize that if we do not make these very 

difficult decisions, the future of Saskatchewan programs is 

going to be jeopardized.  And nobody in this legislature, I 

think, wants to see programs being eroded to the point of being 

eliminated entirely.  We have to protect the integrity of these 

programs, of what they've meant for the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the problems that I see about the debt problem in 

Canada is that there is no national approach to dealing with this 

mountain of debt.  And this is what is called federal-provincial 

cooperation.  And, Mr. Speaker, whether it's debt, whether it's 

agriculture, whether it's economic development, the federal 

government has 



March 8, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 191 

 failed the provinces of this country.  They have abdicated their 

responsibility each and every time.  And again on a grave 

situation like this debt crisis that we're facing in this country, 

Mr. Speaker, again the federal government is abdicating its 

responsibility.  That is shameful.  And they should be taken . . . 

They should be accountable for that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to again carry a little further on this, Mr. Speaker.  We 

have just seen lately a province like Saskatchewan and other 

provinces in Canada, the have-not provinces of this country, 

being asked to pay back close to $1 billion, Mr. Speaker; $1 

billion when they are facing the most difficult choices 

financially in their particular jurisdictions. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the member from Humboldt mentions 

helicopters.  Well let me tell you something about helicopters. 

The cost overrun, Mr. Speaker, on these helicopters, the 

helicopter contract that the federal government is going to be 

buying, the cost overrun is $1.4 billion. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they're asking the poorest provinces of this 

country to pay back close to $1 billion.  Now how is that for 

federal-provincial cooperation?  I'm telling you, Mr. Speaker, 

this problem has to be taken on at a national level.  We should 

be asked to convene a national conference on debt.  And let's 

get 11 heads together to try to solve this problem before we do 

go over the financial precipice, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Mr. Speaker, it is certainly important that we 

address debt and we address it quickly in this province.  But we 

have to go beyond that.  We all recognize, dealing with the 

debt problem and balancing our books is very important for the 

future and the preservation of all the programs that we believe 

in in Saskatchewan.  But we have to do more.  We have to 

stimulate the economy and we have to create wealth, Mr. 

Speaker.  And I'm very proud to say that our government, in 

that area, has taken major initiatives and major steps forward 

with releasing the Partnership for Renewal document in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you that I played a significant 

role in trying to set this particular document together and get it 

on its feet and running.  And I want to tell you that our 

government went through a major consultative process across 

this province with all the major stakeholders in the economy -- 

labour, business.  Mr. Speaker, to this end we have been able to 

bring all of these stakeholders, despite all their differences, we 

were able to bring them together to forge this new document, 

forge a new economic plan for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that speaks of cooperation on the part of this 

government.  And it speaks for volumes for the people of 

Saskatchewan wanting to work together to renew a better 

future for themselves and their families. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Mr. Speaker, the Partnership for Renewal 

document is very specific and it has specific time lines . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  It now being 5 o'clock, this House 

stands recessed until 7 p.m. this evening. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 


