




















































Hansard: May 17, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1759 

 May 17, 1993 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 

 

The Chair: -- I will ask the Minister of Agriculture and Food 

to introduce his officials to the committee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- With me this evening I have Mr. 

Hartley Furtan who is the deputy minister, beside me; Mr. 

Terry Scott, right directly behind me; Mr. Harvey Murchison 

who is behind me and to my right; Ross Johnson who is a 

department budget officer; and Denis Cote who is executive 

director of lending for ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of 

Saskatchewan). 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, we 

have asked questions of the department on a broad-base scale 

for all the ministers and we were wondering whether we'd be 

able to have that? 

 

I guess one of the things that I want to ask questions about -- 

and I'd like to know if they're in there -- is in lands branch and 

in brand inspection and all of these various areas where you 

apply fees to, are they in this group of items that you have here 

or should I ask for them and then get them later on? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No, the information is not in that 

package on the fees.  We have a list of them which we can 

probably send over to you. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- When you send them over, would you be able 

to give me a rough estimate at the volume of dollars you 

anticipate coming in from those various areas that you have 

increased the fees for? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, perhaps I could just 

go down . . . our list of revenues is fairly short; maybe I could 

just read it into the record for the member opposite. 

 

Miscellaneous compensation, $264,000; livestock dealer 

licence, $52,000; pesticide applicator's licence, 24,000; gain on 

sale of land bank, $880,000;  principal Crown land sale, 

$3,160,000; rent and penalty revenue, 16,394,000; 

miscellaneous land bank, $25,800; interest on sales of 

non-land-bank Land, 1.2 million; interest on land bank sales, 

440,000; property sales, a thousand; furniture and equipment, 

2,000; sale of books and pamphlets, 2,300. 

 

Sale of livestock, 600,000; laboratory fees, 391,000; 

incineration charges, 41,000; meat and inspection, 41,000; 

livestock inspection fees, 1.8 million; community pasture fees, 

4,240,000; brand allocation, 150,000; other services fees, 10; 

pasture manager's house rent, 60,000; personal mileage, 

4,000. 

 

Indian and agriculture program, 189,000; proceeds from other 

funds, 30,000; casual, 11,730; and refund from prior years, 

$3,667,460.  That's a list of revenues anticipated this year. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Would you be able to send that over for me?  

I'll deal basically with the pastures and things like that to start 

with.  How many pastures are there in the province and how 

many patrons in the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chair, we have an official just 

on his way in with that information. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Would you also provide for me how many 

bulls you have on hand for those pastures and how many you 

purchased this year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That information is also coming 

with the official.  I don't have that . . . It's in here somewhere, 

but I can't lay my finger on it.  We'll have that in a second when 

he comes in. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we have the answer to the first question. There's 

56 pastures.  There are about 2,500 patrons.  Right now we 

have 600 bulls and we haven't purchased any this year. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- How many are required to run livestock in 

those pastures -- of bulls that is? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Approximately 1,600 bulls. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- What's been the response of moving away 

from purchasing breeding stock?  What's been the response in 

the different pastures in the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, we have had varied response.  

Some pastures prefer to own their own bulls.  Many pastures 

have purchased our government stock for their pastures and 

others are still largely running with government bulls. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Do you receive revenue for those . . . as 

you've sold off, have you received revenue for any sale of 

breeding stock? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- On the bulls that we sold, the 

patrons were selling them on . . . two instalments will be paid; 

one instalment this fall and one in the fall of '94.  The bulls that 

we call, of course, we receive the revenue for them. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- How many of the breeding stock did you sell 

to patrons? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Approximately 250.  That process 

is ongoing right now, but it would be approximately 250 bulls. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- And did the money go to the Department of 

Agriculture or did it go to the Consolidated Fund? 



1760 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1993 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The revenue goes to the 

Consolidated Fund. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The estimate here on rent and penalty 

revenue, is that for lands branch, all of lands branch land, or 

what is that for?  It's $16 million. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That's for all lands, grazing leases 

plus the cultivated ones. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Does that include land bank land? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, it does. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Then you've got interest on sales on 

non-land-bank land. Is that the interest on the principal of the 

$3 million of sale of Crown land? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That would be interest that we 

would receive on time sales of land.  It's not land bank land but 

other Crown land. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Have you still got the land bank land separate 

from all the other Crown land that you had? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, we do. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- And how much of it is left? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We don't have those numbers with 

us.  I think . . . the officials tell me it's around 900,000 acres.  

We can get the exact number for you. 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. Chair. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- I'd like to introduce to you and through you 

to the members of the Assembly, Mr. Clint White, who was a 

member of the Legislative Assembly from 1978 to 1982 in the 

constituency of Regina Wascana, and also a professor of 

history of mine a few years ago. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, on livestock 

inspection, those fees have gone up some with . . . Does that 

include . . . or just tell me what that all includes. 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That, Mr. Chairman, represents an 

increase in the inspection fee going up from $1 to $2.  It will 

come into effect sometime this summer so that's why it's not 

100 per cent increase in the numbers. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Do you charge rent for all of the pasture 

managers and the homes that they have, to these pasture 

managers? And how many are there that pay rent, and in how 

many homes are they? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- There are approximately 35 to 40 

homes for pasture managers and riders, and yes, we charge rent 

on all of them. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- You've got Indian agricultural land.  Would 

you tell me what's happening with the northern farms as it 

relates to the natives and the various farms that are up there.  

Could you give me a run-down of each of them, and if they've 

all reached a conclusion in sale, or what's going on with each of 

them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, there are several 

farms. The Silver Lake Farm by Green Lake is still the subject 

of a lawsuit that is in litigation.  The Central Farm in the same 

area has been transferred to the northern village of Green Lake.  

There's a farm at Cumberland House.  The Cumberland House 

Development Corporation has taken over that farm on 

December 1, 1989.  The Ile-a-la-Crosse Farm was transferred 

to the community.  I'm not sure what date that was, but it has 

been transferred to the community of Cumberland House. 

 

(1915) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Are you still receiving any revenue from the 

sale of those Crown lands in any way?  Does that appear on this 

sheet that you gave me? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No, there's no revenue that shows 

up on that sheet. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The percentage increase on fees . . . and I 

noticed on your paper that you've got here there's a substantial 

volume of dollars that the fees have gone up.  Can you give me 

. . . you have probably not collected the fees in prior years.  

You go from $9 million to $33 million in revenue.  Could you 

give me a breakdown?  Are those in fact . . . no commodities 

moved in '92-93 in each of those places where you have zero, 

or is it just money that has gone to the Consolidated Fund 

rather than to the Department of Agriculture? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Most of those increases where they 

have gone from zero is a result of reorganization.  For instance, 

16.394 million rent and penalty revenue last year was in the 

budget for Rural Development and is now in the Agriculture 

project -- Crown land sales and so on. 

 

So some of them may be increases of fees.  For example, 

livestock inspection fees, the increase is because of an increase 

in fees.  But where it goes from 



May 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1761 

zero to substantial sums, that's mostly the result of 

reorganization and transferring over from the Department of 

Rural Development. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well in order to do some comparative 

numbers, could I have those numbers for all of those where 

zero isn't actually the number, and could you provide them for 

me? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We do not have those with us but 

we certainly can get those for you. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well this sheet of paper doesn't really help me 

much unless I know the difference.  And if it's 5 per cent or 10 

per cent or 20 per cent increase in the volume, I really think 

that what you should have had here is actual numbers 

compared to numbers.  Because if you did that in your budget 

book, you should have had to have it here and provide that to 

me. 

 

And I don't know why you wouldn't have done it, but it's in my 

view a serious error, because I need to have those numbers to 

compare the various numbers that were there last year in order 

to get an equivalent breakdown of what you did increase it at, 

because this is a 300 per cent increase.  And I don't think that 

that's really what it is, but it was substantial.  But I don't think it 

was that much. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- If you look at the Estimates book 

of '93-94 on page 18, you will see the revenues there in lump 

sum.  Estimated for '92-93 was 32.675 million.  Actual or 

updated forecast is 35.083 million.  And our estimate for 

1993-94 is 33.690 million.  So we're actually predicting 

revenues to be down slightly from last year when you take into 

account the Rural Development votes that were transferred 

over. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- What are you anticipating the total volume 

going down as?  What's the reason for that?  Because most of 

them . . . I was just checking it off here -- livestock dealer 

licence went up from 50 to $200, I think.  Your pesticide 

applicator's licence is reasonably new.  Then you go down on 

your meat inspection, livestock inspection, brand allocation 

fees -- most of them are up in revenue. And there's more 

livestock around, so why wouldn't they be higher? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I think what you will notice if you 

look at the page that we handed out, one significant decrease is 

a refund from prior years.  It's $7,261,890 down to $3,676,460.  

That's the refund that is refunded from ACS at the end of each 

July. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Refund for what? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- This is the surplus operating funds 

from ACS.  I think I misquoted the number there.  I think the 

budget that I quoted . . . I quoted 7 million as the budget.  

That's that actual for . . . that's the actual for '92-93, not the 

budget which was 3 million.  So you see, there was an actual 

increase in the budget.  So that does not explain the increase.  

The increases that come about -- as the member opposite has 

pointed out -- some increase in fees.  The 

decreases come about, I think, mostly because of decrease in 

revenues from rent and penalties on land -- will be the 

significant decrease, which will mean an overall less budget for 

'93-94 revenue than for '92-93. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well it's difficult to compare.  First of all, 

your estimate for income and revenue in Agriculture and Food 

is 32 million, and it was forecast for 35.  How close to 35 were 

you?  Was that 28 or 29 or was it 35 or what was it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The 35 million would be the 

estimate as of at the end of March and would be probably 

extremely close although we do not have the numbers from 

Rural Development.  Again we can get those to tell you 

whether we're dead on that target or not. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I think it's really 

disturbing that you would come, first of all with a fact sheet 

that says zero, zero.  If I was to take that at face value, which is 

really what you're telling me, I would say that you had a 300 

per cent increase in your revenue and I could go around talking 

about it because that's what you really supplied us.  Because 

you had a zero for '92-93, is that the truth?  No it isn't. 

 

And I think you should have had it here for us because you 

were the Minister of Rural Development; you took over and did 

some rejigging and now you should have that there.  What this 

represents is not fact.  I think . . . It's disturbing to me at least 

that you would do this realignment without understanding and 

present a budget based on those numbers, and then not have the 

numbers for us here to take a good, serious look at what you're 

doing.  Before I asked you a question too, where is this ACS $3 

million rebate?  What's that a rebate of? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That's a rebate of ACS to the 

Consolidated Fund.  If there's an operating surplus in ACS, the 

legislation requires that it be paid to the Consolidated Fund at 

the end of the year. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- How much is anticipated the cost of the ACS 

livestock cash advance for the coming year?  How much is that 

anticipated reduction in cost this year over last year to the 

corporation?  And how much will this actually be if you take 

those numbers . . . and it should be close to $12 million that 

you get out of there; that shouldn't be 3 million, that should be 

15 million. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The member is right.  The 

annualized saving from the livestock cash advance change was 

about $12 million annually, but the budget has been adjusted 

for this.  The budget for ACS has been reduced so it will not 

create surplus. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So the budget has been reduced by how 

much? 

 

(1930) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The overall budget on ACS 



1762 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1993 

has dropped from an actual last year of 33 million down to 24.7 

this year, so approximately $10 million budget overall.  Some 

of that is the interest subsidy which dropped from 6.641 million 

to 2.461 million.  And part of that again is the savings from the 

livestock cash advance program changes. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So ACS is going to save roughly $6 million, 

you said, in the change of the way the bookkeeping is going to 

be done and as it relates to the payment by producers of the 

interest on the livestock cash advance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The savings on the interest subsidy 

is about 6 million from the budget from last year and about 4 

million from the actual from last year. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- What's that mean?  That $10 million is a 

saving?  Or is it $6 million is the saving?  Or is it 4 million? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well the total savings is 10 million.  

About 4 million of that will be made up of interest subsidy 

which includes the livestock cash advance changes.  Some of it 

will be made up in loan guarantee defaults, which is mostly the 

CAFF (counselling and assistance for farmers program) 

program; a little over a million dollars in administration, and 

actual increase in the loan losses of $1 million. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay.  So that's going to give you a net this 

year of 3.6.  Or is that the 4 million you were talking about on 

the livestock cash advance?  Is that the 4 million on this paper 

that you gave me? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No, the surplus will come from a 

combination of all . . . of the whole program.  That will be the 

estimated surplus, will be in ACS after the interest subsidies 

and so on are paid. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- When could I expect these budget numbers 

for '92-93 that were in Rural Development that . . . they aren't 

on this paper here.  When could I expect them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We can have those for you 

tomorrow. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I noticed in your budget book that on various 

things you had an increase in your administration costs.  

Administration went up $35,000; accommodation and central 

services went up $300,000; the big jump comes in program 

delivery of $4 million -- a little over 4 million; land and 

regulatory management, a million and a quarter; ag policy and 

planning at $60,000 increase there, $40,000 increase.  And the 

first to go down is where the customer gets some service. 

 

Now can you tell me where the increased dollars in 

administration go? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- For instance, the expenditure 

increase of 34,000 in the administration; 

80,000 is for two additional ministerial staff which are required 

because there is no longer two departments to share staff; the 

Department of Highways and Transport last year, 30,000 for 

increased staff and human resources staff to accommodate the 

expanded portfolio resulting from acquiring programs from 

Rural Development and Crop Insurance and Ag Credit; 90,000 

for contractual services in support of agriculture strategy 

development and future restructuring; 60,000 transferred from 

the Ag Development Fund for accounting services.  And there 

were decreases of 500,000 -- savings due to elimination of 

duplication and overlap when the department assumed 

responsibility for portions of the previous Department of Rural 

Development. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- You mean to tell me that you didn't . . . did 

you or didn't you take into account the change from the 

administration in relation to what we have for '93-94 versus 

'92-93?  You did or did not take into consideration the move 

from a combination of the two departments? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, we did take into account the 

pieces of the Department of Rural Development that were 

coming.  It's a question of sorting those numbers out of Rural 

Development.  As you know, that department went in several 

directions.  So as best as we could, we have comparable 

numbers between what would have been those pieces in Rural 

Development plus what we had in Agriculture. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well what cost $4 million more in program 

delivery? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That 4 million is the compensation 

fund or the six-year leaseback program. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- And that was not included in last year's?  Or 

did it go up? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That's an increase of $4 million.  

There was no money spent for leaseback compensation in 

'92-93. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- What do you mean?  The leaseback 

compensation in your leaseback program as it relates not to 

lands branch, but to the land policy that you established last 

year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That is correct. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So $4 million went into that program, or is 

anticipated for this year to go into that program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Is anticipated for this year. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So in land and regulatory management, you're 

up a million-two, about.  How come that's there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That comes from a 2.4 increase in 

land costs; from having to make provisions for losses on land 

sales and bad debts due to changes in the accrual accounting.  

Previously these items 



May 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1763 

were not budgeted. 

 

And then we had decreases of 700,000 in savings from reduced 

land branch administration costs and position reductions; and 

500,000 transferred to technical transfer -- nine positions worth 

of transfer. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Would you be able to send a copy of that 

over, because you've got a whole lot of stuff in that that I don't 

know whether it's . . . one is related to the other, even.  Would 

you be able to send that over to provide us with that volume 

dollars difference?  The increase in administration was due 

only to ministerial staff? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No, there were . . . 80,000 was due 

to ministerial staff; 300,000 from increased senior staff and 

human resources staff to accommodate the expanded portfolio 

programs resulting from Rural Development, Crop Insurance, 

and Ag Credit reporting to the deputy minister.  So it was a 

large increase in the human resources staff; 90,000 funding for 

contractual services in support of the strategy development; and 

60,000 transferred from Ag Development Fund for accounting 

services. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Under program delivery, the grants for 

general agriculture interests, what's the format -- that's item no. 

3 -- what's the overview of where that money is going to be 

spent? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, the list of those grants 

includes 4-H, field worker program, grants to ADD (agriculture 

development and diversification district) board, Horse Racing 

Commission, dairy herd improvement, swine ROP (record of 

performance), Saskatchewan Livestock Association ROP, 

miscellaneous grants, Vet College, Sheep Development Board, 

and SSPCA (Saskatchewan Society for the Prevention of 

Cruelty to Animals). 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Would you be able to provide us with a list of 

those? 

 

Your feed grain adjustment program of $68,000 under . . . Your 

feed grain assistance, isn't that the same as the interim red meat 

production equalization program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That is the wind-up of the 

FeedGAP (feed grain adjustment) program. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well last year you said you were going to take 

that money out of the Ag Development Fund.  Is that where it 

came from or is this what's left over from payment out of the 

Ag Development Fund, or where did you get that from? 

 

(1945) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That money was just voted 

separately this year to clean up that balance of that program, 

just some miscellaneous claims coming in. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So was the two and a half million dollars paid 

out under the Ag Development Fund? 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, that was rolled in last year 

into the budget. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Am I to assume that the two and a half million 

dollars that you paid out in payments from Ag Development 

Fund, that this 68,000 would be over and above that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, that's correct. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I remember that very clearly and I was under 

the impression that two and a half million dollars would take 

you to the full year on that payment.  However, what it looks 

like is it's going to be six and a half million dollars that's going 

to be paid out over the one year.  Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The total paid out under FeedGAP 

for '92-93 was $6.8 million. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The total paid out was $6.8 million in 

1992-93? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That's correct. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well then, Mr. Minister, where would . . . the 

estimate is all what that is, eh?  That's all that the estimate in 

the budget last year, that's all that those other numbers are on 

that other line? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, that's correct. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- How many producers were paid out with that 

$6.8 million, and what . . . could you tell me the hogs and the 

beef cattle? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We have the total number of 

producers for 3,429.  The officials are looking for a breakdown.  

We apparently don't have a breakdown here with us.  We'd 

have to get that for you. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The 3,429 is hogs and cattle? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That's correct, total number of 

producers. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- It's interesting to notice that salaries are up; 

grants to local authorities, that grant is up; payments to or on 

behalf of individuals is up over last year.  Which ones of those 

in expense type have you reassessed to include some of those 

that you've already got in the programs that you've got there or 

are none of those numbers in there?  Would you be able to 

identify those for me? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- These numbers should be 

consistent with the reorganization.  The salaries are three 

persons in the leaseback which creates that increase.  Payments 

to and on behalf of individuals is made up of the leaseback 

compensation and interim red meats.  And the grants to third 

party would be basically the rest of the numbers above there, I 

believe, including about a million, close to $2 million grants for 

general agricultural interests. 



1764 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1993 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I just noticed, Mr. 

Minister, that you read through a number of items here that led 

me to believe that you had made a payment to ADD boards -- 

you said that -- it's at zero.  You said you had made a 

contribution to SPCA (Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to 

Animals), and that's at zero.  There's also the Sheep 

Development Board is also at zero.  Actually you cut out two of 

the functions that were there before and included them in the 

list. 

 

And it's that kind of information, I think, Mr. Minister, that you 

should be aware of.  At least you should be able to tell us the 

truth here about what's going on.  When I ask you a question, I 

expect a reasonable kind of an answer, and I guess that I'll just 

leave it go at that, sir. 

 

And I don't think that that's fair to this committee, nor is it fair 

to the Assembly and nor is it fair to you as a minister to do that 

sort of thing.  And I think that that hinges on being disgusting. 

 

I guess I'd move on to another area that is in the book here and 

deals with item no. 4 and land and pasture management. You've 

given me some overview of that.  These payments are made to 

how many employees, and is that taxes . . . is that grants in lieu 

of taxes as well as the payment to employ staff? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That does not include the taxes 

which we collect and pay to RMs (rural municipality), but it 

includes all the . . . I think it's 97 PYs (person-years).  It's the 

community pastures and the management of the Crown land. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So that the management on your PYs went 

down last year over this year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, we have a reduction in the 

number of PYs this year. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- By how many? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The decrease is 22.6. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Veterinary services, is that constant?  And 

have there been increases in the fees in relation to veterinary 

services as it relates to the pastures? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- This is the vote for the vet lab; 

there was no increases in fees. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The dairy lab went down a little bit.  Was 

there a decrease in the PYs in that one too? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- There was no decrease in the PYs 

in the dairy lab. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well I noticed that you had a 32.9 reduction 

in . . . I believe it's 32.9 reduction in people employed in the 

staff in the department -- I think that's the number -- and you 

had 22 in land.  You had an increase in administration, in PYs?  

Is that correct?  I want to see where we had the decrease. 

(2000) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The staff reduction says, as we 

pointed out earlier, were in lands branch, in ADF (Agriculture 

Development Fund) and in extension. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- How many increase in administration and in 

your first vote? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The total increase in personnel in 

administration is 17.6, largely due to . . . or almost totally due 

to the reorganization; more of the personnel department and so 

on being done from the department. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Can you give me exact numbers of an 

increase in PYs in administration, not including your transfer 

and amalgamation and all of that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Overall we have a decrease in the 

whole department of 60 PYs in administration.  Because of the 

reorganization we have an increase of 19.5.  So it's people 

pulled from lands branch collection into administration and 

those sorts of things.  So overall we have a loss, a reduction of 

60 PYs in the department.  Fairly significant reorganization so 

it's hard to tell which bodies came from where, but the overall 

effect of the reorganization was a decrease of 60 positions. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well that includes grant funded entities.  Is 

that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No, that doesn't include grant 

funded equities. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well if you had a reduction of 60 PYs, your 

department . . . It says the difference in last year to this year is 

531 to 498, and you just told me it was 60.  Where's the 

difference? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- If you look at page 21 of the 

Estimates, you'll see that the total PYs, '92-93 is 797.1 and in 

'93-94, 737.1. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Then the difference is the 797 . . . 737 minus 

the 797.  Then what are the numbers below for?  What do they 

indicate?  Is that something else besides what you were talking 

about? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The grant funded entity that's 

counted there is ACS numbers, so that's the difference.  It's the 

531 to 498 which is 33 or so in the department and then the 

balance in ACS. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay, so that the amount of money that was . . 

. no, amount of PYs in ACS was 26.9.  Your reduction in ACS 

was 26.9? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That's correct. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay, I'd like to have all of -- and I don't 

know whether you have that information in the material 

supplied -- all of the individuals' names and the location where 

they were working and the area of responsibility that they had 

in all of the PYs that were



May 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1765 

moved out and those that you moved out and then replaced 

with someone else.  I'd like to have all of those individuals' 

names and where they worked, if you could do that for us.  And 

I don't know whether you provided that in the material you 

gave us already. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I'm told by my officials that all that 

information is in the list.  All the terminations and conversions 

and so on should be listed in the material that you have. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Does the list also include all of the severance 

that was required to be paid in lieu of those reductions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chair, that information was not 

requested.  We will not have . . . many of the severances are 

still under negotiation.  We would not have a complete list at 

this time. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Would you provide for me the list of those 

that you already have? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes we can provide that list.  We'll 

have to check with Justice to see if that's information that's 

personal and releasable or not.  But certainly if there's no 

problem, we can release the list of those that we have. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I recall clearly in Crown 

Corporations Committee, that the Crown Corporations passed a 

resolution when one individual from SaskTel had on his 

contract that he would not . . . an agreement was made with 

SaskTel and the individual who was contracted, that he would 

not have his severance disclosed.  And the committee passed a 

resolution.  Because they have the majority they said, okay, it 

doesn't matter; the rules on the contract are of no significance, 

just like you did last year with all the farmers in the province.  

And they provided that.  It was Mr. Coombs from SaskTel.  

And they provided that.  So what would be the difference 

between doing that with something that you made as a contract 

versus what somebody else made as a contract? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chair, I've no knowledge of 

the legal obligations to employees as to releasing information 

of that nature.  As I say, if there are no problems with Justice, 

certainly the Department of Agriculture has no problem with 

releasing those lists. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well I'd say that you should be able to 

provide us with a total volume of dollars on this severance 

package of the individuals that are there.  When it was in your 

best interests, you and your colleagues, you decided that you 

thought that that was in your best interests politically to reveal 

that number.  And yet you determined in one place that it's 

good enough for everybody to know, even though it was a 

binding contract, and another case you say it's not good enough 

to know.  Which is it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chair, again I'm not saying 

which it is.  I'm saying that I just want to be sure 

that it is legal to release that and that that is . . . then we will 

certainly release it.  If the Department of Justice sees no 

problem with their breach in confidentially, then the 

Department of Agriculture has no problem with releasing those.  

All I'm saying is that we want to check with the Minister of 

Justice before so doing. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, apparently Mr. Laidlaw 

had his information released.  And it was made available to the 

public.  And it seems to me it was $124,000 for 15 months 

when he wasn't employed.   And I would say that somewhere in 

this budget, you need to identify where that money's going to 

come from.  And where in this budget is that money identified?  

So that we can see how much it's really going to cost 

Agriculture to downsize. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The money for severance will be 

absorbed within our budget.  It will probably come from vacant 

positions and that sort of thing in order to cover the severance.  

It's impossible to know what those severances will be, with 

negotiations. Many employees have bumping rights.  That 

takes a fair bit of time for that to work itself through the system 

and then severances are negotiated after that. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well if there were 60 people who had 

severance requirements and if the average salary is 50,000, 

that's $3 million.  Which department is going to get the cost 

implication of that severance? 

 

(2015) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Again, Mr. Chairman, most of the 

employees will bump into other jobs.  The severance will not 

and may not be settled for some time.  So the department will 

absorb them probably through vacancies and that sort of thing. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, that isn't good enough 

because I know in ACS that you moved out a considerable 

amount of people out of head office, and those head office 

employees are going to cost you significantly more money than 

50,000, one annual salary.  I know that.  You need to have a 

significant amount of money put aside in order to have that, 

what I calculate it at, $3 million, and that isn't even . . . that's a 

conservative estimate of the volume of dollars of severance. 

 

One of those individuals had been there for 22 years, and you're 

going to have a good deal of severance to pay for that 

individual.  I think that you need to have a serious look at 

where you're going to get this money from because one of these 

areas is going to have a serious cut-back in the volume of 

dollars that it's going to have for its various functions.  So what 

we have here is not a real number.  And that's what I'm 

concerned about.  Which one of these are going to get hit when 

it comes to paying the severance out? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The severance for out-of-scope 

employees is not budgeted in ACS.  That would be budgeted . . 

. picked up by the Department of Finance and the government 

as a whole. 



1766 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1993 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay, so out of scope . . . how many 

out-of-scope employees were there and how many in-scope 

employees were relieved of their responsibilities? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- There were 19 out-of-scope 

employees in the ACS and the department. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So there were 40 in-scope people, is that 

correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- There were 41 in scope and 19 out 

of scope from the department and ACS. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well I just calculated the increase in the 

estimates from last year to the estimates this year on all of 

those areas that deal with administration -- on administration, 

accommodation and central services, program delivery, land 

and regulatory management, policy and planning -- and that's 

5.461 million more this year than last year.  And is that where 

you're going to get the in-scope money from?  Or is it going to 

be out of the Ag Development Fund like you did last year with 

the red meat plan that you had?  Or where is it going to come 

from? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The increase in administration 

again is due to reorganization or picking up pieces of 

administration in different departments and putting them into 

one.  Again the in-scope employees all have bumping rights 

and severance will be very limited for those employees. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Why will it be limited? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Because if they bump into 

positions with very junior people in them, then severance is 

very small; if they bump into positions that were vacant or 

open, then there's no severance. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay. How many of these 41 were real 

people, then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We don't know until the bumping 

process is complete, but very, very few of the in-scope people 

will actually be out of a job.  Some of them bumped into other 

departments into vacant positions and . . . So there will be very 

few of the in-scope people who are actually eligible for 

severance packages. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- You didn't answer my question.  How many 

real people lost their jobs?  How many were there that don't . . . 

I don't want to have those where you moved them into a 

position where there was no one there, but I want to know how 

many people you really moved out?  Is it 41?  Or is it 5?  Or is 

it 10? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Of the in-scope people in the ACS, 

there were vacancies in ACS, so they didn't lose any bodies out 

of ACS.  There are only -- they tell me -- two or three who are 

still . . . have not yet bumped back into the service somewhere 

that were in-scope employees that were let go from the 

department. 

Mr. Martens: -- So that if I was to interpret all of that, I would 

say that less than five people have actually lost their job when 

you're talking 41 in the book here.  Is that right? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That is correct.  Because over the 

last year as we looked forward to reorganization, we did not fill 

vacancies and we tried to protect the people in scope who had . 

. . not put them out of a job completely, so that's correct.  

Almost all of them have or will be bumped back into service 

somewhere in government. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- What about the 19 individuals who were out 

of scope? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Of the 19 out of scope, 10 were 

vacant, 9 people actually lost their job from that. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So when you're talking about 60 people losing 

their job in this budget, you really only have less than . . . well 

about 12 or 13 altogether, is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, that is correct.  I think that's 

because the vacancies were not filled and people took early 

retirement and so on.  We did not fill vacancies as we 

attempted to cushion the blow of the downsizing that we did. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Did you take in any other employees from any 

other department as a part of this transfer of people moving 

back and forth?  Have you taken any in from any other 

department that would have been, as you suggested . . . for 

example, you had people moving around in the department. Did 

they move to another department of government from the 

Department of Agriculture or ACS or Crop Insurance?  Did 

they move to another area of government?  Is that what they 

did for bumping? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- There were four people from our 

department who bumped into other departments.  We did not 

get any other people other than the Rural Development people 

coming in which were calculated into the numbers. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, I want to get into a few different topics.  A couple of 

topics that I want to pursue a little bit, and one of the objectives 

that I will have in mind while I'm doing this is not just the 

pertinent information as such but rather hopefully be able to 

explore some of the philosophy that you may have as Minister 

of Agriculture of the province of Saskatchewan that holds half 

the productive farm land in Canada, and perhaps therein be able 

to determine some rationale in the direction that your 

government has been moving over the last while in so far as its 

impact on the agricultural scene is concerned. 

 

My first topic that I want to pursue a little bit is that of the rural 

service centres.  The rural service centres have been 

dramatically reduced, Mr. Minister, and when you get up, I'd 

like you to tell how many there 



May 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1767 

were originally; how many there are now, which means of 

course, how many were closed.  And what I would like you to 

do, Mr. Minister, is indicate to me why these rural service 

centres that were closed in fact were closed.  If you could just 

give me your idea and your thoughts on that. 

 

(2030) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, there were, I think, 

originally designed to be 52.  I don't have the number here.  I 

think it was around 50 that were opened.  There were 52 

opened; 9 were closed.  This was again part of budget restraint.  

We reduced the number of service centres.  A couple of 

principles that we tried to bear in mind when we were doing 

this was accessibility and service from other areas, looking at a 

map. 

 

We were also trying to bring as many as possible services 

under one roof.  I think that was the original intent, and the 

member opposite will know when the rural service centres were 

begun was to bring sort of a single window in rural 

Saskatchewan to government.  And we are attempting to do 

that, and so where we had rural service centres with, for 

example, only ACS or only Crop Insurance, we attempted to 

move more of the services under one roof because, for one 

thing, that saves us money as a government.  It's 

administratively cheaper to function with three or four 

functions in one office, and we feel it's a better service to rural 

customers to have more services under one roof. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, there was $5.461 million more 

in administration.  You're talking about reducing the amount of 

administrative expenditures. 

 

You also talk about you wanted to bring as much of them as 

possible under one roof.  Well the whole concept of a rural 

service centre was one-stop shopping for farmers.  Now I 

suppose if you want to conclude or bring your rationale to a 

logical conclusion, why don't you bring everything into the 

Scott Building here in Regina and have it under one roof?  You 

talk about accessibility and that is precisely what farmers need 

in these days. 

 

Now specifically what I want to do is turn the attention to the 

rural service centre that was closed in Rosthern.  And your 

official was very quick with his paper there, anticipating my 

direction.  Could you indicate to me, Mr. Minister, the 

utilization rate of the rural service centre in Rosthern.  Surely 

you have a criteria upon which you based the closure of these 

nine in terms of their impact, their need as such.  So I'd be 

interested in knowing the utilization rate within the Rosthern 

centre. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- As the member opposite said, the 

original thrust of the rural service centre was to provide a 

one-stop service for farmers.  The one at Rosthern, the rural 

service centre there had only an extension agrologist.  It was 

geographically located on a map in such a way that we felt it 

could be serviced reasonably well from other areas.  And that 

was the 

basis for the decision to close that particular rural service 

centre. 

 

We do not have . . . we do not keep records of utilization at 

rural service centres.  Possibly we should, but we don't have a 

record of client utilization.  With an extension agrologist, a lot 

of the work, at least we hope, will be out from the rural service 

centre contacting farmers on their farms and at field days and 

so on.  So it's very difficult to get a picture of utilization of a 

service.  We just don't have any accurate count of that. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I'm kind of surprised at that, Mr. Minister, that 

you would choose to close down a centre like Rosthern.  I will 

come back a little bit to that particular one. 

 

But you mention the extension agrologist, who happened to be 

Leroy Bader.  Could you indicate to me his status with the 

department right now, whether he's still working for the 

department, whether it's going to be long term or just short 

term.  Answer that first and we'll go on from there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, that individual has 

exercised his bumping rights and has a permanent position in 

Regina at this time. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, we have the Rosthern area 

which is the valley, so-called valley area of Saskatchewan.  It's 

got one of the most intensive livestock, agriculturally speaking, 

areas of Saskatchewan.  As a matter of fact, my constituency 

has almost a third of all of the dairy farms in Saskatchewan 

within it. 

 

We have a large, large number of hog farmers, lots of livestock, 

grain of all types.  And if there is an area in Saskatchewan that 

has the need of an agrologist, even if it's an extension 

agrologist as you call him, surely it's got to be Rosthern. 

 

Now you claim that it can easily be accessed . . . or those 

services can easily be accessed.  But, Mr. Minister, you surely 

can appreciate what a position like this means for, not just the 

farmers of Rosthern but the community of Rosthern itself.  

Because we're not talking only about the salaries given to the 

secretary -- or secretaries -- and to Leroy himself, but we're 

talking about the impact of causing and forcing farmers to 

leave Rosthern, to leave Hague, to leave Waldheim, not come 

into that valley area to do their business.  But you're suggesting 

now that they go to Prince Albert or to Saskatoon to see that 

extension agrologist.  Can you see the impact that that is going 

to have on a community like that?  Was that taken into 

consideration? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well certainly it's taken into 

consideration.  And it's a concern of ours.  It's the argument, I 

guess, you could have for opening service centres in every 

community because it would help with the economic 

development of the community. 

 

We were faced with a very tight budget and changing 



1768 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1993 

technology and ability to service wider areas, and faced with 

some tough choices.  And we just feel that we can reasonably 

provide service to the Rosthern area from our revamped 

organization.  It certainly wasn't a choice that we would have 

made had we not had some budgetary pressures.  But certainly 

there are arguments to be made for all the rural service centres 

and in fact arguments for many communities who would like 

new rural service centres built.  But it's a decision that you 

make on the basis resources you have available to you and the 

practicality of delivering service the best way you can with the 

dollars you have to deliver it with. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well let me assure you, Mr. Minister, the 

people of Rosthern and surrounding communities agree with 

you, but they do not agree with that decision.  They do not. 

 

Now you mentioned before that there were nine of these 

centres that have closed.  How many of those agrologists -- or 

whoever was in charge, along with secretarial help -- how 

many jobs were lost with the closing of those nine centres? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- In regards to the agrologists in 

those centres, all the agrologists have bumped in elsewhere and 

have maintained employment. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well by bumping somebody's at the lowest 

end of the rung.  How many jobs were lost as a result of the 

bumping process? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- In those nine centres there were 

five agrologists.  None of the agrologists have lost jobs.  

They've all bumped into vacant positions and therefore are still 

all employed. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I guess we're back where we were before I 

asked that last question.  You didn't answer my question, Mr. 

Minister, and I think I can understand why.  What were the 

savings to your department with the closure of these nine 

centres? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- $1.1 million was the savings from 

the closure. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Now if it saves $1.1 million, is that just to 

your department or does that take into effect that those folks are 

still employed?  You just told me that nobody lost their job.  So 

where do these savings come from?  Could you explain that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well the savings come by not 

filling vacancies elsewhere.  So if they're . . . There are several 

ways to approach downsizing.  We could just leave vacant the 

positions that come open because of attrition, or we can 

reorganize and pick the centres where we feel best need to be 

serviced, and service it in a rational manner.  And that's the 

choice we picked. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Could you indicate to me what the terms of 

lease in the Rosthern Rural Service Centre was.  Surely you 

must have leased that building for a 

certain length of time.  And I doubt if it would be coincidental 

that that lease would be up at the same time that your 

department closed that centre.  What are the terms? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The lease terms is . . . lease cost 

was $21,540 per year, and it expires on October 31, 1995. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- So, Mr. Minister, what are you going to be 

doing with that $21,000 till '95?  Is that going to be paid out?  

Was this calculated into your so-called savings? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- As the member opposite probably 

knows, SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation) is in charge of service centres.  We no longer pay 

the rent.  They will hopefully find a new client for the building 

and recoup the rent in that manner. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- In other words what you're telling me is you're 

operating on a wing and a prayer.  Hopefully somebody will 

come in and pick it up.  And you're washing your hands as far 

as the Department of Agriculture is concerned in saying 

whoop-de-do, we're saving a lot of money here.  But you've 

just confessed here that the lease payments are going to have to 

be made until October 1995, and that's dead money, Mr. 

Minister.  Now maybe not coming out of your department 

directly, and some of those agrologists may not be being 

funded out of your department directly now.  You have not 

committed to that so I don't know where they are. 

 

So all of these things, when you tell me that you're saving $1.1 

million, but you're telling me now is that that is already 

deducting those extraneous costs that I've just mentioned as a 

couple of examples.  Those have already been deducted from 

1.6, or whatever it may have been, and you're saying when you 

deduct those, you're left with 1.1, or do we still have to deduct 

those from 1.1?  Even if not from your department, but 

certainly from the government and the Saskatchewan taxpayer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That may be true if SPMC is not 

able to release or renegotiate some of these leases.  Rosthern, 

just as an example, we saved $75,641 on salaries, 16,000 on 

other expenses, and $21,540 on the lease fee which as the 

member opposite . . . is savings from us that would be going to 

SPMC and may have to be picked up elsewhere in government 

if they do not find a lease.  So certainly they would, at some 

rate, should find a tenant, so certainly one would not expect 

that the whole $21,000 would become an expense of 

government. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Mr. Minister, all I can say is this, like so 

many of the other things that you are doing, is 

counter-productive as a government.  And that 1.1, I would 

suggest to you, is a very, very forgiving, gracious number.  And 

I think if the bottom line was really known, it would be 

substantially less than that because a lot of this transfer no 

doubt is part of that $5.461 million that we identified as an 

increase 



May 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1769 

in administration within the Department of Agriculture. 

 

I want to go on to another topic now, Mr. Minister, and that is 

on page 22 of Agriculture and Food, vote 1: the feed grain 

adjustment program and the interim red meat production 

equalization program.  Now the way the book indicates is that 

$68,000 was all that was spent or is anticipated to be spent in 

'93-94 under the feed grain adjustment program, down from 

$5.7 million, and I can see why that would be, simply because 

the program came at an end.  Were there some payments still 

made under the feed grain adjustment program in 1993, or is 

that what that 68 stands for? 

 

(2045) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The 68 will be in '93-94 year.  That 

would be clean-up payments for the old program, and $4 

million under the IRMPEP (interim red meat production 

equalization program) program. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- But that 68 would still refer back then to the 

'92 year as such, and your payments are being made in '93 to 

accommodate that? Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That's correct, on the '93-94 fiscal 

year. This is just payments made that are clean-up payments 

that weren't applied for or whatever hold-up there was. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. Under the 

present system of the interim red meat production equalization 

program, in that '93-94, the estimate is going to be $4 million. 

Now that's substantially less than the previous program.  I 

wonder if you could break down for me which category, 

whether it be in the sheep and lamb industry, in the hog 

industry, or in the beef industry, what the proportion is that 

each of those is now going to be receiving less than under the 

FeedGAP adjustment program itself? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The reason for that number being 

less is that this program, as you know, was brought in as an 

interim payment, ends on September 30.  So it's not the rates 

that create less, it's the fact that it's only for part of a year that's 

budgeted and therefore the lower number. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Good, I appreciate that, Mr. Minister. But at 

the same time I want to get back to the premise that I was 

trying to establish, and that is what is the proportion given to 

each of the livestock industry?  And I want to see what 

percentage decrease each of them had. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We don't have the breakdown here 

for the difference.  We have the rates for each, you know, so 

much per pound or whatever, but we do not have the 

breakdown here.  We can get those for the member as soon as 

possible. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- But if you have, Mr. Minister, the rates per 

pound for each, then you have the 

difference, because you know what it was under the old 

FeedGAP program.  And all I'm asking now is . . . I'll give you 

an example.  Are the sheep getting still the same per pound as 

they were under the old program?  Is the cattle industry still 

getting the same per pound?  And the hog industry -- we know 

they're not getting the same amount per pound -- how much 

less?  That's what I'm getting at. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I have the numbers for the present 

program; the only thing I'm missing is the comparison for the 

FeedGAP program.  It's three and a half cents per pound again 

for heifers, steers; 1.6 cents for hogs; and 1.8 cents for sheep.  

But I don't have . . . unless the member opposite has the . . . 

remembers the numbers from the previous program, I don't 

have those here either. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, in round figures . . . and I don't 

have them either, that's why I was trying to get . . . but I'll take 

your commitment that you will supply them for me.  I know it's 

a policy that's well known, I just don't have them with me.  But 

for tomorrow I may pursue this further. 

 

I'm going to make this statement, and you can correct me if I'm 

wrong.  Cattle substantially had no change, sheep also.  Hogs 

have a 30 per cent reduction in the amount paid out to them.  

Would you indicate to me whether I'm right or wrong or within 

the ballpark. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We believe you're in the ballpark, 

but none of the officials here have those numbers at their 

fingertips. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- All right, thank you, Mr. Minister.  We'll 

leave that for now.  What I'm getting at is this:  my initial 

statement was that I wanted you to be able to express some of 

your philosophy to me, and this will supply me and indicate . . . 

perhaps alleviate some of the concern that I have as far as the 

red meat industry is concerned. 

 

If the cattle were essentially the same, why and what rationale 

was followed, to reduce proportionately that that was available 

to the hog industry?  Why was the hog industry penalized as 

opposed to the cattle industry, moving from the FeedGAP 

program into the interim red meat stabilization equalization 

program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- As I've indicated, we don't have 

those exact numbers.  I take the member's word that the 

proportionate decrease was greater with hogs; I believe the 

member's right on that. 

 

I guess part of the philosophy for this program has been to 

maintain the industry in Saskatchewan and the jobs and the 

spin-off that goes with it and that -- although I wasn't minister 

at the time that program was implemented -- may have had 

something to do with the economics of the industry at the time, 

or up to present time. 

 

We don't believe that this is the . . . probably the correct 

method to stimulate the industry.  We are largely competing 

with Alberta attempting to buy our 



1770 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1993 

industry and so that may have had some influence, the 

economics of hog production versus beef production, and the 

effect of lower rates on maintaining the industry within the 

province. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Wow, talk about going around in full circle.  I 

couldn't follow the machinations that you were treading and the 

circuitous route that you took to get to what conclusion I don't 

know. 

 

You were saying: I guess, this may . . . Mr. Minister, you have 

basically devastated a good chunk of the hog industry.  And 

you're saying that you did that -- and I wrote the word down -- 

to "maintain" and enhance the hog industry.  That's what you 

just said. 

 

And I'm asking you, Mr. Minister, how do you even remotely 

suggest that you're doing something to help maintain the hog 

industry by removing 25 to 30 per cent of what they were 

getting before you tampered with the FeedGAP program?  I 

don't understand your rationale there, Mr. Minister. 

 

You talk about competing with Alberta and the Crow offset 

that they've got.  It used to be $21 a ton.  What is it now?  It's 

been reduced substantially; but essentially in Saskatchewan it's 

been taken away completely.  Well if you're talking about us 

having to compete with Alberta, and I know your famous line 

is that we can't afford to compete with them . . . And that effect 

is being felt in our cattle and feeding industry as well, there's 

no doubt about that. 

 

But my concern is again the reduction that has occurred in the 

hog industry.  And as a matter of fact, unsolicited over the 

supper hour, a hog producer called me up and said, what's 

going on in the hog industry?  Well I said, the prices aren't too 

bad, they're around 65, give or take, right now.  That's low, 

because the industry's had up to $1.06 at its highest, but most of 

them are still making a little bit of money.  But that's not 

because of the price of the product, that's because of one 

farmer's gain is another one's pain.  And while the barley 

producer has been experiencing and is experiencing pain, the 

hog producer and the feeding industry of course is reaping the 

benefit for it.  So even if they can make a little bit of money at 

65 cents a pound, that's only because of the input costs being 

lower.  And there's a very, very thin, thin line that is being 

experienced by many producers out there. 

 

And you say one of your objectives is to maintain and enhance 

the feeding industry.  Well, Mr. Minister, what this fellow told 

me over the phone is that right now we're going to be getting 

17 to $19 less -- these are his calculations and we can argue 

about the details -- he's going to be getting 17 to $19 less per 

animal than he did in '92, thanks to your programs, thanks to 

your concern about maintaining the feeding industry.  His 

calculations are that because the hog industry has been hardest 

hit in deleting the FeedGAP program, that's $4 per hog per 

quarter; two and a half dollars per hog on the cash advance.  

And we'll come to that in a little bit.  Ninety cents to a dollar 

per pig, per hog, simply because your increases in power, your 

increases in utility rates, are a large, large component of any 

intensive livestock industry.  Now these are all of the negatives 

that you've thrown at the farmers all in one shot, and you say 

you are concerned about maintaining and enhancing the 

industry.  And I along with many other producers in the 

province are failing to see how you are even attempting to 

support the industry at all. 

 

My question to you, Mr. Minister, is on the cash advance.  Now 

the cash advance in all of the industries, I think, were $25 per 

beef animal and $3 per hog.  And I think it was the same for 

lambs, although it may have been 2 -- I'm not quite sure -- but 

essentially that was the cash advance with a small deductible. 

 

Now a lot of the farmers who accessed that program took that 

money, not just to support debts accrued already, but rather to 

make expansions on the hope that they would be able to expand 

and become a more viable part of the industry.  Now what you 

are doing is saying that cash advance is no longer going to be 

available to you; you have to pay it back. 

 

And what amazes me to no end, Mr. Minister, is while you are 

trying to maintain this industry, which has got . . . particularly 

the hog industry which has got -- and I watch what I say 

because a lot of my colleagues are in the beef industry . . . but 

one poor, lonely sow that costs you about 3, $400 to produce, 

will in an average year produce 20 piglets.  Now if those 20 

piglets are each worth $125, you can see that we get very, very 

close to 21, $2,400 produced by that one animal. 

 

And when you take . . . not a steer, but I guess when you take a 

cow, a beef cow, she's going to have one offspring that at the 

end of the year is going to be worth $700.  So you can see 

when you start taking a look at the capitalization needed in the 

hog industry and the returns and the multiplier effect, it's just 

particularly phenomenal -- it is phenomenal. 

 

Now when every time you put another handicap in the way of 

these producers it just short-circuits the entire system and 

people at Intercon and so on, all through the system, are in 

jeopardy of losing their jobs.  So if you're going to tell me now 

that the cash advance has to be repaid . . . and I understand that 

that has to be repaid in five years, it's got to be repaid by that 

time.  Am I correct on that?  Yes, he nods in agreement to that, 

that the five-year . . . it's a five-year term, you have to repay it.  

But at the same time you are charging them, the producer who 

cannot repay that, prime plus 2 per cent -- prime plus two. 

 

What do you get your money for, Mr. Minister?  Why would 

you charge prime plus two and make money on the backs of the 

farmers who are trying to survive and trying to increase the 

viability of their operation?  Could you answer that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, the member 

opposite asked a lot of questions and made a lot of statements.  

I guess in respect to the hog industry, we certainly believe that 

it is a viable industry and that 



May 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1771 

it is one of the great industries of the future for this province.  

The hog numbers are estimated to be up again this year 

substantially.  They've been increasing for a couple of years 

rather substantially. 

 

(2100) 

 

We have in Saskatchewan, we have the lowest cost of 

production of anybody in Canada for hog production.  We've 

got low cost, as the member pointed out, at the expense of grain 

producers perhaps, but we have low cost, high quality, and 

good quantity of feed grains.  We've got the capacity here that 

markets apparently are available.  SPI (Saskatchewan Pork 

Industry) is telling us that they can market more hogs than 

we're now producing.  So I think the outlook for the industry 

certainly looks bright.  I think, as their cousins in Alberta have 

done, is attempt to buy industry and to build industry on 

subsidies, I think that would do our producers a disservice if we 

attempt to subsidize industry and build up industries based on 

subsidies that we can't afford to sustain when at some point in 

the future we have to withdraw those subsidies because we can 

no longer afford them. 

 

We will, as I'm sure Alberta will soon find -- they are known at 

the Ag ministers meetings as the EC (European Community) of 

North America -- I think they will soon hit the same wall that 

we have in terms of ability to borrow money. 

 

As for the livestock advances, yes we're asking them to be 

repaid.  Those advances were let out at times when they were 

very tough for the livestock industry.  And now, as the member 

points out, certainly not rolling in gravy, but the livestock 

prices are somewhat reasonable and I think the $100 million of 

taxpayers' money that's out there, we're asking to be repaid. 

 

Prime plus two is a commercial lending rate.  I don't know 

what we borrow our money at these days as the province of 

Saskatchewan.  As you probably know our credit rating is not 

all that great, so I think it's certainly not at a great profit that we 

are lending money at prime plus two. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- You see, Mr. Minister, there you go again.  I 

think, I don't know -- those were your concluding comments.  

You're going by a wing and a prayer here again -- I don't think 

it's high, I think it's low, I'm not quite sure. 

 

Prime plus two is a high rate to pay.  I don't pay that much.  So 

why are you asking the farmers that are in dire straits already, 

even if you're going to be asking them to repay it over a 

five-year period of time?  I think the interest rate should be 

more reasonable than the prime plus two.  You're making 

money on it.  I'm sure you are.  You're making your money on 

the backs of the farmers. 

 

We could get into a discussion, I suppose, on subsidies and so 

on, but there's not much point in doing that because essentially 

and fundamentally I probably agree with you, that the worst 

thing that has hit the farming industry throughout the world has 

been this gigantic monstrosity of the subsidy wars.  And we all 

know where that has led, and that's not the direction to go. 

 

And while it may be fair for us to be without sin by having no 

subsidies whatever, we still have to be realistic, Mr. Minister.  

If the others are going to be playing a subsidy game, you 

cannot just stand in an ivory tower and say our hands are clean, 

we have no sin along that line, because there still has to be the 

semblance of a level playing-field. 

 

That's all we're asking, otherwise we're going to have the cattle, 

the feeding industry, going down South or going into Alberta.  

And the only reason the hog industry isn't following suit, quite 

frankly, Mr. Minister, is because it's extremely difficult to dig 

up the pits and move them into Alberta.  So I mean that's a 

handicap that those kinds of producers are experiencing. 

 

One further area that I want to cover, Mr. Minister, and that is 

on page 25, under vote 1, part 8, and there's a sub-program 

there, tripartite stabilization.  Now some of my colleagues may 

want to get into that a little bit as well, but here I want you to 

expound your philosophy, your outlook, your vision as 

Minister of Agriculture in Saskatchewan of what you see in 

store in so far as tripartite is concerned. 

 

Now I know at the annual meeting, for example, of SPI, the 

indication was made there that maybe it's time to pull out 

completely.  You could pull out completely, and I think you 

would have some support for that. 

 

But what do you see then -- let's assume now that you're going 

to get up and agree with me, that you're looking at it, that in a 

year's time or so on, we're going to be out of tripartite -- what 

do you see as an alternative?  What do you see as an alternative 

for that approach?  Is NISA (net income stabilization account) 

a route, for example, that you would be looking at, and if so, 

what have you got in mind along that line?  Just show me some 

of the vision that you have in the long term. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The member makes a good point.  I 

think the member knows that tripartite for both beef and hogs is 

up for renegotiation at the end of 1995.  Some of the livestock 

groups are showing some concern about possible trade 

embargoes.  The federal government and others are suggesting 

that NISA or some enhanced NISA should be the replacement 

for tripartite. 

 

I think as the province of Saskatchewan, we agree that we need 

some farm programs that are less distorting of production, that 

are more whole farm.  I think we can agree with most of the 

provinces and the federal government on that issue.  I think we 

tend to be concerned that there are still some safety nets in 

place that will, although maybe not be an income support, 

would act as safety nets for tough times. 

 

I think if you fill a feed lot or a hog barn full of feeder 



1772 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1993 

pigs or feeder cattle and the price drops 20 cents a pound, that a 

NISA account is not going to be adequate.  It certainly is not . . . 

You know, if you have a whole-farm NISA it takes away the 

distortion and it's whole farm.  It may be less of a problem in 

the area of trade, but certainly Saskatchewan is not in a position 

to abandon our farmers.  There are safety nets that we feel that 

we need. 

 

As you know, we have been talking to farmers about that this 

winter.  We have a Farm Support Review Committee who is 

wrestling with these very problems and have just very recently 

given me an interim report which I think says that, that they are 

concerned and that they are in agreement that we need to move 

to more whole farms so that we don't have programs such as 

GRIP that distort production on the farm, but that we do need 

some safety nets in place, also that we need national programs 

which means it's a matter of negotiations between ourselves 

and the federal government.  And I think we will be moving 

very quickly on those negotiations -- Ag ministers meeting in 

July -- so certainly we're talking to other provinces and the 

federal government as to just what would replace tripartite if 

indeed producers would want to get out of it. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

have a few questions I want to ask you -- kind of put a 

scattering of questions through of Agriculture, ACS, and Crop 

Insurance.  I just want to make a couple of remarks first, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

I think we've only asked you questions about two or three 

different times in question period this year and you seem to be 

quite disturbed, that we should have been asking you more 

questions.  So now we're here and we may be here for a good 

long time because we have lots of questions to ask you.  But I 

guess the reason agriculture wasn't of the importance, there was 

something far more important happened to rural Saskatchewan, 

and naturally our question periods were . . . 

 

And as you know, I was away a lot with my health, but I could 

see and watched almost every question period.  Closing of rural 

hospitals -- I didn't see you as Minister of Agriculture standing 

up trying to protect rural Saskatchewan.  Now they're going to 

close three schools in my riding this year, and they're going to 

maybe change the boundary lines.  All these things affect 

agriculture.  So naturally we had to go on questions in that 

manner, Mr. Minister. 

 

But I have a series of questions that I want to ask you here.  

First, something I heard on the news tonight.  They've 

increased the freight rates and it's going to be a heavy cost on 

farmers.  I'm wondering what your Department of Agriculture 

is doing about it or what requests are you . . . what are you 

doing about it, or have you done anything? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- To start with, Mr. Chairman, I was 

feeling a bit neglected with the lack of questions but I assure 

the member opposite that I no longer feel that way and if he 

were to quit early tonight 

I would not be greatly insulted. 

 

The increase in the freight rate, as the member opposite knows, 

is a result of a 10 per cent cut to the Crow benefit that was 

announced in December by the federal Finance minister.  We 

certainly have expressed our concern at that.  We have talked to 

and tried to join with farm organizations in getting the federal 

government to change their mind about that cut. 

 

We felt it's some $40 million to Saskatchewan which is 

certainly not acceptable to our grains and oil-seed producers at 

this time.  But it is federal jurisdiction and in the final analysis, 

barring persuasion of the federal government to change their 

mind, we have little, little that we can do to protect our farmers. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, thank you. Mr. Minister, 

that's exactly what I knew you'd come back to say: it's entirely 

federal, which you're right.  But when we were over there and 

you were over here, every time anything happened, you were 

always saying, why aren't you down to Ottawa fighting for 

farmers?  Now I don't see you . . . just because you haven't 

been successful for a year and a half, there's no reason why you 

can't keep on trying. 

 

At least you could let the farmers in Saskatchewan know.  I'd 

like to see a headline in the paper where you've been saying 

what you're telling me publicly.  Have you got some 

information that you could give the opposition so we can get it 

out to Saskatchewan farmers, where you have made requests 

about this situation?  Have you got anything you could show 

us? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We certainly can produce some 

press releases and letters that I have written to the federal 

minister.  In fact we've had a good deal of discussion with the 

minister, particularly Mr. Mayer, the newest minister.  In fact 

last time I talked to Mr. Mayer, he said he recognized my voice 

as soon as I said hello.  I'm getting to be his worst nightmare, I 

think. 

 

Talking on issues, we have made some headway, in all fairness. 

We have made headway in some areas, quality factor 

adjustment and so on, and crop insurance.  And I'm going to be 

meeting with Mr. Mayer this Friday in Winnipeg again and I'll 

bring the subject up again.  We just have not been able to come 

to any agreement with the federal government on this particular 

issue. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I understand.  I 

understand what caused the increase.  So would you commit to 

have any letters or . . . I know you can't give us a conversation 

on a telephone, but maybe just a memo of days you did call 

them, and any letters that you wrote or any answers you got 

back.  Would you commit that, Mr. Minister, then we'll get off 

this subject? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Certainly will.  We'll give all the 

correspondence we have with regard to Crow. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. 



May 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1773 

I'd just like to ask a few quick questions here.  How many total 

farmers are there in Saskatchewan now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Approximately 60,000. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- You're saying 60,000 farmers.  How many 

with quota books?  Because I'm saying total farmers.  I'm 

talking about total farmers.  There should be statistics that you 

should know at all times, or your officials should know how 

many farmers.  Because a lot of them are cattlemen and small 

farmers who don't have any quota books.  How many total 

farmers?  And then how many farmers with quota books? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Sixty thousand is the census farms, 

includes all farmers, livestock, with and without quota books.  

We don't have a number for farmers with quota books.  It's very 

difficult.  I suppose we could get the number of quota books.  

But many farms have three and four quota books, and so it's 

very difficult to get an exact number of farmers with quota 

books. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- So you're saying that total of 60,000 

included all farmers whether they're a 10-acre farmer or 50 

acres or with or without a quota book.  And I understand the 

difficulty in coming down to how many farmers are grain 

farmers with quota books because there can be two or more on 

one farm and what not.  But is there any way of getting hold of 

those statistics?  Somebody must be doing statistics on such a 

matter as that. 

 

I know they were available before, but I don't know whether 

somebody still can come up with those statistics or not.  Is 

there any way you can do it?  Give us a breakdown of exactly . 

. . this is what I'd like to know, I'd like to have it on the record.  

And if they can't do it now tonight, that's not a problem.  Some 

of these questions I'd just like you to take . . . if it's just for 

time's sake, if it's possible to maybe get us the answers.  I think 

it's important to know these things. 

 

How many farmers actually have quota books?  And also farm 

families -- how many farm families have quota books?  

Because that's the biggest part of our farm debt is farmers with 

quota books. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Certainly we can try to get those 

numbers.  I think we can pull them out reasonably close.  We 

have breakdowns as to, you know, the number with 25,000 

crossing over, and I think we can get a pretty good handle on 

the number of grain farmers or mixed farmers with quota 

books.  We'll get that number for you.  It may be a little 

difficult to get it dead accurate.  We can get, like, the number 

of census farms, 60,840 -- we know exactly that number -- but 

when you break it down from there, there's some guessing 

involved.  But we can get you an approximate number. 

 

(2115) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Okay, what I would like to have . . . Thank 

you, Mr. Minister.  What I'd like to have is, of those questions 

that I asked you . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . you'll be able to read in Hansard, you'll be 

able to read that in Hansard, the exact questions that I asked. 

 

So what I'd like to know is, of those, of each number that there 

were in December 31, 1991, and then . . . I know you can only 

do an average on it because I know it would be pretty near 

impossible to come down to the number.  That's all I'm asking 

for is what your department's coming up. 

 

Because these are the kinds of questions used to be asked our 

minister of Agriculture, and I know they had to go back and do 

quite a bit of work to get it.  And I'd like to have what it was 

five years ago and ten years ago.  There must be statistics to 

show all that.  Can you do that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, we certainly will.  And we 

have statistics and graphs on the number of census farms 

certainly, and we can attempt to break those numbers down into 

grain farms or farms with quota books if that's how you desire 

to see it.  And I think we certainly will do our very best to get 

those numbers for you. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, just so we can move along 

here quickly, I would say that the most farm . . . I know I was 

involved with constituents back as far as '82-83 on farm debt, 

but there wasn't many actually being moved off the farms.  But 

I think the most has happened in the five years.  So I wonder if 

your officials have a figure of how many farmers have 

completely lost their farms and have moved off. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- What again I can give you is the . . 

. We have from the '86 census to the '91 census, 2,591 less 

farms.  And again, those are census farms, and some 

bankruptcies, some lost their land, many we don't really know 

the reason.  Certainly they came upon hard financial times and 

just quit, or whether they quit because they retired.  Very 

difficult to get . . . we can get the number of bankruptcies for 

you but that's really not . . . I don't think you would agree that 

doesn't really give you the number of farmers who left because 

of financial difficulties. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Maybe we could 

break it down this way.  If we could get the information on . . . 

there should be information breaking it down, normal 

retirement and bankruptcies.  You should be able to get the 

figure on bankruptcy and farmers that just lost their land.  

There must be some kind of statistics on this.  If you could 

perhaps come up with those figures, or try? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We can attempt to get those 

numbers.  We can give you the number of farmers who 

received a foreclosure notice, which is a fairly good indicator, 

and we can give you the number of bankruptcies.  I don't know 

if we can break down the numbers between normal retirements 

and people who left because of better opportunities over some 

financial pressure, whatever, but we'll do our best to break 

those down for you. 



1774 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1993 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, thanks, Mr. Minister.  I 

understand difficulty in the questions I'm asking.  I'm just 

asking a few highlights of these questions and it may affect the 

questions that I'll want to ask when we come back onto 

estimates again, when I get your answers. 

 

I know that the big . . . we haven't touched the big farm 

problem here, by saying how many people lost their farm and 

bankruptcies, how many retired, and how many farmers maybe 

just quit and went away, you don't know.  The big one is, that 

shouldn't be hard for you to answer, your officials should know 

this one, is how many farmers lost their land and and leased 

that land back?  That should be a figure you should know.  

That's a very important figure, because that's the big number.  

We can say we have 2,000 less farmers, or 3,000, but the big 

figure is, how many people lost their land and are leasing it 

back for a short term? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We have approximately 3,000 

farmers who are on leaseback now from lenders -- some or all 

of their land is being leased back which is held by lending 

institutions. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Would you have a breakdown on how many 

maybe lost . . . Does that include farmers that lost some land 

and leased it back, or does that give you the figure they lost it 

all and leased it back?  Because we have lots of farmers that 

have still, maybe lost half their land and leased it back.  Do you 

have that breakdown? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We don't have the breakdown on 

that and I don't believe we can get that.  Private lenders will 

probably not give us that.  We can attempt to get it, but that 

3,000 includes the people who are renting some of it and all of 

it, and we don't really know the breakdown.  We may attempt 

to get that number for you, but we don't know that we have it 

anywhere. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, you should be able to get 

those figures from the boards.  Farm Debt Review Board, Farm 

Land Security Board, mediation services, some or other should 

be able to come up with all those figures.  They should know 

right to the farm.  There's no such a thing as just guessing at a 

round figure when it comes to . . . Every one of these people 

would have a foreclosure notice and there's a history on every 

one.  And I know you can get that. 

 

So would you undertake to go to the boards and . . . You should 

have had that here tonight.  When we were on the government 

side . . . and that was after our minister of Agriculture and your 

officials had all those questions right ready.  And we found this 

out last year.  We could ask the minister of Agriculture . . . He 

didn't have a clue what we were talking about when we asked 

the numbers of farmers in trouble.  It looks like you're exactly 

the same.  You don't know. 

 

And the most serious thing we've ever had happen in this 

province is the farm debt situations.  It's the worst since 1939, 

and here we have a minister that don't these answers.  How are 

you going to solve the 

problem or know how bad it is if you don't know these things? 

 

The first questions was just statistics.  But here we're getting on 

to something that you could get right from the boards.  Go over 

to the Farm Land Security Board.  It's under your Minister of 

Justice, and you should be able to get it.  He should be able to 

know it by memory.  Ask him if you don't know or your 

officials don't know. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well again, negotiations between 

private lenders and farmers may not be available to us.  We 

know the number, that there are 3,000 farmers who are leasing 

land from lending institutions.  Whether or not that is all their 

land or whether they are leasing land from their neighbours or 

still own some land is a pretty difficult figure to obtain.  We 

can certainly attempt to do that for you. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, we understand the member 

from Saskatoon Greystone wants to ask a few questions.  So 

I'm going to accommodate her, and I just want to ask a few 

questions pertaining to ACS.  How many total farmers took out 

the cash advance? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, as of March 31, 

there were 11,351 farmers with the livestock cash advance. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, I didn't ask that.  I said the 

cash advance and . . . I'm sorry, I meant the $25 an acre cash 

advance.  But I was going to ask both anyway.  So you're 

saying 11,000 took the . . . I didn't ask what has them out now.  

Who the total farmers that took out the livestock cash advance 

loan and the total farmers that took out the $25 an acre cash 

advance, the total that took them out in the first place. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The total number who took out the 

$25 an acre production loan was 57,614. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Now do your 

officials know the total . . . this is kind of a difficult one 

because capital loans went back a long time.  So maybe we 

should ask how many capital loans does ACS have on the 

books today?  How many farmers with capital loans? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- 6,109 who presently have capital 

loans. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, could you give us the status of 

the above?  Now first, how many have paid off their loans 

entirely?  I'll ask several questions together here for the sake of 

time here.  On the cash advance, $25 an acre, how many of that 

50-some-thousand have paid it off entirely and how many are 

still in reasonable standing and trying, and how many are in 

very much difficulty out there?  And the same thing with the 

livestock loans. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- For the production loans, there are 

11,506 clients who still owe money but are current in their 

payments.  There are 7,716 who are delinquent in their 

payments, who still owe us money. 



May 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1775 

And there are 2,755 who are in claims for recovery so they are 

in the process of attempting to . . . we're attempting to collect 

those loans.  They are the ones that are seriously in arrears. 

 

With the livestock cash advance, there are currently 8,530 

which are current and paid up.  There are 1,744 who are 

delinquent and 1,077 who are in recovery, or in other words are 

in some difficulty. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you tell me 

on the livestock cash advance loans, what your opinion is when 

they . . . how many of them went into difficulty when you quit 

the program or are calling those loans in over a period of time.  

What kind of a problem is that causing?  I mean maybe 

somebody was keeping their interest payments up or whatever 

they had to do and put them into arrears; maybe by calling 

these loans in put them into arrears automatically. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The first principal payment isn't 

due until August 1 of '93 so there is no payment due yet.  I 

think the ones that are delinquent are basically ones who 

haven't come in and renewed their loans.  So they're probably 

not a problem with them.  There's no interest on it.  They just 

haven't done the paperwork to renew their loans. 

 

The 1,077 that are in recovery are loans that are outstanding 

that the livestock is no longer there to cover or that sort of 

thing, so those are really the only people who are in difficulty 

at this time.  And really the effect of asking for a principal 

payment will not be felt until at least August when the first 

payment's due. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Yes, Mr. Minister, I think you're probably 

right there.  But I would expect maybe you might have a 

problem there.  If an individual is a complete cattleman, cattle 

operation, they'll probably be able to financially handle it 

because the cattle business has been pretty good, especially in 

the cow-calf. The feedlot has not been good and they may be in 

trouble and we can see why the cash advance on the $25 an 

acre's got the problem because there's been the price of grain. 

 

Now I just want to make a statement more or less in closing, 

and then we'll let the member from Saskatoon Greystone go 

ahead. 

 

(2130) 

 

I see a lot of problems in collecting past . . . a lot of 

inconsistency in collecting past-due accounts.  Maybe you can't 

do anything about it but . . . and rather than you answer now 

unless you want to is maybe you can discuss it when we're back 

on again and give me an answer to this question.  Because I can 

understand a lot of people in the community get upset when 

somebody gets a complete write-off.  And somebody . . . and 

then the next person who's in, they can't get any. 

 

But we understand there was some individuals, they quit 

farming, they got nothing left or they go bankrupt, or whatever.  

And if there was no money there to get, 

there's no money there to get.  And that causes a real problem 

with the neighbour down the road that doesn't know the 

circumstances.  Hey, why can't I get something off? 

 

But I see little inconsistencies.  I'd like you to think about this 

because I had a senior member almost come to me . . . came to 

me the other day and he's nearly 80 years old.  And he's being 

hassled by ACS, and he's taken part of his pension; that's all 

he's got, he's got no money left.  The land is . . . he doesn't farm 

it any more of course, and he's poor health, and he's being 

hassled.  And he's giving them, to keep from this hassling, he's 

giving part of his -- I'm just giving you one example -- part of 

his pension. 

 

And we found out about it and they've given . . . actually he's 

turned over a letter to me to go and deal on his behalf of him 

and his son.  But we're going to try to help this person.  But I 

hear lots of this out there, where the accounts are just sitting 

like this.  And one person, he can speak up for himself, maybe 

he's 50, 70, or 60 years old or whatever, and he's still in good 

health, and he can get up there and fight for himself and take 

care of what his finances in the best manner they can. 

 

But I see an inconsistency with people that don't talk up or 

don't know.  And I would like you to either answer now or at a 

later date, what is your real policy in past-due accounts if you 

got a . . . Like a government isn't like a bank, they can pretty 

well do what they want.  Have you got a consistent policy to 

handle past-due accounts? 

 

I know it's very difficult.  And we had that difficulty too.  But 

I'm just wondering what you're doing because it's getting a 

much worse situation now.  Now you don't have to answer that 

now, Mr. Minister, maybe a comment.  And then think about 

that till we come back on again. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, that's a very good question.  I 

think what we can do is put together in writing what our policy 

is and forward it to you, and then we can discuss it the next 

time we come back. 

 

Now as to the individual, you know if there's an individual 

case, feel free to forward it to my office and we'll have the 

officials check into the individual case. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  That's fine.  And 

I'm going to . . . the member from Greystone will ask you some 

questions.  I'm going to turn it over to her. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

I'm pleased to have the opportunity to ask some questions to 

which people in agriculture in our province are looking forward 

to and, I'm sure, are most interested in your responses. 

 

After reviewing the estimates provided, I noted that the 

Department of Agriculture experienced a cut of some 20 per 

cent.  In addition to this, the budget cut for Sask Water was 

proportionately larger.  In fact I think 



1776 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1993 

this cut equates 34.6 per cent. 

 

While the overall government expenditures were reduced by 

0.6 per cent, the cuts to Sask Water and the Department of 

Agriculture and Food are 34.6 and 20 per cent respectively.  

And it leads one to ask where the priorities are of government, 

and particularly when we're looking at water and food. 

 

Mr. Minister, I would like you to explain the priorities and how 

these cuts fit within the overall context of where the 

government is taking the province, since the cuts obviously 

affect your department substantially. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I certainly agree 

with the member that I think if she was hinting or implying that 

agriculture should be a priority, and certainly it is, it has been 

in Saskatchewan and always will be, I suspect. 

 

I guess what you have to look at is where the cuts came from.  

The cuts in, as we said, some 60 positions in administration and 

trying to deliver the same services that we deliver in a cheaper 

manner. 

 

Some of the major cuts that have a big impact on our budget, I 

think, $33 million in GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 

premiums which is half our cuts right there, simply because the 

formula in the program gives us a lower premium this year; 

16.4 million in Agricultural Credit Corporation, and that's 

largely due to winding down of the CAFF program, the losses 

there and interest rates and so on. So it's not a major change in 

program that causes that to decrease. 

 

There's 1.2 million in the farm purchase program which is a 

program that we repealed, although it was winding down in any 

case because of the low interest rates. So although the cuts . . . I 

think there's another 14 or $15 million that comes from an 

accounting change. We are paying back a loan to the federal 

government for the drought assistance that we got in 1988, 

paying our share back. 

 

Because of accrual accounting that was all accounted for and 

put into last year's budget or the deficit, or wherever it went, 

but it no longer shows up in our budget.  So that's another 

substantial cut. So although the overall percentage is great, it's I 

think quite explainable as to where it came from. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Do I understand 

then that what you're saying with overall expenditure 

reductions of the government being 0.6 per cent, and that with 

Agriculture this year plus coupled with what was cut last year, 

plus what has been cut from Sask Water, that somehow you're 

supporting that this was all justifiable and that the reason why 

your department got cut more than others is something that you 

can support relative to what happened in government overall? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I can support what happened in our 

department and to government overall.  As I pointed out, 

certainly we don't want to 

make cuts to Agriculture.  We made cuts across the piece; the 

choices were not easy.  I guess I've heard in this House that we 

shouldn't have cut health care as much as we cut health care; 

and I've heard in this House that we shouldn't have cut 

Education as much as we cut Education; and I've certainly 

heard that we shouldn't have cut Economic Development 

because that's hurting our jobs. 

 

And certainly I think with the basic agriculture we're delivering 

basically the same programs that we delivered last year.  We're 

doing some cuts in the department itself, and you know, 

certainly we don't like closing nine rural service centres and 

those sorts of things, but I think overall the thrust, the 

importance of agriculture is still there. 

 

If you look at it historically, you don't have to go back to . . . I 

think, very few years to the Ag budget was a hundred million 

dollars and we're now at three hundred-and-some million; so in 

historic terms, it's still a large amount of money spent on 

agriculture.  And overall if you take into account the gas tax 

rebates and so on that go to farmers, agriculture spending is 

something like $540 million that's from the provincial 

government. 

 

And although we certainly would like to spend more, I think it's 

a justifiable budget considering the financial restraints that are 

on us. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  It is interesting 

to look at the first page of the budget estimates.  This first page, 

I think, actually speaks some volumes.  It's interesting to note 

that the first five categories of expenses on that page increased 

while the latter five items did not.  And it's interesting, Mr. 

Minister, because the first five items, the ones upon which 

more money is being spent, all involve bureaucracy.  They 

involve such things as administration, accommodation, 

program delivery, policy and planning, and lastly, regulatory 

management. 

 

But it appears as though the government and the department 

have chosen to spend more money on these particular items 

while spending less on things that help farmers directly.  In 

other words, more is being spent on administration while 

cutting back on such things as research, extension assistance to 

farmers, income stability, lending programs and insurance 

programs. 

 

And I would like you please, sir, to explain how spending more 

in administration for the Department of Agriculture is supposed 

to help farm families in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I think the budget numbers are 

somewhat skewed by the reorganization process.  I think the 

administration can be explained by the fact that we pulled 

pieces that were in administration in other areas into one 

central administration to make it simpler.  The program 

delivery, 19 million, includes things like a lot of direct 

payments to farmers, the 4 million for leaseback, interim red 

meat production 



May 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1777 

equalization program, and so on, so ethanol, I think, subsidies 

and so on. So it's grants . . . program delivery actually includes 

a lot of money that's paid directly to farmers, and that increase 

is really not in administration but in program. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- The statement's been made, Mr. Minister, 

that I should make my questions more easy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, after 

reviewing the estimates of your department, I notice the overall 

expenditures then, on such things as administration and salaries 

and the administration of crop insurance, went up some $1.095 

million or 1.5 per cent from a year ago.  As administrative costs 

went up by over a million dollars, grants to third parties which 

include payments to farmers were cut by some $69.102 million. 

 

Mr. Minister, for each and every single farmer in the province 

of Saskatchewan, you cut farm support, be it in income support 

or otherwise.  And your cuts took more than a thousand dollars 

out of the pockets of each and every farmer in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So when combined with your cuts to GRIP last year, the cut to 

FeedGAP last year, the cuts to rural health services, the cuts 

without any plan to create any other development opportunities, 

how does this, in your mind, represent a commitment to farm 

families and to rural Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I agree that there shouldn't be any 

hard questions after 9:30 and it's past that time.  And that 

definitely was a hard question. 

 

I think the explanation is, the savings in program money comes 

from savings in premiums.  As I said, the 33 million that we 

saved from GRIP premiums just because of the way grain 

prices are, and the 14 million that we saved because of an 

accounting change -- we no longer pay back to the federal 

government on an '88 program.  Again, the administration is, I 

believe, a part of moving some of the administration from 

things like ADF and others that would have been in other votes 

into administration, as we tried to centralize the administration.  

As I pointed out earlier, we've downsized by some 60 positions.  

So certainly we took out one complete layer of management in 

the department. 

 

And I think overall it's something like 76 or 78 cents out of 

every dollar in our budget goes directly into the hands of 

farmers or industry.  So certainly we are not a department that 

spends a lot of money internally.  Most of our money goes 

directly into the hands of producers. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Chairman, 

Mr. Minister, I do want you to tell me about these 60 positions 

to which you have been referring.  Do we have a list of those 

60 positions that have been cut? 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That list, I believe, is in the 

material that you got -- at least, I hope you have. 

 

(2145) 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  In this year's budget, Mr. 

Minister, before . . . in the Estimates books before the financial 

figures for each department are introduced, the mandate for the 

department is written in full.  And before I ask my question, I 

just wish to commend you for making sure that that is there.  I 

see that as an important step in the right direction as far as 

accountability is concerned.  Despite that, the mandate of the 

department reads as follows, and I quote to you: 

 

 . . . foster a commercially viable, self sufficient, sustainable 

agriculture . . . industry. 

 

And my question to you is: how does a thousand dollars-plus 

cuts for each farm family in this province, plus cuts to research 

of $5.679 million or 32.2 per cent represent an attempt to fulfil 

that mandate?  In other words, how do these cuts represent an 

attempt to maintain a viable and sustainable agriculture 

industry in our province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well certainly the cuts, again, as I 

pointed out, being in premiums in GRIP and in an accounting 

change, the reason the premiums are lower is because grain 

prices have moved up a bit and certainly not anywhere near 

where we'd like to see them and certainly not where there is . . . 

farm families are out of the woods or out of a very stressful 

situation; however, they have moved up. 

 

The research component, basically have been reviewing the 

mandate and looking at particularly the ADF, the Agriculture 

Development Fund, for the past two years determining what 

mandate it should have, what . . . As you know most of the 

funding that they get is over a long period of time, four or five 

years or longer. 

 

What's happened is a lot of programs have wound down.  So 

while we've got considerable less money in the budget, there is 

still $2.1 million going into new research projects for this year.  

So certainly not as much as we would like to spend, but we feel 

that it's . . . we're back into research business.  But hopefully 

we're doing it, as we're trying to do everything else, in a 

targeted and efficient manner that will be of valuable research 

for the province.  So we certainly hope to continue with a 

strong research program that we believe will be the future of 

the agriculture in this province. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I think it's an 

appropriate time to bring a particular example to you this 

evening.  Some of these cuts in research, let's talk about them 

in real terms because there were research dollars lost to a 

particular department in the College of Agriculture.  And what 

it meant was the following: that the funding is now going to 

entirely to what would be called demonstration projects or what 



1778 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1993 

we call short-term research.  What was lost with cutting those 

research dollars were the only strategic, long-term research that 

was happening in that department, which its entire focus was on 

sustainable agriculture. 

 

Now I know that it's not left up to you what a university 

department chooses to do in terms of its choices, where it 

places its research dollars.  But I find it rather ironic when your 

department's mandate is to deal with sustaining the agriculture 

industry in Saskatchewan, that so many dollars are going into 

short-term research, rather than a focus on and support of 

long-term projects that deal with sustainability. 

 

And I'm not going to be criticizing you, but if there's anyone 

from the university listening tonight, I'd like to say that the 

decision made in that department to keep everyone, who in fact 

worked in one area, rather than spreading this out and keeping 

someone who was a very fine researcher, plus all the 

technicians, plus the over million dollars that this gentleman 

brought in from other research monies from around the 

country, is just a shock to me that this kind of thing could be 

going on. 

 

That was in a direct result of the cuts in dollars that came from 

this particular government to the University of Saskatchewan 

and they made those decisions.  To them -- and I don't hold you 

accountable for their decisions -- but to them I say this: if this 

were a school and they had to make some choices whether to 

keep two steno/clerks and they had two people who did 

janitorial services and what they chose was to keep was two of 

one or two of the other instead of one of each, I mean it just 

leaves me kind of bewildered. 

 

But these cuts in research are having very serious effects.  And 

this is one kind of an effect that we're going to be feeling 

directly because the sustainable research in agriculture in that 

particular department is now gone, and I think it's actually gone 

from Saskatchewan and gone from Canada. 

 

Not enclosed in your budget estimates, Mr. Minister, is a copy 

of your new organizational chart which you were kind enough 

to provide me with over a month ago.  And in relation to that 

chart, I notice that there are now three deputy ministers -- 

assistant deputy ministers, I stand corrected -- in the 

Department of Agriculture, rather than two as in the past. 

 

And this raises two questions:  would you tell me, Mr. 

Minister, what sort of salaries each of these assistant deputy 

ministers receive so that the people of Saskatchewan can know 

how much more they're paying to have another one of them, 

and secondly, can you explain to the people why it is necessary 

now in your new organizational chart to have three assistant 

deputy ministers rather than two? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, the assistant 

deputies make $6,100 per month.  We have only two of those 

positions filled and will not be filling 

the third one for the foreseeable future. 

 

I guess what the organization did was took out one total layer 

of management, so I think we had eight directors of branches 

who were removed and replaced with . . . We had, I think, eight 

directors and two assistant deputies; we now have, with the full 

complement, three assistant deputies.  We are functioning right 

now with the two assistant deputies and so essentially we've 

lost eight very high-paid managers' positions, and it's taking 

one level out of the department is the net effect of what we did. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  The 

organization chart for this department, while it might involve 

some improvements, doesn't really seem to represent anything 

new and I think the only thing I notice here is that planning will 

be placed in one central branch.  How that will have any great 

impact on farms in the province I think is a question which 

most farmers would like to have answered. 

 

And after some 19 months in power, I guess what we can do is 

look at this: you have removed the support program, however 

flawed, of the previous administration; you've removed some 

service centres; you've removed the Department of Rural 

Development; and soon FeedGAP's replacement is likely to be 

gone, I would suspect, similar to the livestock cash advance.  

So it appears that there's been a great deal of adeptness at 

removal.  Furthermore you have a discussion paper that has 

been presented to people throughout the province that 

addresses what appears to be the same old problems and offers 

no real new alternatives. 

 

Now given all of this, Mr. Minister, farm families in our 

province and I think people generally, would like to know if 

you have any further removal projects planned and what 

specifically your government does have planned for 

alternatives to create greater sustainability, and to in fact have 

some positive, direct results come out of this change in your 

organizational structure of your department. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I believe the reorganization is 

going to give us a focus.  It's going to let us concentrate on 

change.  I think the Department of Agriculture has planned and 

come up with the same sorts of programs and the same sorts of 

delivery for a long period of time.  We feel that agriculture is in 

for a significant change.  I think some of the things we need to . 

. . the paper that we have I don't think is hassling out the same 

old problems in the same old ways.  I think we are looking at 

some major changes in direction.  I think we need to focus our 

attentions of the provincial government not on pouring money 

to solve the immediate problems.  The $1.1 billion in 

hassle-free cash across the piece which just added to the debt 

problem of the farmers and nearly bankrupt us as a province is 

not the solution.  We don't feel, in particular in our economic 

situation, that we have the sorts of resources that can come up 

with income shortfalls that are caused by disasters or 

international price wars. 



May 17, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1779 

We think our role is much more focused on helping 

communities and producers to adapt and change to the 

conditions.  We believe that the disaster relief is really 

essentially a federal responsibility that we just do not have the 

resources to provide, and putting what little resources we have 

into not-well-thought-out programs is not the answer.  We 

think, as a member mentioned earlier, research and 

development, diversification, and all the things that I think we 

all know we have to do and have not been very successful in 

this province in the past hundred years, are things that we will 

try to be concentrating on. 

 

We're getting a lot of innovative ideas from rural Saskatchewan 

when we talk to people.  I'm very excited.  I think now we are 

on the verge of some change.  I think producers are and 

communities are, looking at change and looking at ways to 

survive.  They're not asking government for large hand-outs.  

All they're asking for is what can you do to help us a little bit.  

And that's hopefully what we concentrate on in very tough 

economic times.  We certainly are striving to keep a priority in 

agriculture which is, we think, our future in this province. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I couldn't agree 

more that if the province is going to diversify, what we're going 

to have to do is to become more and more effective and of 

course focus on our attempts, as far as value added industries 

are concerned, industries like ethanol, like canola-based 

biodiesel, like game farming and horticulture and specialty 

crops, as well as seed and grain cleaning. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, there is one significant barrier that 

continues to be in the way of those things, and that barrier 

happens to be tax policy.  You're asking -- and in fact you just 

told me -- that you would like people . . . or people are telling 

you to step out of the way and to do some few things that might 

in fact be concessions that would help them out.  And I couldn't 

agree with you more. 

 

The greatest deficiency in our tax policy is that our government 

wants to tax inputs rather than profits.  An example I think that 

I've probably raised on more than one occasion is regarding our 

fuel taxes.  Fuel taxes on ethanol, fuel taxes on locomotive fuel 

add to the cost of doing business and they deter people from 

diversifying in our economy.  The government recently 

extended the breaks offered to industry on E&H (education and 

health) for inputs. 

 

And when will it start turning to taxing profits rather than 

inputs so as to encourage agricultural diversification in our 

province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well certainly that's been a 

philosophy of our party for a long time.  I guess we are 

hampered somewhat in the tax regime that we have.  When we 

tax profits it's basically income tax, and we are stuck with the 

federal income tax system.  We tax whatever the federal 

government taxes plus we take a percentage of that.  Therefore 

it's difficult for us to raise those sorts of taxes as a province but 

we'll certainly keep on trying. 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 

 


