




















































Hansard: April 27, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1227 

 April 27, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: — According to order a petition regarding SaskPower 

presented on April 26 has been reviewed pursuant to rules 

11(6) and (7) and is found to be irregular and therefore cannot 

be read and received. 

 

According to order the following petitions have been reviewed, 

and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and received: 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased postpone 

consideration of The Health Districts Act. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — It is my distinct pleasure today to welcome 

and introduce five very distinguished guests to the members of 

the Legislative Assembly. Seated in the Speaker's gallery we 

have none other than the 1993 World Women's Curling 

Champions. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I would just like to tell our distinguished 

guests that this standing ovation doesn't happen to everyone 

that I introduce. 

 

I would like to at this time introduce the curlers individually 

and ask them to stand and remain standing. Ms. Sandra 

Peterson, skip; Ms. Jan Betker, third; Ms. Joan McCusker, 

second; Ms. Marcia Gudereit, lead; Ms. Anita Ford, fifth, 

alternate, and coach. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you very much. The members of the 

Legislative Assembly will have an opportunity to welcome and 

congratulate our guests following question period. We'll now 

continue with introduction of guests. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my pleasure to 

introduce to you and to members of the Assembly this 

afternoon, 72 grade 5 students from McLurg School who are 

seated in the west gallery. They are accompanied by their 

teachers, Mrs. Graham, Mrs. Taylor, and Mrs. Grant. 

 

I'm very pleased to see them here this afternoon. I hope they 

enjoy the proceedings and their tour. I look forward to meeting 

with them afterwards to have a brief visit to discuss some of 

the proceedings they have witnessed this afternoon. I would 

ask all members to join with me in welcoming these students to 

the Assembly. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have two groups 

of people to introduce today. They are seated in your gallery, 

four women who have a particular focus in dealing with 

matters that are before the Assembly and I won't mention them. 

I'd like them to stand. They're wearing the white ribbons. And I 

think each person here knows who they are. And I'd like the 

Assembly to welcome these people to the Assembly here 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, also seated in your gallery are 

some school students, grade 8 school students, 14 in number, 

from the Pense School. And I want to indicate that the member 

for Thunder Creek gave me the opportunity to introduce you, 

and I consider that a privilege. 

 

They're here together with their teacher, Mr. Doug Sthamann. 

And I want to welcome you to the Assembly and I'll be 

meeting with you later on to visit a little bit about what goes on 

in the Assembly, and we can talk about various things then. 

And I want the members of the Assembly to welcome those 

people here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to join 

with the Speaker in congratulating the Peterson rink, and 

particularly to say congratulations to some people who are 

fairly close to me, and that is Anita Ford's family. Her husband 

Gary is here, who happens to be my cousin. My aunt and uncle, 

Roy and June Ford are in the gallery as well as some 

newlyweds, Mr. and Mrs. Ewald Wagner who happen to be 

Anita's parents, and her father. They're celebrating as well. 

 

And I just want to say on behalf of the legislature, it's really 

nice to see them all here and in such good spirits. And we're so 

proud of you. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Premier's New York Speech 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Premier. Yesterday my colleague asked you 

about a Canadian Press story that said that your speech in New 

York included comments about increased farm receipts. In 

response to this question you, sir, graciously offered to provide 

the House with the text of your speech. The Premier said, and I 

quote: 

 

 I followed these notes very carefully, and I indeed distributed 

them to the media . . . I made no mention of farm receipts . . . 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, we felt it was very imperative that 



1228 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1993 

we follow up and indeed see what was said or what actually 

took place, and we were very concerned. And our staff 

followed up and contacted Canadian Press. We find out, Mr. 

Premier, that indeed what Canadian Press says and what you 

have said do not quite line up. Canadian Press confirmed that 

the speech you were giving out yesterday was not the same one 

that you gave to them at all. The speech you gave them did 

indeed contain comments about increasing farm revenues in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Premier, it would seem to me that by telling this Assembly 

that the speech you gave out yesterday is the same one you 

gave to the media, you've misled the House and the people of 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Premier, I would like to know how you 

explain this misrepresentation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the record will show 

what I said yesterday. But I don't believe, if my memory serves 

me correctly, that I said the speech which Canadian Press got 

was a speech which I delivered in New York. Whether that's 

the statement I made yesterday or not is really, in my 

judgement, irrelevant. What I did give to the members 

yesterday was the text of the speech which I actually delivered 

in New York. 

 

I have to tell the member also that after I left question period, 

one of the people in my staff indicated that it is decidedly 

possible that the text that you referred to, that the Canadian 

Press received, was an early draft which did have that reference 

but never was actually delivered. What was delivered was what 

was presented to you and to your leader yesterday. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And to the Premier. 

Mr. Premier, I believe you've indicated that there was the 

possibility that maybe the speech given to Canadian Press, as 

Canadian Press has confirmed with us, they received a different 

copy than what you handed out in this Assembly. 

 

And it would appear to me, Mr. Premier, that it would be 

appropriate to apologize to the Assembly and even apologize to 

Canadian Press for having presented one speech in this 

Assembly — the copy of a speech — and yet having given 

possibly a different one to the Canadian Press. 

 

Why not just come clean and apologize to the Assembly and to 

Canadian Press? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I don't believe I have 

anything to apologize for because I have indicated to the hon. 

member that the speech which I gave to New York city is the 

one that I've delivered over to him. 

There have been drafts which have changed. In fact the speech 

which I actually delivered in New York was being worked on, 

on Monday and Monday evening in New York, before I 

delivered it at Tuesday noon. 

 

So it's very possible that the script which was distributed to 

Canadian Press contained those words. If there was any attempt 

. . . any interpretation of an attempt to mislead, I totally 

withdraw that; that is not the intention. I simply remain in the 

position which I said yesterday, which is that the speech which 

I gave yesterday is the same speech which you have and that's 

in fact what was said. 

 

I think that explains the disparity, if there is any disparity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And again to the 

Premier, and I believe the problem, Mr. Speaker, the problem 

we face today is indicative of how the Premier operates. 

 

First of all, people in Saskatchewan really don't know where 

the Premier's coming from. It seems that the Premier is just 

telling us, well, he may have . . . the script he gave us was the 

one he gave to the business community, but he may have given 

a different one to the Canadian Press. 

 

You go to New York and tell one story; you come back here to 

Saskatchewan and tell a different story. Then you try to 

substantiate what you did by providing two different texts of 

the same speech. 

 

Mr. Premier, how many different versions of your address to 

the New York business community are there? Will you present 

them to the Assembly today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, this question really has 

got to take the cake. And believe me, the opposition surely to 

goodness must have more important questions to ask, Mr. 

Speaker. But perhaps they don't. 

 

I can assure the member that the speech which I gave to the 

Leader of the Opposition yesterday was the text of the speech 

which I actually in fact delivered in New York. The 

explanation I've given to you already in the two previous 

questions — there may be . . . for all I know, there may have 

been several drafts kicking around in advance of the one that 

was delivered, and I don't deny that to be the case. All I'm 

telling you is what I spoke and what I delivered was 

represented in the notes which was given to the opposite 

members there. So that's the situation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, one has to wonder exactly who's 

trying to cover up and who's trying to hide what. When the 

Premier starts to laugh and conduct 



April 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1229 

himself in the way he has today, it's a strong indication that 

something is hurting over there. In fact, when I look at the 

press release yesterday — Romanow citing increased farm 

receipts — did the Premier say that or did he not say that? 

 

On one hand he tells us he didn't; on the other hand the press is 

telling us this is what they indeed heard. Who heard the truth? 

What were . . . Were you exactly saying the truth, or do you 

have one story in New York and another one here in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I'm sorry that the hon. 

member is so agitated that I have reason to smile, but I have to 

tell the hon. member I do have reason to smile. We have finally 

turned the corner on the huge deficit that you and your former 

premier left behind. We have finally turned the corner . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — We have finally turned the corner on 

the wellness model, and people are beginning to understand 

and accept it. The prospects are looking better all around. And 

I've said to the hon. member — I don't know how many times; 

I will tell him one more time — what I delivered in New York 

and what I said in New York is the text that was given to you, 

sir. I invite you to read it. That is the position. 

 

You ask about the Canadian Press story, you ask the Canadian 

Press about the story; I told you about a possible explanation. 

You can accept it or reject it; you can do anything you want 

with it. That happens to be the truth. 

 

So it may irritate you to understand the truth, and it may irritate 

you that I'm smiling. But I tell you, I have a great deal of time 

containing my laughter at the low level of questioning in an 

important day like this in question period. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and again to the 

Premier. I find it very interesting that the Premier talks about 

Saskatchewan having turned the corner, and yet the headline 

reads: "Recession has hurt Saskatoon." You've talked to the 

farm communities. You talk to the farmers trying to get their 

crop in the ground this year. You talk to the people who are 

losing their jobs because of your decisions in health care. In 

fact this article yesterday, its text did not detail the 

government's decision to cut financing to dozens of small 

hospitals. 

 

It seems, Mr. Speaker, you say one thing in one place and 

another thing in another place like you did prior to the election. 

You told rural hospitals that everything is okay. You came to 

Regina and said no, we've got to make some tough decisions. 

Mr. Premier, people just are getting to the point where they 

don't really believe you any more, and that's the thing that is at 

stake here. Your credibility is at stake. 

Why will you not just take a moment to admit to the people of 

Saskatchewan that yes, you made a mistake, Yes, you 

apologized for that mistake and will get on with life. Why 

won't you do that, Mr. Premier? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, if the members of the 

Conservative Party wish to talk about credibility, I'm prepared 

to talk about credibility. 

 

It was, after all, the questioner's party and government that said 

in 1986 that the deficit would only be $380 million. And right 

after the election they came in with $1.2 billion deficit. And 

that's credibility. 

 

It was the government of the day that said that in fact all of this 

deficit and debt was manageable. And only when we opened up 

the books did we find that the province was teetering on the 

verge of bankruptcy. That's credibility. I could continue about 

the credibility. I don't think I have to take any suggestions from 

the hon. member opposite about credibility. 

 

And if the member persists in wanting to fight the 1991 

election all over again, I say to him, good luck. Someday, 

somewhere, somehow, he may wake up and in his own mind he 

may conclude that they won the election. But I want to tell him 

and the member from Estevan, you didn't. The people won; you 

lost; we're here; we turned the corner; we're building a 

brand-new, stronger province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, here 

again we see a Premier trying to cover his tracks. The Premier 

went to the people in 1991 and led people to believe that there 

was so much that he could offer — that there was more for 

health care, there was more for education, he was going to do 

so much more for agriculture, he was going to do so much 

more to build the jobs in this province. And what do we see? 

People leaving the province. Farmers having difficulty. On one 

hand he says there's increased revenues; therefore the province 

has turned the corner, we're on our way up. And yet on the 

other hand, talk to the people around here. 

 

Mr. Premier, why don't you take a minute and talk to the 

people? Will you take that minute and in fact take a close look 

at what you said and apologize to this Assembly and to the 

Canadian Press for misleading them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — This is absolutely childish, Mr. 

Speaker, and embarrassing. It's up to them what they want to 

do. They can continue this line. 

 

I will only simply say this. I will again at the end of question 

period, when the rules permit me, Mr. Speaker, I will give them 

yet the umpteenth copy of what we campaigned on in 1991. It's 

called "Let's do it . . . The Saskatchewan Way" and it says this: 

first things first, open up the books, and then talks about 



1230 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1993 

new directions; talks about the PST (provincial sales tax) that 

these people tried to put on in harmonizations; talks about our 

attempts to have open and honest, accountable government and 

work for quality of life. 

 

I'll mail this over to them again. That's what we campaigned 

on. We said that we would open up the books and work 

therefrom. Now when we opened up the books we saw exactly 

what kind of a mess that was there. I want to tell the House — 

and the members opposite themselves know this to be the case 

because their own constituents are telling them — they know 

that what we are doing is the right thing, that we have turned 

the corner, that we have a horrible task in front of us left 

behind by nine years. 

 

That's why you people are sitting third and so badly third and 

will be sitting so badly third for probably decades yet 

politically. They know that we're doing this and we're doing the 

right job. And you can represent anything you want. You can 

say anything with respect to the Canadian Press. I've given you 

the text, the text that I delivered to New York. That's the truth 

of the matter. Please accept it and just read it and understand it. 

It was a heck of a good speech, by the way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

Premier. Mr. Premier, just so that we can get you on the record 

one more time while you're so delighted with this line of 

questioning, it says here in Canadian Press and I quote: 

Romanow cites increased farm receipts. And you said 

according to them in New York there's increased farm receipts 

and that's why the Saskatchewan economy is going to do well. 

That's why your plan is working. 

 

Now you have a BBB credit rating. It's falling. You're worried 

about it . . . (inaudible) . . . no, no, ours was A; yours is a BBB. 

You've added over a billion dollars to the deficit and to the 

debt. You've added a billion dollars to the debt, and then you're 

in New York and you're quoted as saying: Romanow cites 

increased farm receipts. Then when you get home, the Wheat 

Pool and UGG (United Grain Growers Limited) and everybody 

else says, whoops, farm receipts are going to be cut in half this 

year. 

 

Now we know why you might have been tempted to say farm 

receipts are up in New York, but it's not true. So you come 

home and we call you on it. And we say, farm receipts are in 

half. And you say, well it must have been a different speech. 

 

Did you, Mr. Premier, actually say that farm receipts were 

increasing in the province of Saskatchewan when you were in 

New York city? Did you say that or not? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, for the fourth or 

fifth time, the answer is no, I did not. The 

answer is what the speech is given. That's the answer. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Blame the press. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I'm not blaming anybody; I'm telling 

you . . . You asked me a question, and I'm asking the former 

premier . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. I gave the 

member from Estevan lots of time to ask his question, and I 

don't think there was very much interruption. I would like him 

to listen to the Premier's answer now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I've given the answer to 

the hon. member. Before I take my place to complete my 

answer, I find it's passing strange from the member of Weyburn 

talking about credit ratings . . . Estevan, I'm sorry. There's 

something about him and credit ratings which is dangerous for 

the world. It was positively nearly fatal for the province of 

Saskatchewan on the downgrades that you administered to us. 

 

And — low and behold! — would you know, Mr. Speaker, two 

weeks after he was appointed to the board of directors of 

Cominco, Cominco got a downgrade but the . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I don't know what it is about you, sir. 

I don't know what it is about you, sir, but something about you 

and downgrades follows you just like Joe Btssplk in that 

cartoon that just is around all the time. 

 

Now we have turned the corner here. You have left us a heck 

of a mess. Please understand that. We have turned the corner; 

we're trying to control the debt situation. What we need here is 

your understanding and your support and not the stretching of 

the truth. You know what the situation is; I've told you before. 

What that speech that I gave you was is the notes that I 

delivered to New York and the words that I gave in New York. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier. 

Mr. Premier, you're wrong on two accounts. Number one, you 

haven't turned the corner because the farm income is cut in half 

this year, and that's not turning the corner. That's terrible. 

 

There's a recession on in Saskatchewan, particularly in 

Saskatoon. The food bank people, recipients are up 450 per 

cent. That's number one. You're not right in turning the corner. 

 

And secondly, you are now saying you didn't say this in New 

York; therefore the media must have got it wrong. So you're 

now blaming the media. 

 

You were down there trying to prop up your credit rating, 

which is BBB, knowing that farmers' income is going in half, 

there's a recession here, trying to prop 



April 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1231 

up your ideas, and when you get back home you get caught 

with your hands in the cookie jar. 

 

Mr. Premier, are you now saying that the media has got the 

story wrong, that you didn't say that farm receipts were 

increasing in Saskatchewan? Are you saying that CP (Canadian 

Press) is wrong? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I said very early to the 

hon. member from Moosomin, I've said very early in the first 

questions that the member from Moosomin asked, very, very 

simply this. I said that the Canadian Press story . . . after I left 

question period yesterday, one of my officials said, when I 

asked him about this story, how was this because I did not use 

those words in the New York speech and I gave you a copy of 

the New York text speech, the answer is, it may very well have 

come from an earlier draft of a speech which was given. 

 

I've said to the member before and I repeat again, that speech 

was being revised on an ongoing basis by myself right up until 

virtually Tuesday morning when I delivered it Tuesday noon. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Why would it have been in there in the 

first place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — So I repeat again to the member . . . 

Because I've given you why, the possibility of maybe why. 

You won't accept that, and that's the situation. So I mean, those 

are the notes that I've given. I've given them to the member 

opposite. I understand the farm receipts problem is a serious 

one. We know that's the case. 

 

That's not what the Canadian Press says I say. But I told you 

what I said in New York. But you people, I mean you're like 

the Bourbons — you'll learn nothing and you remember 

nothing, and you'll be condemned to third place in opposition 

forever as a result. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SEDCO Appointments 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the minister responsible for SEDCO 

(Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation). Mr. 

Minister, on April 13, SEDCO fired three vice-presidents. On 

April 22, SEDCO hired three new vice-presidents. According 

to the president of SEDCO, the three who were fired were all 

perfectly competent and will receive letters of recommendation 

from SEDCO. 

 

Mr. Minister, why would SEDCO fire three perfectly capable 

vice-presidents and then back-fill these same positions just nine 

days later? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to 

the member, just so he has things in 

context, some examples of the staffing and the changes that 

have happened in SEDCO since the election. 

 

I find it passing strange that the members opposite, who ran 

that corporation into the ground by investing in such things as 

GigaText and many other very, very bad deals, would have the 

audacity to stand in this House and be critical about a 

government that is downsizing and reorganizing that 

corporation. I mean it is just unheard of that they would believe 

that the mismanagement of that corporation would continue on. 

 

We have announced downsizing of the corporation; from 

December, 1991 — there were 81 positions in that corporation 

— to May of 1993 where we will have 63 employees. So while 

you may want to focus on one or two positions, in actuality 

there have been a number of changes in that corporation. And 

some of the people have moved on to other jobs in the 

community. Some have been elevated within the corporation. 

And there will be continual change in SEDCO to try to revamp 

it in such a way so that the hemorrhaging of money which has 

gone on for 10 years comes to an end. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, it turns 

out that one of the new vice-presidents is none other than your 

former ministerial assistant and business partner, Zach 

Douglas. So what you did, Mr. Minister, was fire three people 

who were performing their jobs perfectly well in order to make 

room for a patronage appointment of your buddy. 

 

After your election promises to eliminate patronage, you'd 

think that you wouldn't do those kinds of things, Mr. Minister. 

And in fact the president of SEDCO went on to say, I guess 

this is just an opportunity to test new blood. Is this, Mr. 

Minister, an opportunity to test new NDP (New Democratic 

Party) blood? 

 

Isn't the so-called reorganization all about that, Mr. Minister? 

It's simply an opportunity to create a new position for your 

friend Zach Douglas who passes the NDP blood test. Is that the 

reason? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to 

the members opposite that three individuals who were 

appointed by the president as VPs (vice-president) are Mr. 

Zach Douglas who has a Bachelor of Law degree from the 

University of Saskatchewan. From 1984 to the date he started 

working for our government he had his own consultant firm, 

and before that worked with the government in the Department 

of Tourism. 

 

The other individual, Brent Krajewski, had been a member of 

your government in the economic policy division. He was also 

part of the Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation 

under your administration. That's another one of the new VPs. 



1232 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1993 

The other individual was Mike Fix, Michael Fix. You will 

know Michael because he worked in the . . . as a manager of 

loans and investment for the Saskatchewan Economic 

Development Corporation, hired by your administration in 

October 1980 . . . or 1990. 

 

So I say to you very clearly that the three new vice-presidents 

are all qualified, some who were hired by your government and 

one who was hired by our government. I make no apologizes 

about the fact that we're making changes at SEDCO which this 

year alone, as a result of the bad loans that your administration 

set up, lost $47 million. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The vice-president that 

was hired by SEDCO, Mr. Zach Douglas, was your former 

assistant and he also was your former business partner. Mr. 

Minister, I wonder if you would tell us how much Mr. Douglas 

will be making? Is he qualified for the position other than just 

being your former assistant and business partner, and does he 

in fact pass the NDP blood test that we mentioned before? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to reiterate 

that all three of the new VPs that were hired as the result of the 

recommendation from the president to the board of directors 

are all very competent. Some of them who I mentioned 

previously worked with your government, and an individual, 

Mr. Zach Douglas, who is very competent. And we will see, I 

think, as a result of these changes, a corporation that much 

better meets the needs of the business community than the 

operation that you had set up under the previous 

administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

minister says this is all about a restructuring program. But on 

the very same day that you fired these three vice-presidents, an 

article on the same page of the Star-Phoenix quoted you as 

saying you haven't decided how SEDCO is to be restructured. 

 

Mr. Minister, why are you making major personal changes in 

the department of SEDCO if you haven't decided on what kind 

of SEDCO . . . what SEDCO's role is to be in the future? And 

why couldn't these three existing VPs have continued in their 

positions under a restructured SEDCO? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, if the member would 

listen to the answers rather than read the prepared questions 

that are put in front of them, he would remember that I have 

just indicated that we are downsizing SEDCO from 86 

personnel positions to 63 in this year — not 3 but it will be 23 

positions that 

we're reducing. 

 

Why are we doing that? Because I'll tell you the corporation 

was badly mismanaged by your government when they were in 

power. And I tell you I make no apologies, just . . . And not 

unlike a corporation, whether it's Chrysler or whatever, when 

they're losing money and have a bad operation, you make 

changes to the administration. And we are making those 

changes to SEDCO. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, restructuring has become your 

government's word for the process of firing perfectly capable 

people and replacing them with NDP patronage appointments. 

You've restructured NDP hacks into Education. You've 

restructured NDP hacks into SaskTel. You've restructured NDP 

hacks into Crop Insurance. And now you're restructuring up a 

job at SEDCO for your NDP hack and friend, Zach Douglas, in 

SEDCO. How many more government employees can expect 

to be restructured, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, at a breakfast meeting 

with the Regina Chamber of Commerce that I attended with the 

Premier, the topic of SEDCO came up. And one of the things 

that is clear to the business community, and they're telling us 

very clearly, that the operation that you people had set up in 

SEDCO has to be changed and was a terrible mess. That's what 

they're telling us. And what they said to us is the changes we 

have made to date are impressive and they support. 

 

And I want to say that you people are so out of touch with 

what's happening in the business world that they are amazed 

and we are amazed that you even represent 10 positions in the 

Assembly. And I'll tell you that unless you get a handle on the 

reality . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Why is the Premier on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 

introduce a motion, with the consent of the House Leader for 

the official opposition, respecting our special guests. 

 

The Speaker: — I think the Premier has to wait till we get to 

orders of the day. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the reality is the 

opposition has a series of Bills which they want to introduce; 

we have some. Rather than delay the tea, I'm asking leave of 

the Assembly, at their suggestion, in the management of the 

House, to move to this item now. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

MOTIONS 



April 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1233 

Recognition of World Curling Champions 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 

and thank you very much, Mr. Opposition House Leader. I'll be 

very brief. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and members of the House, at the conclusion of 

my remarks I'll be introducing a motion, seconded by the 

member from Rosthern, respecting our very special guests, the 

world champions. 

 

And my remarks here are going to be very brief and to the 

point. 

 

I think everybody acknowledges that an accomplishment of 

this magnitude really is something which should be noted and 

remembered. It's not very often that you can say you're a world 

champion in any endeavour, and an endeavour which is as 

difficult and as challenging as so much an instrumental part of 

Saskatchewan and Canada as curling is. Our special guests are 

the world curling champions. 

 

It's a wonderful term: world curling champions. And they come 

from Saskatchewan. They represented us very well, very 

optimistically, and cheerfully all the time. They went through 

the Scott tournament of champions, won that, The World 

following on this. It's wonderful to have watched their progress 

through Geneva to victory, and we're all very proud of them. 

We'll be honouring them appropriately in a tea in a few 

moments. 

 

And with those few words, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move, 

seconded by the official opposition House Leader, the member 

from Rosthern: 

 

 That we, the members of the Legislative Assembly, extend 

congratulations to the Peterson rink of Regina, including 

Sandra Peterson, skip; Jan Betker, third; Joan McCusker, 

second; Marcia Gudereit, lead; and Anita Ford, coach and 

fifth, for their superb performance and distinguished 

accomplishment in winning the World Women's Curling 

Championships. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's with a great deal 

of pride and pleasure that I get up to second the motion made 

by the Premier. And as the hon. curling team has just noticed, 

it's not very often that we agree on things in this legislature. 

But certainly here the Premier has our heartfelt support in this 

motion that he has just made. And I want to go through just for 

a few moments with a few ideas as to why. 

 

Because curling, Mr. Speaker, has a long history in 

Saskatchewan. Following suit of the European and Scottish 

rural workers who began curling with dry stone rocks on frozen 

lochs and moors, Saskatchewan people have grown to develop 

their own curling traditions. And these traditions, Mr. Speaker, 

have 

continued on for generations. Keen competition, spirited 

audience participation, and strong, friendly heritage are key 

ingredients of the success of this sport. 

 

Curling in Saskatchewan is not just a sport. It has over the 

years become a way of life. And it is the way many 

Saskatchewan friends and families, young and old, enjoy the 

long winter nights that we have in Saskatchewan. 

 

And as the Premier said, Mr. Speaker, it isn't every day that 

Saskatchewan athletes receive worldwide recognition. But 

Sandra Peterson and her curling companions have done just 

that. 

 

Starting at the city level, Sandra's team won the southerns, then 

they won the provincials, and proceeded to the Scott 

Tournament of Hearts in Brandon, Manitoba. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the measures of importance of any game is 

the prestige of its championship play-offs. Hockey has the 

Stanley Cup. Baseball has the World Series. Football has the 

Grey Cup. And the world of curling has the fame of the Brier. 

And this has been built by men and women who have made it 

one of the famous sporting events in Canada. And I'm sure, Mr. 

Speaker, that all members will agree that as much as any 

curling event in Canada, the Canadian curling championship 

has helped to unite Canada in a manner that has never been 

done and achieved through economics or through politics or 

virtually by any other means. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the Sandra Peterson rink of Regina . . . 

excuse me. Finally, Mr. Speaker, the Peterson rink of 

Saskatchewan — because we're including all of you now — 

has achieved that goal in Geneva, Switzerland. Here the world 

watched five Saskatchewan women achieve the highest honour 

in the sport of curling. 

 

Congratulations, Sandra, Jan, Joan, Marcia, and Anita, for a 

long-fought victory that you all deserve. And Saskatchewan, 

I'm sure, is joining me in saying that they are very, very proud 

of you. But I want to leave you with one short message and 

challenge. Next year you are going to be Team Canada, and 

what I want you to do is to be in the finals of the Brier curling 

against the other Saskatchewan team. Good luck. 

Congratulations. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I agree with my 

colleagues that curling is as much of Saskatchewan as snow 

and the Roughriders. And in Saskatchewan there are heroes 

everywhere, people who put their souls into what they do best. 

 

Today we are saluting Sandra, Marcia, Joan, Jan, and Anita, for 

their fabulous performance at the Scott Tournament, the 

Canadian championships, and the Worlds. The thrills that 

you've given all of us have drawn right to the button of our 

hearts. All of us 



1234 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1993 

applaud you, not just for your victory but for your years of 

sacrifice and dedication, your intensity, and your solid 

commitment to excellence in your sport. 

 

Curling and politics have a lot of common terminology. Blank 

ends, lightweights, hacks, freezes, and my personal favourite, 

keeping the house clean. 

 

Today in honour of your achievement, we are peeling off our 

political guards and burying our shots for a few moments so we 

can tell you how proud we are of you, Sandra, and your team. 

And I join with my other members of the Legislative Assembly 

in congratulating all of you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

members of the Assembly, it is my privilege to introduce to 

you, Sandra Peterson, skip. Sandra Peterson has been curling 

for 18 years and has established a national reputation as a 

first-class curler — and I think we might update that to read an 

international reputation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

She is employed by the city of Regina as a supervisor at the 

South East Leisure Centre. When not curling or working, 

Sandra enjoys gardening, golf, and playing with her dog, P.J. 

 

Now the notes I have, Mr. Speaker, state that Sandra admits to 

being forgetful and absent-minded; for example, leaving her 

purse in the airport lounge — and this was confirmed by her 

colleague, Jan, who looks after her. One day Sandra decided to 

iron out the wrinkles of her new curling pants, and in so doing, 

she melted a hole in the only pair she had to curl in. 

 

Now none of these are characteristics, Mr. Speaker, that she 

displays on the ice, where she epitomizes a tremendous ability 

to concentrate. When asked what has been her most exciting 

moment to date, Sandra responds, I just lived it by winning the 

Canadian and World Championships. I would say the people of 

Saskatchewan and Canada were delighted to be able to share 

those moments with her. Ms. Sandra Peterson, skip. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, members of the Assembly, it's 

my privilege to introduce Jan Betker, third. Jan Betker is a 

distinguished curler of 20 years and many championships, the 

1984 Canadian Mixed Championships and three provincial 

ladies' championships, to name but a few. 

 

Jan finds humour in everything, much to the delight of her 

team-mates. And she can do — this I have to see — facial 

impersonations of people and animals, keeping everyone in 

stitches. I'll just mention that a lot of the members of the 

legislature share that talent so maybe . . . 

 

Jan looks after Sandra — this confirms the other comment — 

and her forgetfulness and generally 

keeps her on track. When Jan is not curling, you'll find her 

working at Laurie Artiss, swapping stories on the latest curling 

techniques. She enjoys reading, golfing, and playing with her 

dog, Einstein, and says by far the most exciting moment to date 

was winning the world's women's curling championships. 

 

Again, Ms. Betker has proved that although you are third, you 

can still be first. Jan Betker, third. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it's my privilege to introduce to you and though you to 

members of the Assembly, Joan McCusker, second. 

 

Joan McCusker is an elementary school teacher at Dr. A. E. 

Perry School in Regina and has curled for 16 years. She 

inherited her love for curling from her parents, who, along with 

her three brothers and three sisters, are all avid curlers. 

 

Joan is the effervescent member of the team who maintains a 

high level of enthusiasm even in the most difficult of times. 

And it's stated that while going through security at the Regina 

airport to Switzerland, Joan was detained because the scissors 

in her handbag, used for cross-stitching, turned out to be a 

quarter of an inch longer than regulation allowed. As you 

know, in federal regulations, as in curling, a quarter of an inch 

is everything. 

 

Fortunately for the team, Joan and her scissors arrived in 

Geneva on time. Joan manages to squeeze in time to cycle, 

jazzercise, play fastball, slow-pitch, and be a mom to her 

8-month-old son, Rory, and wife to her husband Brian. 

 

The most exciting moments to date for Joan were winning the 

world's women's curling championship and the birth of her son. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Joan McCusker, second. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, it's my privilege to introduce to 

you and to all members of the Assembly, Marcia Gudereit, 

lead. Mr. Speaker, Marcia Gudereit is employed as a systems 

analyst by CDSL (Co-operators Data Services Limited) in 

Regina and has curled for 15 years. 

 

She's the quiet member of the team with an infectious laugh 

that can be heard throughout the curling rink, invariably getting 

her team members going. And I might add that she's got them 

going all the way, so that's great. 

 

When not curling or at work, Marcia enjoys softball, cycling, 

reading, cooking, and I'm informed she especially likes eating. 

She also enjoys spending time with her husband, Kerry, who I 

believe was a member 



April 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1235 

of last year's Brad Hebert Saskatchewan champions curling 

rink. 

 

Marcia has had three most exciting moments to date: winning 

the Canadian women's curling championship, the world 

women's curling championship, and getting married. 

 

We are all very proud of her and her accomplishments. 

Congratulations to Marcia Gudereit, world champion lead. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kujawa: — Mr. Speaker, members, it gives me great 

pleasure to introduce Anita Ford, fifth, alternate, and the coach 

of this team. Her colleagues say that she is the best-organized 

person that there is in the world. They couldn't get along 

without her. They need her to do the things that they do. 

 

She is, I am told, a person who is quiet, with a dry sense of 

humour who rises to the occasion as she did in the daily draw 

which she won without having thrown a rock all week — this 

to the consternation of Marcia, who normally wins this event. 

 

She works as the office manager of the Gold Square Physical 

Therapy Clinic. Besides that, she's been curling for some 30 

years, finds time for softball, golfing, drawing, coaching, and 

helping her husband, Gary, on the farm. 

 

This has to be special for anyone, and in 1990 I think it was 

special for her. She watched her daughters, Atina and Cindy, 

win the Canadian Junior Curling Championship, which got 

them to Glasgow for the championships the following year. 

 

Anita Ford: fifth, alternate coach, world champion. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to add my 

congratulations to the world curling champions, and a special 

one to the second, to Joan. And she's sitting there wondering 

why. 

 

My constituency includes Raymore, Strasbourg, and Semans, 

where Joan was a teacher and the coach of the curling team up 

there, and coached the team that curled against, when my 

daughter Corrine skipped the team in Strasbourg. So on behalf 

of Last Mountain-Touchwood and Raymore and Semans area, 

we congratulate you. I will say that you look very well in red; 

it's a good colour. 

 

I remember talking to Joan in the Strasbourg curling rink once 

and she said that she was looking for a team that took the 

curling a little more seriously, and I think you have finally 

found that team. You can't get much more serious. Enjoy your 

time with your new son and your family, and congratulations. 

We'll look forward to seeing you there again next year as Team 

Canada. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Motion agreed to. 

 

House Recess 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, in order that we 

might adjourn for a moment and go have a cup of tea with the 

world champions, I move, seconded by the member for 

Saskatoon Riversdale: 

 

 That this Assembly do now recess to greet our distinguished 

guests and reconvene at the call of the Speaker, which I 

understand to be about 30 minutes. I so move. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Speaker: — Before the House is recessed, I just want to 

remind members that the bell will ring, and you will have then 

five minutes to reconvene. And that's approximately one-half 

hour from now. The bell will ring, and you will have five 

minutes to reconvene. 

 

This House stands recessed at the call of the Chair. 

 

The Assembly recessed for a period of time. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

A Bill to restore health care services to the 

community of Lampman 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 

the first reading of a Bill to restore health care services to the 

community of Lampman. 

 

The division bells rang from 3:32 p.m. until 3:34 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Neudorf Britton 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd Goohsen 

Toth  

— 7 

Nays 

Wiens Murray 

Simard Hamilton 

Tchorzewski Draper 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Teichrob Flavel 

Shillington Scott 

Solomon Wormsbecker 

Kowalsky Crofford 

Carson Knezacek 

Mitchell Keeping 

Bradley Carlson 

Koenker Renaud 

Lyons Langford 

Calvert Jess 

— 28 

 

A Bill to restore health care services to the 

community of Lafleche 



1236 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1993 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 

the first reading of a Bill to restore health care services to the 

community of Lafleche*. 

 

The division bells rang from 3:37 p.m. until 3:38 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Neudorf Britton 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd Goohsen 

Toth  

— 7 

Nays 

Wiens Hamilton 

Simard Draper 

Tchorzewski Whitmore 

Lingenfelter Flavel 

Teichrob Scott 

Shillington Wormsbecker 

Solomon Crofford 

Kowalsky Stanger 

Carson Knezacek 

Mitchell Keeping 

Cunningham Carlson 

Lyons Renaud 

Calvert Langford 

Murray Jess 

— 28 

 

Bill No. 54 — An Act respecting the Department of 

Economic Development 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it's my privilege to 

move first reading of a Bill respecting the Department of 

Economic Development. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 3 — An Act respecting Health Districts 

 

The Chair: — Order. I would ask the minister to introduce the 

officials who are with her here today. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I 

would like to introduce to my left, the deputy minister, Mr. 

Duane Adams*; and immediately behind me, Ms. Kathy 

Langlois*, the executive director of the financial department in 

Health. And to her left, Mr. Jim Engel, health planning and 

policy planner in the Department of Health; and to his left, Mr. 

Gerald Tegart, solicitor in the Department of Justice. Thank 

you. 

 

Clause 1 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 

over the past number of months, a number of communities 

have been really questioning whether or not your government 

is indeed following the proper process and format and if indeed 

your government and your department actually knows or has a 

plan for . . . long-term plan for health care in this province. 

 

We've seen in my communities in my constituency, 

constituencies across the province, and when we talk about 

constituencies across the province we must also refer to the fact 

that the constituencies here in the two large centres of 

Saskatoon and Regina . . . Because the decisions that you have 

made — unilaterally made, I might add — lately are affecting 

people in a broad spectrum right across this province. 

 

(1545) 

 

Well last night in questioning regarding the department and 

regarding Bill No. 3, a number of questions were asked of the 

Associate Minister of Health. At that time the Associate 

Minister of Health indicated that he would have a number of 

answers or at least answers for some of the economic decisions 

of what was the reasoning behind the decisions that you're 

making regarding the cutting down of health care. 

 

Could you . . . I believe . . . what consultation process, what the 

finance or the remuneration to boards and chief executive 

officers . . . and there was a number of areas that I think even 

when people around the province of Saskatchewan are asking 

themselves . . . at the end of the day are we really going to save 

any money. 

 

And I'm wondering, Madam Minister, if indeed you would 

have the responses or at least responses to the questions that 

were posed last night so my colleagues can have a chance to 

review them, and give us a chance to assess the responses to 

those answers and look at the numbers and see what we can 

arrive at. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to whether or 

not there is really going to be any savings in this health care 

direction, I want to make this point. And I will tell the member 

that there are some. I do have some material which I'll be 

shortly sending over that comes as a result of the questioning 

yesterday. But as to the general question of will there be any 

savings, there already has been savings. There have been 

savings in Regina and Saskatoon and Prince Albert that have 

been in the millions of dollars. I think . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — How much? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Well I'll give you some approximations. 

I think it's around 6 or 7 million in Saskatoon; around 5 to 6 

million in Regina. And Prince Albert are still working on their 

plan and have indicated that there will be, for example, fewer 

reductions. Because they are operating as one board, they are 

able to absorb the funding reductions more effectively. 



April 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1237 

The fact is, is health care has been reduced. The spending in 

health care has been reduced, and getting into a one-board 

concept or a district concept helps people to deal with funding 

reductions. There have already been very substantial funding 

reductions in the health care area, and particularly in the two 

major cities, as a result of last year's budget and this year's 

budget. And the fact that they have had district boards have 

enabled them to cope better with those funding reductions. 

 

With respect to job loss, for example in Saskatoon, the 

Saskatoon Health Board indicates in its report that most of the 

people who were laid off as a result of funding reductions last 

year have been hired back into the system through proper 

management and through a proper labour strategy. This would 

not have happened if we had had a series of separate boards in 

those cities. 

 

P.A. (Prince Albert) indicates that they are able to achieve the 

same sort of rationality in the system, reducing the impact of 

funding cuts by government. And that is key. 

 

And I want to make this point. Funding reductions are going to 

take place regardless of whether we have district boards and 

district amalgamation in the province. We have a huge deficit. 

The government is attempting to get a handle on it, and there 

will be budget cuts. What getting involved in a district does is 

it helps those boards in those communities to deal with those 

funding reductions. It helps them to coordinate and integrate 

services, and in the long term, through that coordination, to 

provide a more comprehensive range of services to 

communities throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

So the members are coming from the perspective that once you 

get into these boards there will be savings, and I believe there 

will be. But I want to remind them that there are already 

reductions, and getting into boards quickly will help our 

communities to deal with those reductions. And certainly 

where they have been into boards, the impact has been reduced, 

and they are coping more effectively with many of the budget 

reductions. So I just want to make that point generally about 

savings. 

 

The second aspect of that point that is really important is that 

health reform, getting into boards and operating in a more 

coordinated fashion, is not only to be able to deal with deficit 

reduction and funding cuts and not only to achieve economies 

of scale, but also to provide the coordination and integration of 

health care services that is necessary to lead us to a better 

health care system in the years to come. If we can provide more 

community-based services — and we have to free up 

institutional dollars to be able to do that — if we can provide 

more therapies, if we can get doctors organized in group 

medical practices on a district basis, if we can achieve all these 

things that we believe we will achieve through district 

coordination, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Chair, I'm sorry, we will be 

able to provide a better-quality health care system into the 

future and for future generations. 

So reform isn't only to save or to deal with budget reductions. 

Reform is also to move to a higher-quality health care system, 

to save medicare for future generations because we need an 

affordable system in Saskatchewan. And if we can move to an 

affordable system, we will save it for future generations, unlike 

some other jurisdictions that are talking about privatization of 

health care. 

 

Now I do have some information for the members opposite, 

and my deputy is just getting it together. As soon as he's had an 

opportunity to put a package together for you, we'll send it 

right over. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, we trust that that information is 

coming over immediately because we had asked for it last 

night, and I think the deputy minister was here and would be 

aware of it. 

 

Madam Minister, you made some comments about how much 

more effective and efficient boards will be by going to regional 

boards and how much you're going to really save. And one has 

to ask themselves really how much, in the long run, will you 

save? 

 

Now I trust that the information the deputy is sending over as 

quickly as possible indicates the remuneration that all board 

members will be receiving because, Madam Minister, when 

you take a look at where we are today, most board members 

presently serving health care and health boards across the 

province of Saskatchewan are pretty well doing their duty on 

gratis*. The only remuneration most board members receive, 

especially in the rural areas, comes through funding that they 

receive from rural RMs (rural municipalities) and communities, 

their municipalities and communities. So I don't know exactly 

where you're going to find savings by building larger boards 

and having excessive remuneration* in place for these boards. 

 

Secondly, Madam Minister, if you're going to put chief 

executive officers in place to address the different needs — and 

I'm not exactly sure whether you mean one to address health 

care in a region or hospitals in a region; one to address home 

care in a region, and a chief executive officer to address care 

homes, Madam Minister — where are you going to find the 

savings? All what you're doing is basically another 

bureaucracy, another level of government here in the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

So I would like to know how you intend to find savings when 

indeed what you're suggesting, actually from what I can put 

together and just by adding up the numbers, it would appear to 

me that there is an additional expense that is going to be 

incurred by the department, by this province. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to that 

question about how many CEOs (chief executive officer) are 

you going to have. These will be decisions the district boards 

will make. 

 

In Regina, for example, they are looking at . . . in 



1238 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1993 

Saskatoon there are, have been, two CEOs, for example, 

replaced by one. And this kind of the thing is happening 

throughout Saskatchewan where there are district boards. In 

other words, what's occurring, Mr. Speaker, is the 

administrative level is actually being reduced, not increased, 

through amalgamation and coordination of health care services. 

 

Now district boards will have the right to determine whether 

they have one CEO or whether they want someone out in the 

various communities. That will be up to them to make those 

determinations as to what is best for health care in those 

particular communities. 

 

Where there have been district boards, it has actually reduced 

administrative costs from the point of view of numbers. For 

example, in Saskatoon in the hospital sector, nine 

administrative departments at each of the facilities were 

merged into three central services — finance, human resources, 

and support services — an estimated savings in the order of 6 

million. 

 

More than 1 million was saved through bulk purchasing, joint 

tendering of service contracts, and energy conservation 

measures. By jointly insuring their facilities, they saved more 

than a hundred thousand. Same-day surgery, out-patient 

surgical programs, early maternity discharge programs, have 

contributed to reducing bed numbers in the hospitals while 

serving the same number of patients. 

 

In Regina we saw measures of this nature as well, so it is . . . 

The boards that are in existence are working very hard to 

reduce the administrative costs, to reduce the duplication in the 

system, and they are doing it with a great deal of success. And I 

know that rural Saskatchewan can do the same thing. They 

won't save the same amounts of money, but they will achieve 

economies of scale. They will be every bit as creative and 

every bit as innovative as Regina and Saskatoon and Prince 

Albert. 

 

But let's get back to the other issue. The whole trend in health 

care is to move to more community-based services right across 

the country. Institutional services are important and must be 

maintained. However, we also have to emphasize more health 

promotion, more disease prevention, and we have to emphasize 

more community-based services and therapies in our health 

care system. 

 

Through doing that, we will provide a far broader range of 

health care services to a far broader community across 

Saskatchewan than simply maintaining the institutional sector 

and doing nothing else. 

 

And we can't do these other innovative things without freeing 

up money from the system in the institutional sector for more 

community-based services, and the two go hand in hand. 

 

This is the direction we must move. We cannot do it by looking 

at one institution and one community. We must have the vision 

to go beyond that, which means that we need a vision to look at 

a larger community, to 

look at larger areas, and working together, communities pulling 

together and working together. They can, and will, deliver a 

higher quality of health care services for future generations. 

 

And so it isn't simply an issue of saving money. And without 

health reform it would almost . . . it would be extremely 

difficult for our smallest communities to be able to cope with 

the budget reductions that we are facing in this province as a 

result of the massive debt that we're trying to get a handle on. 

 

And so I think it's very important to keep pointing that out. 

Yes, savings are important; yes, I believe there will be savings; 

yes, there are savings where there are boards in place. But it's 

not simply a question of savings. It's a question of moving to 

the new health care system which is going to provide a broader 

range of services to a broader range of people. 

 

And the potential in this system is enormous because it doesn't 

have to be limited to traditional health care services like home 

care and therapies. The potential goes beyond that. The 

potential goes to programing in social service and human 

justice areas. Very soon I'll be announcing a provincial council 

which will be mandated to look at those issues, to look at the 

broader issues, to look at the broader issues that we know, for 

example . . . and I say this to the member from Moosomin 

because he will understand this. 

 

Much of our illness today can be alleviated through proper 

policies and programs in areas such as the environment, in 

areas such as housing, in areas such as . . . in social justice 

areas. We know that these things contribute more to ill health 

in many ways than things of the past. 

 

There's been a change in the kind of things that cause diseases 

to people. We have vaccinations now that take care of things 

like polio and diseases of the past — smallpox and so on. We 

have vaccinations to deal with that. 

 

But what we haven't dealt with are the social and human justice 

issues that contribute to ill health. And although we won't be 

able to do a lot in that area right now because we have limited 

funds, what we're doing today through the organization of 

district boards, is creating that coordinated system within a 

larger community that can move ahead in future generations to 

create programing in those areas in their district and their 

communities that are going to affect a person's health. 

 

We know that through proper environmental control, we can 

improve the health status of a larger number of people than 

spending $3 million on another MRI (magnetic resonance 

imaging) machine. 

 

So we have to think. We've got to stand back. And as people 

who want to create a system that is better in the future, we've 

got to stand back, take a hard look at the health services we're 

providing, and target our dollars in the future where there will 

be an improved health status for people and improved health 

outcomes. 



April 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1239 

So this isn't simply a question of cost-cutting and saving 

money. This is also an issue of moving to a better health care 

system that will, for future generations, result in healthier 

people and healthier communities. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Toth: — Well, Madam Minister, in listening to your 

response, I'm still waiting for the answers to the first question I 

asked. And I asked you for the information. We were promised 

it last night. We were promised it would be here on our desks. 

It would be sent over to us, information that would lay out the 

remuneration for boards, information that would lay out what 

chief executive officers would be receiving, what 

administrators would receive. 

 

And in your response, Madam Minister, you talked about a 

number of savings that were supposedly taking place at the 

present time and the fact that you needed Bill No. 3 to force 

communities into a regional-board concept to address some of 

the problems we're having in health in trying to make it more 

efficient. 

 

And I just want to indicate that in my area of the province, 

since 1989 I believe it was, there are a number of communities 

have already been sitting down together. And they've been 

looking at ways in which they could formalize basically one 

base, have one base hospital that would do all the purchasing 

and then transfer it out to the different hospitals in the area. 

And a lot of that was already taking place. 

 

In fact, Madam Minister, a number of the communities have 

amalgamated basically all their boards into one board to 

address health in a global sense for the community. And in 

some situations, they have hired one administrator to 

administrate both the hospital and the care home. 

 

And it would seem to me that by giving some time to these 

communities, by encouraging people to look at ways and 

means in which they could make a contribution to making 

health care more efficient and more effective and also less 

costly, a lot of communities, a lot of people have ideas out 

there already. And I must commend a number of the 

communities that have already taken the initiative. 

 

But what we're finding, Madam Minister, is the fact that people 

have a feeling today that even though they believe that 

rationalization must take place, we must look at ways in which 

we can become more efficient, they are very concerned with 

the process that is being adopted today. And what is actually 

happening, Madam Minister, is health care is basically being 

focused in the two large centres. 

 

Now in your comment, you talked about early discharge and 

how much more you were going to save by discharging 

mothers early, and I just want to . . . An article in the Saskatoon 

Star-Phoenix, April 22: 

Early discharge for new mothers not cheap as claimed . . . the 

average number of mothers receiving home care each day is 

2.7, the average number of nurses employed is 2.75, the cost 

per day per mother and child for this is $147.09. 

 

 The board says the cost per day per mother and child at St. 

Paul's and Royal University is $144 and $181 respectively. 

But it averages in-hospital costs at $165 a day — halfway 

between University and St. Paul's — and then compares the 

$147 and $165 and says the early discharge program saves 

money! 

 

And I think when you look at that, as it goes on to say: 

 

 Most would laugh at this analysis. They call it tricky or 

deceptive accounting. The at-home program really costs 

money because it is more expensive than the price at St. 

Paul's. 

 

Now if you looked at the St. Paul's argument . . . or the St. 

Paul's, the sense is of 144 a day. Then if a patient was in St. 

Paul's, there would actually be a $3 saving. Certainly if they're 

in Royal University, it's substantially a higher cost. 

 

So would it seem, Madam Minister, that when you look at the 

numbers that are coming out, beginning to come to the surface, 

then in a lot of cases your wellness model or the health plan 

you've laid out, rather than saving money, is actually going to 

cost more money. 

 

And I have a hard time understanding how in the world you're 

going to save money when you're actually spending certain 

money . . . more money in different areas, supposedly to 

provide more efficient, effective health care. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

don't have access to the figures the member opposite is talking 

about, but I want to remind him once again: health reform is 

not simply a question of saving money; it's a question of 

providing better-quality health care services. And mothers who 

are discharged earlier and are at home sooner with the rest of 

their family are where they should be — at home with their 

family, with help. I say that's better-quality health care. But 

what it also does is it frees up beds in the hospital sector for 

other patients who may need surgery or some other medical 

procedure of a serious or medium nature. 

 

So early maternity discharge, if the member opposite takes it 

and looks at it in isolation, he might be able to make the 

argument he's making. I would have to review those figures. 

But I've been just spending the last 20 minutes saying that isn't 

the only point to health reform. The point is, is we want to 

provide higher-quality health care. Early maternity discharge 

where mothers are in their home, with their families and looked 

after, is higher-quality health care. Unless there's a reason why 

that mother should stay in the hospital. 



1240 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1993 

Secondly, it opens up beds for people who may have a greater 

need for those beds, for people who should be in the hospital 

today for surgery or whatever the procedure is. But they will 

have a greater need than that mother, and that mother can be 

looked at in the home. 

 

And in that sense one could argue that there is a saving. But it 

isn't simply a question of saving. It's a question of a better 

health care system for the people of Saskatchewan and for 

future generations. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Well, Madam Minister, I think just to say that 

early discharge is the appropriate way to go may not be the 

total answer and may not be totally correct. Because I think 

every patient, the circumstances are different for every patient. 

And when patients are sent to the city, major centres like 

Regina and Saskatoon, maybe they're 125-or-so miles out of 

the city. To send a patient home without really having an 

adequate source of help in place or even having a hospital 

within reaching distance should a major problem occur, in my 

opinion, Madam Minister, is not really addressing wellness or 

the wholeness or a very good and wholesome health care 

system. 

 

Now I don't disagree with the fact that in certain situations 

many mothers may find that they're in a position . . . they feel 

quite comfortable and are able to go home early. And I think 

that has been taking place. But to just blankly say that early 

discharge is the way to go, I'm not exactly sure that that is 

proper and that is providing more effective health care delivery 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

It would seem to me, Madam Minister, that when you're 

looking at other costs in deliveries in the province as well, we 

look at the closure of hospitals all across this province . . . and 

I'm going to get into a few questions in that area in a bit. But 

there are . . . a lot of people have come up with suggestions as 

to how we can provide a more effective and efficient health 

care program. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, you've made an announcement three 

weeks ago about closing 52 hospitals across rural 

Saskatchewan. And of those 52 hospitals, there are many 

communities out there wondering exactly what's going to 

happen to their community. There are workers out there 

wondering . . . are very concerned about their jobs and about 

their livelihood. Families are concerned. It would seem to me, 

Madam Minister, that if you're talking about wellness, the 

stress that we have across Saskatchewan in regards to the 

announcements by your government regarding health in this 

province is a far cry from being a very sound wellness model. 

 

And I wonder how you answer the individuals who are directly 

affected. And we're talking . . . I think I believe I saw in one 

paper where there's supposedly a program in place where 

you're going to talk to people working in the health care sector 

and help them broach from the job they were in to maybe 

another job. And if there aren't any jobs available, I don't 

know where you're going to place all these workers. 

 

So it would appear to me that instead of helping or building 

upon a wellness model, you're actually adding to the fact of 

health problems in this province and not really, I would say, 

not addressing very effectively the health needs of the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

I wonder what your response to that is, Madam Minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — As I had indicated in my comments 

earlier with respect to early maternity discharge, I advised the 

member opposite that obviously in all cases women will not be 

discharged early; that it will depend on their unique situation. 

And of course there are cases where they shouldn't be 

discharged. And so the doctor and the physician does 

appraisals before they're discharged and will discharge them if 

the medical professional, if the physician feels they can be 

discharged. 

 

It's not a question of just discharging everybody regardless of 

what their medical condition is, which seems to be implied by 

the member opposite's comments. And I thought I had taken 

care of that in my original comments. 

 

What this is, is a general direction — early maternity 

discharge. And as community-based services are put in place, 

we will be able to do more of that. But of course there are some 

people who have to stay in hospital longer than others. But it is 

generally the direction and it is better-quality health care. It's 

better medicine, Mr. Chair. 

 

Now with respect to communities around the province who are 

under considerable amount of stress as a result of budget 

reductions, I know that budget reductions causes people stress 

and job loss causes people stress. We understand that. I wish 

the member opposite had thought of that when they put this 

province on the verge of bankruptcy. If they had not put this 

province on the verge of bankruptcy, many of these reductions 

would not have to take place today. So let's accept some 

responsibility for that, sirs. 

 

Now with respect to jobs and communities, we do have a 

health reform labour committee that is meeting this week — in 

fact I think they're meeting today — and they are having very 

good discussions about exactly the issues that the member 

opposite has raised, to come to some kind of an understanding 

as to what sort of retraining and labour adjustment will be 

required to get us through this very difficult period of 

transition. 

 

There will be some job opportunity in the community-based 

services. So although there will be job loss in the institutional 

sector, there will also be opportunities in community-based 

services. 

 

And as we develop the home care programing . . . and the 

increase to home care has been very generous this year. I have 

been receiving some very favourable 



April 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1241 

comments from members in the home care sector, indicating to 

us that they're very pleased with the money that has been 

allocated to home care this year. And they are very anxious to 

get on with developing programing to move to more 

community-based services. 

 

So I do want to say that there will be some job opportunity 

there. We are in the process of defining it in consultation with 

labour, and also in consultation with employers in the health 

care sector. And these meetings that are taking place right now 

will hopefully bear Saskatchewan people, and people who are 

particularly concerned about job loss, will bear them some fruit 

and bear them . . . help to alleviate some of the pressure. 

 

I'm not suggesting that all jobs will be replaced, but there will 

be job opportunities in the community-based sector. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, when you look at the number 

of hospitals . . . number one, first of all I should respond to 

your argument about bankrupting the province. One doesn't 

have to look too hard. Go back to the 1970s and look at the 

choices made in the 1970s to find out where a lot of the debt 

that we face today . . . In fact the member from Regina Victoria 

east or . . . in the east side of Regina, Regina east anyway, 

former Finance minister last year, indicated to this House that 

there was indeed a $3.5 billion or so deficit in the provincial 

sinking funds, as he told. When you consider the sinking funds 

which are provided — and the member will know what that's 

all about — the gross debt for the province of Saskatchewan in 

'82 was 3.5. That was prior to the election of a Conservative 

government. 

 

(1615) 

 

As well, Madam Minister, choices were made by the Liberal 

government of the '60s and by the Blakeney government of the 

'70s to utilize pension fund money to balance their books rather 

than putting it into an account to build up for a later date when 

it would have to be paid out. And lo and behold, we find a $5 

billion deficit in that account. Mr. Gass pointed that out as 

well. 

 

Madam Minister, the former government of Mr. Blakeney also 

made choices to go to New York, like your Premier did the 

other day. Only he's trying to defend his government's decision 

and ask the creditors down there to hold the ratings up. But Mr. 

Blakeney went down there and borrowed money and decided to 

buy potash mines, decided to buy land when land prices were 

rising. And through the '80s, those decisions came home to 

roost. Somebody had to pay the bills. 

 

Madam Minister, it doesn't take too long just to sit down and . . 

. As another article said: the NDP have some responsibility for 

the province's long-term debts. And to say it was just created 

through the 1980s is again another long . . . you're drawing 

another long bow — is a gross mistruth or untruth towards the 

Saskatchewan taxpayers. How in the world can you expect 

Saskatchewan taxpayers to believe that it just built up during 

the 1980s. Now you're adding to it. And you're telling us today 

you're going to save money. And I really don't see where you're 

going to save a lot of money. 

 

Madam Minister, how many people are going to be 

unemployed due to the decisions you're making in closing 

down hospitals and care home beds in this province, all across 

the province, in rural areas, in Regina? We know there's 

something like 109 jobs, I believe, here in the city of Regina. 

I'm not sure exactly, close to a hundred in Saskatoon. And all 

the other areas of the province, how many people's jobs are 

affected? Those jobs that are affected, what kind of severance 

packages are going to be agreed to, what kind of a cost is that 

going to be to the treasury? 

 

It would seem to me, Madam Minister, that there's an 

additional cost going to be rising. Who's going to be paying 

that? Are the local boards or these regional boards then going 

to be asked to pick up the cost of the severance packages out of 

the reduced global budget they're going to be getting? Madam 

Minister, I'll give you an opportunity to respond to those 

questions. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, I just really cannot believe 

what I just heard. The members opposite . . . I mean, it's all 

here in this article from The Globe and Mail: "How the gravy 

train went off the rails." "A legacy of debt." There it is. The 

story is there. It talks at length about the mismanagement that 

has occurred in this province and how money was thrown at 

everything. There's a whole list. "How the gravy train went off 

the rails." With a great big picture of the former premier from 

Estevan. 

 

I mean let's not start rewriting history here, Mr. Member from 

Moosomin. Let's look at some of the expenditures that was 

made by the former government: some $349,000 spent by the 

Department of Finance in '89-90 to produce glossy budget 

documents; 500,000 lost in the High R Door Manufacturing 

failure. How much was it in GigaText and Guy Montpetit with 

this fancy idea about computers and French translation — 5 

million, 6 million? What was it? Three hundred and fifty 

_five thousand for 60,000 square feet of space in Regina's 

Ramada Renaissance; $400,000 dollars spent to repaint the 

STC (Saskatchewan Transportation Company) buses. The list 

goes on and on and on and on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think the history on the debt, on the issue of the debt is clear. 

The members opposite had an opportunity from 1982-86 to 

make sure we had balanced budgets, and they chose not to do 

it. From 1986 to 1991, they continued their habit of reckless 

spending that has virtually put this province on the verge of 

bankruptcy. 

 

One of their own front-benchers, Grant Hodgins, couldn't stand 

to sit on the front benches of their government any longer 

because he knew the province was on the verge of bankruptcy. 

He said so. He had to get out. He felt it was immoral, that it 

had gone 



1242 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1993 

beyond anything he could tolerate any longer. 

 

The history is clear, Mr. Speaker. The members opposite would 

be wise to stand up and admit that they were wrong, to stand up 

and say, I . . . we made a mistake; we the Tory government 

made a mistake. And let's get on with trying to get control of 

the deficit and rebuilding the province. Let's get on with it. 

 

But for heaven sakes, to stand there and point back to 20 years 

ago and say somebody else caused this is absolutely ridiculous. 

And do you know what it does? It further erodes the little 

credibility that you have. Can you imagine the . . . I mean 

people must be laughing, who are watching this TV, to hear 

you say it's not your responsibility; it goes back to the Liberals. 

Come on, gentlemen. Get a dose of reality. Come on. 

 

Now history will prove . . . and, you know, by making 

comments of that nature you don't do yourself any credit, 

particularly those of you who are aspiring to be the next leader 

of the Conservative Party. You will never come out of third 

place in the province, which is where you're at, unless you 

stand up and tell the public you made a mistake, you were 

wrong, and you're going to work to put this province back on 

track. 

 

And what does that mean? That means supporting what most of 

the people in this province support. Deficit reduction, health 

care reform, restructuring, and trying to get a handle on 

duplication of spending, for example, in the health care, and 

duplication of spending throughout our system. Let us deal 

with the debt. Let us turn this province around, and let us start 

building the future for our grandchildren. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Chairman, there are only three words 

that can describe that liturgy and that's, what a farce. 

 

I asked the minister to answer a question. I asked the minister 

how many people are affected by hospital closures. I asked the 

minister to give us an idea of what kind of severance packages 

are available. I asked the minister to let us know who's going to 

be responsible. Are the boards going to be responsible with the 

global budget that's going to be 5 per cent less than it is this 

year? Who's going to carry the load of paying for the 

severance? 

 

I wonder if the minister could respond to those questions. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the 

question the member opposite was asking, the details with 

respect to severance is being worked out right now with the 

management, with the unions, and through the development of 

a management plan. Each board has been asked to, in context 

with the district planning group, to put together a management 

plan to identify how many people would have to be laid off for 

example in their institution, and to look at what other plans 

could be put in place in order to rechannel some of these 

people. 

So boards are meeting with unions. And the government, 

through its committee, is meeting with employers and unions to 

work out the issues pertaining to the labour impacts as a result 

of the budget reductions and the conversion of hospitals. And 

as this is worked out, we'll have a better idea at that point as 

exactly how many people are going to be impacted, in terms of 

numbers, and funding will be made available to meet legal 

obligations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Well, Madam Minister, I believe you said that 

there were discussions taking place right now as to how you 

address severance packages, and how many employees are 

gone. What I'm wondering is, to my knowledge, we don't have 

regional boards or regional districts right across the province 

yet. And how are you going to arrive at these figures and 

numbers until you have a better idea of where the . . . how the 

numbers boil down, how they break out, and how many people 

are actually affected. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — First of all, each board that has been 

impacted, each hospital board and integrated facility, has been 

asked to provide us with a management plan. They have been 

asked to do that in conjunction with the planning group or 

steering committee in their area, because there are planning 

groups and steering committees that have been established and 

have been there for some time. And they already know who 

they've been dealing with and what their district will look like. 

 

In many instances, these boards have a pretty good idea of 

what district they're going to be in and what planning group 

they've been working with. They will be asked to work with 

those planning groups and with the Department of Health to 

come up with a management plan. 

 

In addition to that, there's a joint management and labour 

coordination process that's taking place out of Regina, and that 

was announced about a week ago, I believe. 

 

So there are two areas that are dealing with the labour issues 

that you've raised. First of all, the board, the hospital board, or 

the board of the integrated facility, has been asked to provide a 

management plan and to work with the steering group and its 

district and the Department of Health, to come forward with a 

management plan. 

 

Secondly, the Department of Health has established a labour 

and management coordinating committee that's dealing with 

some of the more provincial issues with regard to labour. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, you mention that there are 

steering committees that are working, and there are individuals 

out there that are guessing at what they may perceive as being 

their region. It seems to me that a lot of these communities are 

still groping in the dark because we've had many situations 

where department officials have made different comments and 

suggestions as to the size of regions. And it took 



April 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1243 

place right in our area. 

 

Now what do you say to communities running along Highway 

48, some communities that are looking at possibly forming an 

association, the Moose Mountain health care district, in the 

neighbourhood of some 14,000 individuals, when a department 

official would say at one meeting, while 14,000 might be 

appropriate but no, we would suggest you look at 29,000 which 

automatically then pushes them into the . . . I believe it's along 

the No. 1 Highway. I forget what they call that district. 

 

So if you're sitting there, trying to draw up a plan, how do you 

draw up a plan when to date you still don't have a sound or 

solid idea of what kind of district you're going to be forming, 

and how do you address the employees in those communities 

when you're not exactly sure if your community is in this 

district or if it's in another district? It would seem to me that 

before you're drawing up a plan, you should have a pretty firm 

idea as to what your district is going to look at so you know 

who you're dealing with, the communities you're dealing with, 

the facilities you're dealing with, and the individuals. 

 

And I just don't know exactly . . . and a lot of the boards out 

there, the steering committees, the number that I've talked to 

are still groping, trying to understand where the department and 

your government is really coming from, because there hasn't 

been a lot of clear ideas or a format laid out for them so they 

know exactly what they're facing. So how do they develop that 

plan, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, the member has made our 

point. Let's get this district board legislation passed and let's get 

on with the planning. The member has made our point. These 

decisions, budgetary decisions, have been made. It is urgent 

that we get districts in place so we can deal effectively with the 

budgetary decisions, that whether or not we have districts, 

those decisions are still there. We can lessen the impact if the 

members opposite would just allow this to go through and get it 

passed and get these districts in place. You've made my point, 

sir. 

 

Now with respect to the area that you've talked about, the 

14,000 and the 29,000, what is taking place in the province is 

that we have indicated that we want districts of at least 12,000, 

that we would like to see at least 12,000. There may be one 

with eleven five somewhere and that might be okay, but I'm not 

sure that is the case anywhere in the province. I think they're all 

shaping up to be 12,000 or more. 

 

(1630) 

 

There may be some sense in some situations to look at a larger 

district, and I think the Department of Health officials have an 

obligation and a duty to tell planning groups and steering 

committees — have you thought of this option? Have you 

thought perhaps of moving to a group of 29,000, for example? 

Have you thought of this other option over here? — in order 

for people to explore all the options that are available to them 

and 

then come up with the best decision for their communities. 

 

So you may very well have heard Health department officials 

saying 14,000 would be appropriate, but have you thought of 

this possibility? That's fine. I don't have any problems with 

that. I don't have any problems with people being made aware 

of options and coming forward with a more informed decision. 

 

But I'm saying to the members opposite that the planning 

groups throughout the province are coming together very 

quickly. They are coming together with a pretty good sense of 

where their districts are. I don't think it's as the member 

opposite has pointed out, that they're groping and don't know 

where they're going. 

 

I think they've had a lot of discussion and they know exactly 

what they want to do. Many of them are waiting for the district 

board legislation so they can get their district board in place, 

and they want the legislation to be able to do that. 

 

We have heard repeatedly from people that delay at this point, 

and I quote from the Saskatoon Health Board, a letter that was 

written to the opposition Health critic, where the chairperson of 

the board indicates that delay at this point can only serve to 

reduce the time remaining for district boards, once they are 

formed, to begin facing the challenges ahead. So let us get on 

with the process. 

 

I have heard this comment repeatedly throughout the province. 

People want the legislation, they know it will assist them in 

getting into districts, they know it'll assist them in dealing with 

the budget realities, and they want to be able to move ahead. 

 

Now yes, there will be uncertainties and there will be anxieties, 

because change always brings with it uncertainties and 

anxieties. That's true. I know that. But that doesn't mean that 

you stand still and you don't do anything and you say, I'm not 

going to change because I'm not 110 per cent sure of all of the 

little detail. Nobody can be 110 per cent sure of all the little 

detail. Nobody. And it takes courage, it takes vision, it takes 

innovation to move ahead and deal with problems and solutions 

as they arise, and find the opportunities within change. 

 

And there are communities throughout this province, Mr. 

Chair, that are doing exactly that. Many communities in this 

province are seeing the opportunities within change and are 

grabbing the challenge and running with it — many, many 

communities. And they are waiting for the district legislation to 

be able to form a board and get on with facing those challenges 

that are there. And they want to have an opportunity to make 

their local input and to develop a plan and work with the 

Department of Health and other communities throughout 

Saskatchewan to develop a high quality health care system for 

their citizens and for the residents of Saskatchewan. 

 

So I say to the member opposite, if the group sees a 



1244 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1993 

district of 14,000 and they feel strongly about that, well then 

they should put their proposal together. But asking them to 

look at other options is not an unreasonable request. I would 

say it's prudent because there may be other options that serve 

their needs better. And if they look at them and then say, well 

they don't like it because they don't want to join with that 

particular community for some reason, that is fine too. But let's 

look at the options. 

 

And that's what is being urged throughout the province. Where 

district planning groups have not considered all the options, 

Health officials will direct their attention to other options that 

might be a possibility for them. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Well, Madam Minister, there are many people 

across this province who will not agree totally with what 

you've just said. In fact probably the only ones really pushing it 

are Mr. Helmsing from SHA (Saskatchewan Health-Care 

Association) and a few of your very close supporters scattered 

throughout the province who are standing up for their . . . 

trying to defend you. In fact, if you went into a lot of 

communities, you'd find there are many people just totally 

annoyed at the process and the way you have proceeded. 

 

And it would seem to me from your response, Madam 

Minister, earlier on, your very first response, that there is and 

has been in the minds of the department for a long time, a plan 

or a map of some kind that could have been put out there for 

people to work with. I wonder if you'd reveal that map to this 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to support on 

health reform, I want to remind the member opposite, that the 

Saskatchewan Association of Special Care Homes is 

supporting health reform. The SHA, which represents 

numerous boards, is supporting health reform. Home care, 

which represents numerous boards, is supporting health reform 

— we're talking some 400 boards in the province. 

 

We see support coming from the P.A. Health Board. We've 

seen support coming from Regina and Saskatoon. We've seen 

support coming from the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses' 

Association. We have had support across this province. 

 

And I think if the members opposite are being honest, they will 

realize that the large majority of people in this province 

recognize the need for health reform and support health reform 

and want to move in the direction of health reform as proposed 

by the government. It's clear . . . I have a whole file here, and 

this is only part of the support that has been expressed to the 

government as to the health reform. 

 

I recently spoke to the public health association which talked 

about the need to move in this direction. I recently spoke to the 

palliative care association. They support health reform. And 

yes, people recognize there are difficult budget decisions. They 

recognize that. And they recognize that this causes problems as 

we move through health reform, but they also see the need to 

get a handle on the deficit, and they're prepared to work within 

that context. And they also see that health reform helps them to 

deal with the deficit situation as it exists today in the province. 

 

We need health reform, Mr. Speaker, for a whole range of 

reasons, and the members opposite know that, and so does the 

public. We need it in order to be able to deal with the financial 

situation, to fill in the gaps in the health care system, to remove 

the duplication from the system, to continue to be able to 

operate the infrastructure that has been built in an effective 

fashion, to rebalance roles and put more emphasis on 

community-based services, home-based services, therapies, and 

so on. 

 

That's absolutely essential for future health care. We need it to 

be able to reduce some of the inequities in the health system, in 

northern Saskatchewan for example, to move people from user 

dependencies, to empower communities and people with 

respect to their own health care. 

 

There are a whole range of reasons why we need health reform, 

and what we are doing when we form districts, Mr. Speaker, is 

setting the building blocks for that health reform. We've 

established a Health Services Utilization and Research 

Commission that's going to be looking at health outcomes, 

because long gone is the day when we can simply provide 

health care services without making some sort of a 

determination as to whether or not there are health outcomes. 

It's important for us to look at health outcomes in the future in 

our new health care system. 

 

Communities throughout this province and professional people 

and individuals are rising above vested interests. They're rising 

above political partisanship. They're building new partnerships. 

And why are they doing it? They're doing it because they want 

a better health care system for future generations, and they 

want to preserve and save medicare for future generations. 

That's why they're doing it. 

 

All across this province, people are rising above professional 

partisanship, political partisanship, and vested interests. And 

that's our heritage in Saskatchewan, and that's why health 

reform is going to work because that's our heritage. And 

notwithstanding the political jockeying that's taking place today 

on health care issues, the communities are going to rise above 

it, and we will end up with a better health care system. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think we've sat here about 

five minutes waiting for the answer, and there wasn't an answer 

to the question. Will the minister release the proposed regional 

map that the department probably has on its back wall? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, we don't have a map that 

the Department of Health has pre-prepared. There are districts 

coming together, and we have a pretty good sense of what they 

are, but they also 



April 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1245 

change. And what may be a district last week, today, when 

we're putting it into the final form, is slightly different. So as 

communities look at their options, districts are changing, and 

the size is changing. So we don't have a predetermined map. 

We are waiting for the communities to come forward and 

provide us with their district. 

 

Now we have been following the direction the communities are 

moving, and we've got some indication as to what those 

boundaries are and what those districts will look like. We have 

an indication, but they are changing as well. And until all the 

district boards are in place, we will see that change taking 

place, and until all the discussions have been had. 

 

So the Department of Health does not have a predetermined 

map that's going to be imposed on the people of Saskatchewan 

as they did in New Brunswick. We have asked communities to 

come forward and to tell us what districts they want to be in, to 

have these discussions with other communities and with other 

boards, and to come forward with their plan of what kind of 

district they want to form. 

 

And we're waiting for all of that information to come in before 

we draw the map. And even at that point boundaries may not 

be specifically defined between districts. We may know what 

communities and what catchment areas a district board is going 

to represent, but until all the district boards are in place and the 

institutions and services that they represent are in place and 

fully determined, we will not know exactly where the boundary 

is. And even at that point there may have to be discussions 

between districts to determine exactly where that boundary is. 

Now it may be clear because it may be the municipal 

boundaries, but there may be situations where it isn't a 

municipal boundary, in which case we'll have to have further 

discussions in that regard. 

 

So to the member opposite, no, we don't have a predetermined 

map; and yes, we do have some idea as to what it's going to 

look like because districts have been having these discussions 

now since last August. But it is also flexible; where they're 

heading is flexible. Until their board's in place, we won't be 

sure. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Well, Madam Minister, I'd like to follow that 

area but there's a couple of questions I would like to address 

regarding facilities and I'd like . . . I'm wondering, regarding a 

community like Whitewood where their hospital has been cut, 

the community of Whitewood, what is going to happen to the 

employees there and what kind of services can that community 

expect once the hospital's gone? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Now with respect to communities where 

their hospitals are facing a role conversion, what we have said 

is this. The hospital is to provide us with a management plan. 

This management plan will deal with the issue of employees 

and it will also deal with the issue of placement of long-term 

care patients in acute care beds. The management plan is 

supposed to be in by May 31, although some leeway has been 

given to 

some areas if they feel they can't get it together that quickly. 

The management plan is to be done in conjunction with the 

planning group or steering group in that district and the 

Department of Health. 

 

And it's no different for Whitewood as it is for any other place. 

The hospitals have been asked to send correspondence to the 

families to indicate that their relative will be re-placed. Now 

that does not mean that the long-term care patient is going to be 

just dumped back in the lap of the family; that's not the plan. 

The plan is is to come up with alternate placement. And the 

administrators of those hospitals have been asked to provide a 

management plan to do that. 

 

And I want to reiterate that because there has been some 

concern expressed by people that they have been advised that 

what they are to do is just take back their mother, for example. 

And that hasn't been the plan. They've been directed, and they 

know that, that they are to do a management plan about the best 

place for this person to go to. So that plan should be ready by 

May 31 or sometime thereafter, but certainly within a short 

period of time thereafter. 

 

(1645) 

 

And with respect to what is going to be there, we have 

indicated that these facilities can convert to emergency acute 

care centres and health centres or wellness centres. What will 

be in there? The ability to deal with emergency acute care 

situations. The other thing that the facility could be used for is 

basic diagnostic services. Doctors, for example, could use the 

facility for basic diagnostic services and the X-ray services that 

are available in the facility today. 

 

There should be emergency acute care. And there could also be 

other health care planning and programing. For example, I was 

out in one community that provided me with a long list of 

potential things that could be done in their community with 

respect to wellness programing like foot care for seniors and a 

therapist coming out once a week and the well senior clinics, 

well adult clinics, and so on. And they were looking, this 

community was looking to the future and grabbing the 

opportunities within change. They wanted to develop a health 

centre that provided a broader range of services to a broader 

range of people than simply delivering acute care in-patient 

beds. 

 

And so there is . . . the options that are available are lengthy for 

communities to consider. And we're asking them in context 

with their district board, where there is a board, or in the 

context of their planning group and steering group, to come 

forward with the options. 

 

Now some of these communities don't want to use the hospital 

facility to do that. They may say their facility is too old; they 

want to use another facility in town. Well that option is 

available for them to explore as well. So I believe that most of 

these facilities will be converted to emergency acute care and 

to a wellness centre, other health care programing with the 



1246 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1993 

availability of X-ray and diagnostic services that the doctor can 

access. Some of them may not be converted because the 

community may determine that they have other facilities that 

are higher quality that they prefer to use. And those options 

should be explored by those boards in conjunction with the 

planning group and steering group within their community. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So what you're 

saying, Madam Minister, then is if the district board or regional 

board decides to look in, like in this case I've raised, the 

community of Whitewood decides to put five beds in that 

hospital, reinstate five beds and run the X-ray and lab, that they 

have the ability to do that. Is that true, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Not with respect to in-patient beds. They 

could look at something like respite care, but not with respect 

to acute in-patient beds. The decision with respect to in-patient 

acute care beds has been made unless there is an exceptional 

circumstance that the Department of Health has not considered. 

But that has to be very exceptional. 

 

And I wouldn't say Whitewood falls into that category. 

However, I don't want to speak to that without that community 

having an opportunity to have input into that process. 

 

However, it has to be looked at in the district context, not just 

one community. And the district in the planning group and the 

community, if they decide for example that they want some day 

care there for seniors or some respite care, they may want to 

look at something of that nature in that facility. 

 

Now I'm not saying that it would happen. It has to be done in 

the context of the district planning group and in the context of 

global funding. Because what the government will be doing is 

funding the district globally. The district will do a needs 

assessment as to what is required where and in the context of 

provincial standards and targets that we've set, and the district 

will be funded in that regard. 

 

Now if the district determines that they need some day care, for 

example, in this particular community for seniors, if that is a 

real need that's been determined by the district, then they could 

look at using a facility for that purpose. What they can't use it 

for is in-patient acute care beds. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, so what you're saying then is if 

a district board decides to put acute care bed . . . they really 

can't put acute care beds into a hospital like Whitewood. 

Rather, they could possibly look at respite beds. 

 

Are you also saying that they have the ability to operate that 

X-ray and the lab work that is already sitting there? You've got 

the employees . . . your lab techs and your X-ray technicians 

are married to businessmen and women and men in the 

community; they're married to farmers. And they're going to be 

in that community so they're available. 

So on one hand you're saying no, they can't fund acute care 

beds . . . and my colleague at Unity said that they were 

informed last night if a district board decided to put two or 

three or four acute care beds in a facility like that, they have the 

ability to do that. 

 

So who is actually telling us the truth? Are you telling us the 

truth, that you can't put them there? Or is the department right 

in saying that the board has the decision to put two or three 

acute care beds in these hospitals? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — The acute care in-patient beds will not 

be funded by the government in the facilities where the funding 

has been taken out for acute care in-patient beds, subject of 

course to the comments that I had made earlier. What is going 

to go into the wellness centres or the health centres that will 

exist in these facilities will have to depend on what the real 

need is, not on wants — not on wants, on needs. We will in the 

future be funding health care needs and not health care wants. 

 

And so with respect to X-ray and diagnostic, what has to 

happen is the potential for using that equipment is there. They 

have to get together with their planning group in their districts, 

do a needs assessment, determine what the real needs are, and 

then in conjunction with the Department of Health and the 

global funding that is going to be allotted to the districts, the 

Department of Health will approve a plan that is affordable and 

sustainable and that is targeted to needs. 

 

So to the member from Moosomin, the Department of Health 

will support a plan that's affordable, that's sustainable in the 

future, and targeted to needs. It's not good enough for one 

community to look at one institution. It has to be done in the 

context of a district. And this is why the district board 

legislation is so important to enable these communities to move 

ahead — to move ahead with the process of reform so they can 

determine what their needs are and come forward with an 

affordable and sustainable plan. 

 

That's what has to happen. And so we urge your community to 

move ahead in that direction, the sooner the better. 

 

Mr. Toth: — One quick question. Madam Minister, if the 

community decides to fund those beds in their community and 

the district goes along with them, will they be able to do that? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Are you asking if they decide to fund 

them out of community monies personally? Is that the 

question? He nodded his head yes. 

 

The answer to that is no. And the reason for that is that we end 

up . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Why not? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Well we end up with a health care 

system that isn't equal across the province, that 



April 27, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1247 

isn't equal across the province. 

 

So communities, we will not be allowing communities to go 

out and raise the money locally to try and build their own 

private hospital or build their own in-patient acute care beds. 

So no, that option will not be available. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Madam 

Minister, I've listened as carefully as I could for the last while 

as you've been skating around the important issues of this Bill. 

And I want you to know that the people of rural Saskatchewan 

as well as the people in the cities of Regina and Saskatoon are 

firmly convinced that that's exactly what you're doing. You're 

skating around the issue. You're not hitting it straight on. 

You're not giving people the facts and the realities here. 

 

I'm going to show you an example from one of the people that 

wrote a letter here, and I have the letter here with me from the 

operator of Gull Agencies in Gull Lake. He gives a little 

example here, and I want to just read one little paragraph: 

 

 To put it in perspective you would appreciate, just consider 

cutting 10 per cent of the total employees of Saskatoon or 

Regina and see what effect it has on the city. This is the 

percentage we will lose from our payroll if this goes. 

 

And he says here in the paragraph ahead: 

 

 Two hundred and twelve people are employed in the town of 

Gull Lake with real jobs according to the census, and the jobs 

connected with health care that are going to be gone is 26. 

 

That's more than 10 per cent, Madam Minister. You take 10 per 

cent of the key jobs of any community in this province away 

from them, and you have caused disaster. Nobody else. You 

can't blame this one on the federal government or the Arabs or 

anybody else. It is on your shoulders and on your conscience. 

And when you look in the mirror, you had better be prepared to 

face all of the people of Saskatchewan that you're hurting 

because they're the people that are going to be looking back at 

you on this health issue. 

 

You are destroying medicare in the province of Saskatchewan 

such that nobody else has ever done in the history of this 

province. You claim to be the champions of all of these great 

things. You're going to make health care better. You tell me 

what kind of health care is better when people in Prelate and 

Leader are going to be expected to drive for 50 or 100 miles, 

and all they're going to get for services is an extended 

ambulance service. How do you expect those people to have 

any faith in their community to be able to provide them the 

kind of care they need? 

 

There's absolutely no way that those people can survive. We 

have an ageing population in Saskatchewan, an ageing 

population in rural 

Saskatchewan, more than any place else because the young 

people are having to leave rural Saskatchewan because of lack 

of opportunities. Instead of cutting health care jobs, instead of 

cutting the province down to the bone, what you've got to be 

thinking about is providing some job opportunities to attract 

our young people to the rest of this province, or you're going to 

end up with two big cities in this province. 

 

And the rest of it will be a wasteland; it might as well go back 

to being a desert. Maybe it will be like the Palliser triangle that 

Palliser described so many years ago where he described that it 

was a desolate area, not fit for human habitation. Maybe that's 

what you really want, is a desert with only two big cities left. 

I'm sure you'll have fun controlling them. You can be the 

master of both the big cities, and there'll be nothing left of the 

rest of the province. 

 

But that's what you're heading for, and the people of 

Saskatchewan are saying that and they know it because you're 

destroying the fundamental job base in this province as well as 

the medicare system itself. The jobs are important, but the 

service is important, and we can justify that. You have ignored 

the wishes of the people. You have ignored the arguments of 

the people who have come to you in a very honest and 

forthright manner and have said to you, we can show you how; 

we can make these buildings and these facilities more 

economical, more viable, and we can make them manage more 

effectively and more efficiently. 

 

These communities have said to you, Madam Minister, that 

there are ways that we can do it, and they've come up with lists 

of ideas. And when they present them to you, what do they get 

in return? Nothing. Go away. Disappear. Get out of my life. 

That's all we hear. We have the Minister of Environment, of all 

people to be representing Health, out in our town trying to tell 

us how to run our hospital. That's the kind of stuff we get out of 

the back benches here. I'm telling you, Madam Minister, this is 

a travesty beyond all recognition of travesties. The people of 

rural Saskatchewan will never forgive you. 

 

In all the days that you live you will look in that mirror and see 

the faces of the people of Saskatchewan that you've hurt. They 

will be there looking back at you and only at you. These 

fellows here don't even count because the rest of Saskatchewan 

doesn't even know they're there and they don't care, but they 

care about what you're doing because it's important. It's too, too 

important to be left lying here idly without being discussed and 

without you taking some consideration for two things — 

negotiation and compromise. 

 

That's all they've asked you for. They've not asked for the 

moon, and they have not asked for the stars, and they haven't 

even asked you to stop trying to solve the problem of the 

deficit. They've said they'd work with you. They've shown you 

examples of how those facilities can be better used, and they've 

shown you examples of how they're willing to cooperate and 

they've shown you that they're willing to negotiate. But 

negotiation is no good without compromise. 



1248 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1993 

It's like a marriage, Madam Minister, and you've got to start 

cooperating like one of those members in that marriage — the 

marriage of politics with the people of Saskatchewan. You've 

got to start considering the option of giving some compromise. 

 

Out in Gull Lake, a short few days ago, the Minister of the 

Environment tried to explain to us what was happening, and I 

tell you that he was an absolute farce. It was disgusting to listen 

to what he had to say . . . 

 

The Chair: — Order. It being 5 o'clock the committee will 

recess until 7 p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 

 


