


















































Hansard: May 26, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1945 

 May 26, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This is a petition 

regarding the proposed 230 volt power line from Condie to 

Queen Elizabeth power station. 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that the Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to do 

the following: 

 

1. Order SaskPower to facilitate the production of 

non-utility generated power in areas of increased demand.  

Several companies in this area have applied to generate 

power; 

 

2. Order the Minister of the Environment to undertake a 

complete environmental assessment including public 

hearings; 

 

3. Order SaskPower to ensure that there is a full and 

complete compensation package for all affected 

landowners; 

 

4. Order SaskPower to table in the legislature a complete 

economic analysis by an independent auditor that proves 

the economic benefits of the proposed line exceed the 

economic benefits of non-utility generated power or 

conservation; 

 

5. Order SaskPower to table in the legislature a review of 

all national and international studies on the effects of 

electric and magnetic fields on humans; and 

 

6. Further, order SaskPower to cease and desist all 

planning, surveying, or preparation for construction of the 

Condie to Queen Elizabeth 230,000-volt power line on any 

of the proposed routes until all other points in this petition 

are honoured. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these individuals are from Moose Jaw, Craik, 

Aylesbury, Regina, Allan, Markinch, Middle Lake, Young, 

Kenaston, and so forth. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

 

Deputy Clerk: -- Mr. Martens, chair of the Standing 

Committee on Public Accounts, presents the fifth report of the 

committee: 

 

Pursuant to an order of the Assembly dated May 4, 1993, 

your committee reports Bill No. 41 -- 

An Act respecting the Financial Administration of the 

Government of Saskatchewan, with amendments. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to just say a 

few things about the work of the committee in Public Accounts.  

The responsibility of the Bill 41 was given to Public Accounts 

Committee of which I am the chairman, and we reviewed the 

matter.  There were a number of observations made by the 

Provincial Auditor, there were a number of observations made 

by the comptroller for the province, and also the deputy 

minister of Finance.  And together with members of the 

committee we put together a Bill that will respond in some way 

to the financial services of the provincial government. 

 

I want to say that I appreciated the cooperation of the 

committee in dealing with the items that were there.  There will 

be a few amendments that will be brought forward, and they 

were voted on in the committee, Mr. Chairman, and they were 

approved by the committee. 

 

And with that, I move, seconded by the member from 

Saskatoon Idylwyld: 

 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on Public 

Accounts be now concurred in. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I ask leave of the Assembly that 

the consideration of the said Bill in Committee of the Whole be 

waived. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave, I move the 

Bill now be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Standing Committee on Communication 

 

Clerk Assistant: -- Mr. Speaker, as chairperson of the Standing 

Committee on Communication, presents the second report of 

the said committee which is as follows: 

 

Your committee has considered the recommendations of 

the Public Documents Committee, under The Archives 

Act, contained in retention and disposal schedules 

comprising sessional paper no. 141 including schedule 326 

being the Saskatchewan administrative records system; 

amendment to schedule 327 of the Saskatchewan 

Legislative Assembly; and amendment to schedule 328 of 

the Tripartite Beef Administration Board, tabled this third 

session of the twenty-second legislature and 



1946 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1993 

referred to the committee by the Assembly on May 19, 

1993. 

 

Your committee recommends to the Assembly that the 

recommendations of the Public Documents Committee on 

schedule 326 and amendment to schedules 327 and 328 be 

accepted. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I move, 

seconded by the member from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden: 

 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 

Communication be now concurred in. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would 

like to introduce to you, and through you to the members of the 

Assembly, 21 grades 6, 7, and 8 students seated in the 

Speaker's gallery from Countryside School in Saltcoats.  The 

teacher that is accompanying the students is Ray Isaac; and 

they have three chaperons, Denver Wiebe, Charles Penner, and 

Bert Friesen. 

 

Following question period we're going to meet for photos and 

also for drinks and discussion.  And I trust that they have had a 

fruitful experience in Regina so far, and that it will be enhanced 

somewhat this afternoon after listening to question period. 

 

I'd like to wish them a safe trip home and ask you to join me in 

welcoming them to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to introduce 

to you and to the rest of the Assembly here 22 students from 

Beardy's School, grades 6 and 7.  They are in the west gallery, 

and they're accompanied today by their teacher Harry Salahub, 

and chaperons Ivie Cameron, Dion Smallchild, Roy Gamble 

and Shirley Gamble, as well as their bus driver Tom Gardypie. 

 

I met with this very polite group of students this morning for 

question and answers as well as pictures.  And I would like to 

ask you now to join with me in welcoming them to the 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also 

would like, to you and through you, to introduce a very special 

group of young people in the west gallery today.  There's a 

large number of them; they're 60 grade 4 students from the 

school of St. Theresa in Dewdney constituency here in Regina. 

 

It is always special to introduce students from St. Theresa 

School because that is the school in which I 

taught for some time before I became a member of this 

Legislative Assembly.  I am looking forward to spending some 

time with this group of young people after question period for 

pictures and for a discussion about their visit to the legislature.  

Hopefully they can get me up to date on what's happening at St. 

Theresa. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask members to join me in 

extending a warm welcome to this group of students who are 

here with us today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a great pleasure 

for me today, Mr. Speaker, to introduce to the members of this 

Assembly a group of 40 students from the community and town 

of Waldeck.  Waldeck is about 10 miles away from where I live 

and my youngest son took his grade 7, 8, and 9 there.  I know 

the teachers fairly well and I am very proud of those teachers 

and also the students. 

 

Two teachers that are there with them today are Lorne Hustak 

and Marv Parschauer.  Both of them have done excellent jobs 

in class and in the school.  I also want to acknowledge the 

councillor for my division, Mr. Clifford Veer.  He's the bus 

driver there today, and I want to welcome him here today too. 

 

I also want to say that I know quite a few of them, but there's 

one specific one, Mr. Speaker, that I want to introduce to the 

Assembly, and that is my niece who lives on the ranch there 

with us.  Her name is Loni Chickoski, and obviously not very 

happy about it, but I want to introduce her anyway because her 

mother would not consider anything less than that. 

 

I want to have the members of the Assembly join me in 

welcoming these students to the Assembly and thank them for 

coming. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure 

today on behalf of my colleague, the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote, to introduce to you and to the members of the 

Assembly some students, some grade 8 students from Boucher 

High School in Prince Albert. 

 

They have travelled here today to visit the legislature and to see 

some of the proceedings as well as some other sights in Regina.  

I will have the pleasure of meeting with the group at 3 for 

photos and for a discussion. 

 

And I also want to welcome with them their teacher who is 

Heather Schulte and their chaperon, Steve Kasyon.  And I'd ask 

the members of the Assembly to give them a hearty welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- And I think finally, Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to on my behalf and on behalf of the member from Moose 

Jaw Palliser, introduce 12 



May 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1947 

students, adult students from the SIAST (Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology) campus in Moose 

Jaw.  They are currently studying at the Alexandra centre. 

 

The Alexandra centre is located in the constituency of Moose 

Jaw Wakamow but will serve students from both Moose Jaw 

constituencies, so both the member from Moose Jaw north, 

Moose Jaw Palliser, and myself would want to ask all members 

here this afternoon to greet these students. 

 

I understand, Mr. Speaker, they are here just for a short time 

just to observe question period.  And I'm sure they will hear 

some very good questions and some even better answers.  I 

would ask members then to join me in welcoming these adult 

students from Moose Jaw. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Co-op Upgrader Review 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Premier today.  Mr. Premier, in today's paper we see your 

government leaking out more details of its plan to break the 

legal contract with 240,000 co-op members and take over the 

upgrader. 

 

Mr. Premier, unfortunately this is just like the 1970s all over 

again, the way you want to do it.  You don't look for solutions, 

Mr. Premier.  You don't try to negotiate.  You just go and take 

it over.  It's just like we did with potash, Mr. Premier.  It's like 

we did with that $200 million boondoggle called the land bank. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, now you're adding one new trick to your 

bag of tricks.  You're taking over control of the upgrader, but 

you're leaving co-op members across the province holding the 

bag for the finances. 

 

Mr. Premier, why should 240,000 co-op members hold the bag 

for you when you run the upgrader into the ground?  Mr. 

Premier, didn't you learn anything from your experiences in the 

1970s that this is the wrong way to go? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, what I learned from the 

1970s, as reinforced by the actions of the 1980s, was the 

difference between two governments which, faced with serious 

economic situation, approached solutions, one from a rational, 

economically logically based position in the interests of the 

taxpayers, and the other in an economically irrational position. 

 

The privatization of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

for example was done at a loss to the taxpayers of about $600 

million when you, sir, and your colleagues sold it off in haste.  

This is documented in the Gass Commission and the like. 

 

But the substance of the member's question is the 

issue of -- again he comes back to the central theme -- why are 

we doing this.  We're doing this because Justice Estey said that 

this project, the way it was packaged by you, has run 

financially aground.  That's the fundamental conclusion. 

 

And Justice Estey recommends the principles of how to save it.  

I presume you people would want to save it.  We want to save 

it.  Now that's his best shot as to the way out.  We've endorsed 

that way out.  We think the federal government, while not 

totally endorsing it, at least has got the door open to that.  We 

ask that FCL (Federated Co-operatives Ltd.) adopt the 

principles of that way out, as set out by Estey.  And finally we 

ask you, if you really have the interests of the upgrader and the 

people of Saskatchewan at heart, to endorse the principles of 

Estey.  Will you?  Yes or no? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

Justice Estey never said in his report that 240,000 co-op 

members should have their contract broken by this Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

Mr. Premier, in 18 short months you have broken your contract 

with 60,000 farm families.  Your commitment to health care in 

this province is broken by the fact that you are going to close 

hospitals all over rural Saskatchewan.  Matter of fact, Mr. 

Premier, at a meeting in Prince Albert, when a prominent 

member of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool asked you if you 

would ever move against the Co-op upgrader, you categorically 

denied that you ever would.  You said to him, no, that is not 

our intention at all. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, the betrayal grows each day that you 

threaten to use this Legislative Assembly to break that legal 

binding contract and not negotiate.  Justice Estey's whole report 

was based on negotiation, of arriving at a mutual settlement; 

240,000 co-op members, Mr. Premier, are asking you to keep 

the word that you gave in Prince Albert, Saskatchewan.  Will 

you keep it, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member refuses 

to accept the basic fact here.  I repeat again, the clear indication 

of the government and the intention, again, that the way out of 

this is a negotiated settlement.  The way out of this is a 

negotiated settlement based on the principles.  It doesn't have to 

be the exact crossing of the t or dotting of the i's of Estey, but 

on the principles of Estey. 

 

Estey's report is based on three months of trying to get an 

agreement through mediation.  Estey's report is based on 

considering all of FCL's arguments, and still he said, this is the 

way out.  We accept that former Supreme Court justice's 

recommendation as the way out.  There's room to negotiate, but 

there must be adherence to the principles. 

 

Now what more, sir, can any premier or government do when 

after 18 months we have neither gotten FCL 



1948 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1993 

to move nor have we gotten them to accept even the principles 

of Estey nor have we even gotten them to the point of sitting 

down with the Premier of the province or the minister 

responsible for this file to negotiate.  Their position simply is, 

they're not going to negotiate. 

 

Now that means that this is a prescription for, as I say, a policy 

of prayer; hope that nothing goes wrong even though we're 

living with a megaproject which is on the edge -- $300 million 

of losses for NewGrade over four years; over $600 million in 

exposure.  And you, sir, by your questioning, would have us 

continue putting the taxpayers -- all the taxpayers, including the 

Federated Co-op members, the Co-operators of which I'm a 

member -- every taxpayer at risk with that kind of a 

megaproject. 

 

I say, Mr. Leader of the Opposition . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the 

Premier knows that that simply is not the case.  FCL were told 

by your hand-picked political friend, Mr. Ching, that those 

issues that they agreed to by writing yesterday to put to 

arbitration as per the original agreement, were simply not on 

the table, that the bigger financing question had to be dealt with 

first before he would accept arbitration.  Mr. Premier, yesterday 

your minister received a letter saying that those issues can go to 

arbitration as per the agreement; there is no problem there.  

Justice Estey recognized that arbitration is a big part of the 

original agreement. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, why don't you take the time to at least put 

those issues to arbitration before you would use this Legislative 

Assembly to irrevocably change the contract of 240,000 co-op 

members in the province of Saskatchewan?  Why wouldn't you 

at least give that a try, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, what the hon. member 

either does not understand or ignores is that this issue is a large 

issue which involves, among other things, the arbitrated issues, 

the arbitration matters.  There's no doubt about that, but it 

doesn't stop and end there. 

 

It involves arbitration.  It involves a convoluted governance 

system on NewGrade which was designed by your government 

in such a way as to stymie effective commercial-making 

decisions respecting the upgrader.  It involves the issue of what 

happens when there is a deficiency on operations as there has 

been -- $76 million that your former premier and government 

pumped into it in order to save the project.  It ignores the fact 

that there is a huge debt, $360 million which you, sir . . . I am 

on the hook on, every taxpayer in this province is on the hook 

on, in addition to another 260 approximately from the 

federal government.  Those are the issues which have made this 

project run aground.  It is what has led Justice Estey to 

conclude you need to negotiate those issues now -- now. 

 

Just because the sun is shining and you can see it through a 

hole in the roof is no argument for saying you shouldn't repair 

the roof.  Wait till the day that the rain comes down and 

destroys all the furniture in the house, is your philosophy.  Well 

that may be yours, but it isn't ours.  We're acting to protect the 

taxpayers and we're doing it now, in the absence of 

negotiations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, your 

urge to protect the taxpayer, I suspect, has more to do with your 

political agenda than anything else. 

 

Mr. Premier, when you have Mr. Ching and Mr. Banda and Mr. 

Dombowsky, a whole raft of your hand-picked political 

patronage appointments over there in CIC (Crown Investments 

Corporation), I would think that people would be a little bit 

suspicious of your motives.  When we see that you're going to 

take over the board of the upgrader, I suspect those will be the 

kind of gentlemen that'll be on that board carrying out your 

political agenda. 

 

Mr. Premier, I don't consider that a good way to negotiate or to 

enter into arbitration.  Why don't you be upfront with the 

process here so that 240,000 co-op members -- who are also 

taxpayers, I would remind you, Mr. Premier -- know that this 

Legislative Assembly is not going to send a message that legal, 

binding contracts with people don't matter any more; that if I 

don't get my way, I'll simply do like I did with potash and 

uranium and oil and farm land; I'll bring in legislation and I'll 

expropriate it, I'll nationalize it. 

 

Mr. Premier, don't you think that that is the wrong message to 

send to Saskatchewan taxpayers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, on page 10 of the Estey 

report, Mr. Justice Estey concluded, among many conclusions 

along this vein, the following: 

 

Furthermore, at no stage in the foreseeable future will cash 

flow of (from) the Upgrader, by itself, service the interest 

and (the) principal charges falling due on the guaranteed 

debt, even when operating at full capacity . . . 

 

That's the finding -- at no stage in the foreseeable future.  Now 

that results in the liability that I've talked about in several 

hundreds of millions of dollars.  That is the outcome of this all. 

 

Mr. Justice Estey has set out the terms of reference of a 

potential settlement to get out of this.  You, sir, either refuse to 

accept those findings, in which case you might as well go out 

and tell the taxpayers that you are going to stick to the deal that 

you negotiated and that's 



May 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1949 

the end of it, and therefore they're going to be on the edge for 

upwards of $700 million, $700 million -- you're going to stick 

to your deal that you and your former premier negotiated, that 

you may as well come clean and tell the people -- or you have 

to follow the Estey report. 

 

And we say the principles of the Estey report is the way out.  

It's the fair way out for Federated Co-op, FCL.  It's the fair way 

out for the taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan.  It's the 

fair way out for the Government of Canada.  Everybody who 

looks at it must come to that reasonable conclusion.  What's 

your problem, sir?  Why don't you endorse the Estey report? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The problem, Mr. 

Premier, is that you're saying to 240,000 co-op members: I'm 

going to take your business, but if I mismanage it down the 

road, you're on the hook for the financial repercussions of it.  

That's what you're saying. 

 

I mean, Mr. Premier, it's like you promised them no new taxes 

in the last election.  Do you remember that, sir?  No new taxes.  

Well you've taxed everything that you can possibly find in this 

province.  And now you're saying to co-op members, I've 

figured out a way to tax your co-op dividends.  That's  basically 

what you're saying, Mr. Premier, to the co-op members of this 

province who thought they had a legally binding contract. 

 

I mean if you run the upgrader like you did the Potash Corp or 

the P.A. (Prince Albert) Pulp mill or all the land bank land 

spread around this province, the fact is that co-op members will 

have their dividend taxed, in no uncertain words. 

 

Mr. Premier, is that your solution, to bring in a tax now on the 

dividends of co-op members in the province of Saskatchewan?  

Is that the solution we're looking at? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, these people, this 

question is so far off the mark of any of the factual basis of 

what the debate is about that I don't think anybody can make 

any intelligence out of it.  This is a situation which is unrelated 

to any of the factual circumstances which are before us. 

 

Look, the debate is we have an albatross and a bad deal 

negotiated by them facing us.  That no one disputes. Everybody 

concludes that.  Unless the former premier from Estevan still 

sticks to the view this is a wonderful deal that he negotiated 10 

days before the election.  Unless the former premier believes 

that $50,000 a day in interest charges on this project is good for 

the taxpayers.  And unless the former premier thinks this is a 

good way for him to get elected as a federal Member of 

Parliament down there in Souris-Cannington. He should say so 

publicly.  He should say so publicly. 

But this does not make sense. This deal does not make sense.  

Don't take my word for it; take the word of Mr. Justice Estey. 

 

Now if you say this deal makes sense, end of the debate, you 

and I disagree.  But if you think it does not make sense, then 

you've got to say to me, negotiate along what lines?  We've 

tried every line.  The best line is the Estey line.  A neutral, 

independent, competent, integrity-filled person who says, here 

is the way out. 

 

We will accept that way out.  I repeat again to you, why don't 

you accept that way out? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, what I 

say to the Premier is, negotiate, not legislate.  That's what Estey 

said -- negotiate, not legislate. 

 

What we've got here, Mr. Premier, is not an acceptance of 

negotiation, not an acceptance of arbitration, not an acceptance 

of the parameters of the Estey report.  What we have here is a 

political problem, sir, that only you can fix. 

 

Now we all know who the real minister of CIC is.  The 

associate toy minister over there said to the press yesterday that 

the government has always been willing to negotiate on the 

outstanding issues.  Unfortunately the message delivered to the 

other party in the so-called negotiation was that that wasn't on 

the table. 

 

Mr. Premier, you are passing legislation through this House to 

give your friend Mr. Ching the ability to tear up and rewrite 

agreements on Bill 42.  The record that he has shown on the 

co-op deal, Mr. Premier, says that 240,000 co-op members are 

having their contract broken because of your political agenda. 

 

Mr. Premier, why don't you tell 240,000 co-op members today 

that your hand-picked political friends are not the ones going to 

do the negotiation, that that negotiation was done by somebody 

with some credibility in the province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, that is a very revealing 

question.  Prior to 1991, FCL came to the former government 

of the day and said on three separate occasions, which will be 

documented by the documentation which we'll be tabling 

shortly in this House and publicly, on three different occasions 

and said, this man has got to be out.  We have no credibility or 

confidence in him.  And they moved him.  The premier 

capitulated. 

 

Then the second person came.  He said, this man has got to be 

out.  And the premier, former premier, capitulated.  The former 

premier got a letter from an adviser, a personal friend and 

adviser of his, which will be tabled, pleading to the former 

premier not to sign that agreement.  They said, that adviser, 

who's an expert in oil matters, he's got to be out.  They moved 



1950 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1993 

him out. 

 

Now the Leader of the Opposition says to this government that 

we have got to say, our negotiators are out.  I don't say to FCL 

who they negotiate with, and by golly, FCL is not going to tell 

me who we're going to negotiate with.  We stand up for the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan -- unlike you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would say, Mr. 

Speaker, by that answer that the Premier is saying that his 

political agenda and his political friends are more important 

than the contracts that he signs in the province of 

Saskatchewan, the dealings that he has with the people. 

 

Mr. Premier, 240,000 co-op members don't want their 

dividends taxed because you are breaking a legal contract; 

240,000 co-op members, Mr. Premier, don't want your political 

agenda in the road; 240,000 co-op members want negotiations, 

not legislation. 

 

Mr. Premier, don't use this Legislative Assembly to repeat the 

mistakes that you made in the 1970s by bringing in that 

legislation.  Negotiate in good faith, Mr. Premier.  Send the 

right message outside of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have said inside this 

House during question period, and outside this House before 

the matter arose.  I repeat again.  I say so, as of this date, the 

government of the province of Saskatchewan is prepared to 

negotiate.  The Government of Saskatchewan wants to 

negotiate.  The Government of Saskatchewan does not want to 

introduce legislation.  The Government of Saskatchewan is 

prepared to meet Mr. Leland and his team as he chooses it, any 

time, anywhere, to negotiate on the principles of Estey. 

 

Our condition is, and our only condition is, that the principles 

of Estey be negotiated.  Our line also is that we want a 

memorandum of understanding which can be taken elsewhere 

for further consultation.  We're prepared to meet any time, 

anywhere. 

 

I told that to the president; I'm saying this to this House; and I 

have been rebuffed -- yes.  Those negotiations have not been 

accepted.  That is not my choice.  None the less, I repeat the 

offer now. 

 

If FCL wants to call at this stage in the game and say they are 

prepared to negotiate on the principles of Estey, let's do it.  

We'll go.  In the meantime, the legislation can go too, and 

there's nothing that prevents a negotiated settlement and to 

avoid all of this. 

 

But if they continue to take the position which you do which 

says this deal is the best thing since sliced bread, 

notwithstanding that the credit rating agencies . . . 

notwithstanding that the taxpayers are facing all kinds of 

pressures in health care, in education, and social services, if 

you take that position and they take 

that position, I say to you, sir, that's a policy of prayer and nine 

and a half years of you praying for a turnaround in the 

economic circumstances has only sunk us in a deeper hole. 

 

It's not our policy.  Where do you stand on Estey?  Join us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, you say you want to 

negotiate but then you use a threat of nationalization as the 

hammer over Federated Co-op.  That's what you've done, sir.  

That's some negotiating strategy. 

 

Have you given any thought at all, Mr. Premier, to the signal 

that it is sending to the business community in this province.  

The message is clear, Mr. Premier -- don't do business in this 

province with this government because they may change their 

minds and rip up a contract that they have with you.  That's the 

message, Mr. Premier. 

 

Is it any wonder, Mr. Premier, that new companies don't want 

to relocate to Saskatchewan.  Is it any wonder that there's been 

negative job growth since you've taken power.  Is it any wonder 

that there is negative economic growth since you have taken 

power. 

 

Mr. Premier, when are you going to stop . . . or start working 

with businesses in this province instead of against them, Mr. 

Premier?  And when are you going to stop your tax and 

take-over mentality that is driving jobs, growth, and hope from 

this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, my colleague, the 

Minister of Economic Development, will take subsequent 

questions along this line, but I do want to . . . I want to make 

one response because I thought it was in the context of the FCL 

upgrader.  I want to say that today we received a rating report 

by Standard and Poor's of New York, which I'm very pleased to 

report, Mr. Speaker, has indicated that our BBB plus rating has 

been confirmed.  The rating remains stable. 

 

But I also want to say this, in response to the hon. member 

when he talks about the business community.  This is what the 

business community reads.  This report also says that we have 

done this.  The government's . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

The former premier, you know, something about him and truth 

which makes him very allergic, because he just continues to 

chirp from his seat.  And I wish he would scratch that allergy 

and get up and ask a question on this matter.  He'd feel better 

for it and so would I. 

 

But here's what S and P (Standard and Poor's) says about us.  It 

says: the ratings reflect the government's strong, demonstrated 

commitment to deficit reduction and a more rigorous 

management of its off-budget loans -- off-budget loans -- and 



May 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1951 

investments.  Now what we're talking about here, what we're 

talking about here is an off-budget loan, an investment on FCL. 

 

And they say we've got to do more of this.  The business 

community knows that when you deal with government, it's got 

to have the proper smell.  The deal's got to have the proper 

smell.  They all know that.  And they know that this deal's a 

bad deal.  I tell you, Federated Co-operatives knows it's a bad 

deal.  I tell you ordinary cooperators knows it's a bad deal. 

 

Now what we're trying to do is square the circle and get a 

properly negotiated settlement.  If your line of questioning was 

the right way, namely: we acknowledge it's a bad deal; we don't 

think this is the solution; here's what we think is the solution, 

we'd entertain that.  But you stick your heads in the sand and 

you continue to say that this is a good deal come heck or high 

water, and it doesn't matter, we can't do anything except have a 

policy of prayer.  And I repeat again, I reject that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, by any 

yardstick available, your economic record has been a disaster.  

Your first quarter labour report released today shows 

unemployment in Saskatoon has climbed in the past year by 

almost 2 per cent to 12.4 per cent.  There are 11,000 less jobs in 

Saskatchewan today than there were at the same time in 1991.  

There are 12,000 more people on social assistance, the highest 

number in the history of this province.  And you are the 

Premier who said that you would end poverty in this province.  

Our economy has shrank by 3.5 per cent since last year; that's 

$700 million gone from our province for ever. 

 

Mr. Premier, you say everything is fine and run around scaring 

businesses out of this province by doing government 

take-overs.  Mr. Premier, why don't you simply admit you have 

no economic strategy for this province, diverge some of your 

attention away from your tax and take-over agenda, and get to 

work on a solution to the problems facing Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I hear the member's 

gloom and doom.  Again the member from Kindersley 

obviously having a very, very difficult time finding things to 

ask questions about.  He continually goes back to the 

gloom-and-doom scenario when nothing else works. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to the member in May 25's 

Leader-Post, on the market page: 

 

Oil and gas stocks hot. 

 

Saskatchewan's oil patch in for a mini-boom. 

 

This is just one example, one example of where the private 

sector is creating employment, and in fact activity in the oil 

patch is up by 187 per cent this year 

alone.  Housing starts are up 80 per cent.  In the area of trade, 

non-traditional exports are up 15 per cent. 

 

So you can continue your gloom-and-doom and 

hope-for-disaster scenario, but I can tell you after 10 years of 

your management the people of this province are sick and tired 

of it and they are very pleased they have the government they 

have, the Premier they have, creating economic development in 

the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Before 

orders of the day and by leave of the Assembly, I have already 

indicated to the Government House Leader that I, by leave, 

would move that certain following items be dropped from the 

order paper. 

 

The Speaker: -- Does the member have leave? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

RESOLUTION AND RETURNS WITHDRAWN 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you to the Government House Leader.  

Mr. Speaker, under private members' motions, item 11, 

resolution 17 be dropped. 

 

Under motions for returns (debatable), return items no. 4, 6, 7, 

9, 10, 13, 14, 16, 17, 19, 20, 26, 27, 30, 31, 33, 36, 44, 46, 49, 

55, 63, 65, 67, 70, 72, and 186, Mr. Speaker, be dropped from 

the order paper. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I'm not certain that this has ever 

happened in this legislature before, but I will ask, is leave 

granted?  Order, order.  Is leave granted for each of those items 

that the member has requested to be dropped? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

The Speaker: -- Those items are dropped.  Order. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 77 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 77 -- An Act 

respecting the Implementation of Certain Treaty Land 

Entitlement Settlement Agreements be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

(1445) 

Bill No. 78 



1952 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1993 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 78 -- An Act to 

confirm an Agreement between the Government of Canada and 

the Government of Saskatchewan varying the Saskatchewan 

Natural Resources Transfer Agreement be now read a second 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 74 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Farm 

Security Act 

 

The Chair: -- I will ask the Minister of Agriculture and Food 

to introduce his officials to the members of the committee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  With me 

today I have Darcy McGovern, Rick Burton, Dan Patterson, 

and Bev Cleveland. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

have a few questions I'd like to ask you and it's on the land 

ownership part of the Bill.  Would you, in your words, Mr. 

Minister, just enlighten us.  And we've read the Bill of course 

and we think we understand it, but just in your own words tell 

this legislature the purpose of this Bill, the overall picture of 

bringing this Bill to this House. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- There are several sections to the 

Bill, the land ownership question that you addressed.  The 

purpose of this Bill is really to clarify and somewhat tighten up 

the regulatory control of the farm land ownership Act.  It 

doesn't put any provisions in that were not in the Bill 

previously. 

 

The restrictions as to foreign ownership are the same as they 

have been for the past number of years.  But the Bill gives the 

board more investigative powers and some powers to 

investigate sales before they happen, rather than after the fact 

which, as the current legislation stands, if there's a land sale 

and the farm land tenure board has no power to intervene until 

a sale has been made, then they can order a divestiture of the 

land which creates, I think, some problems for all those 

involved.  So in this case it will, with the amendments, it will 

allow them to be out front a little better and to make some 

rulings before actual sale takes place. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, in Saskatchewan in the last 

year, year and a half, there were several large portions of land 

that were about to be sold and the public thought they were 

sold, and all of a sudden it fell through.  I think you know 

where I'm talking about.  There was some over in the 

Kindersley area or Eston area; like you say, some large, large 

areas of lands from several different farmers that thought they 

had 

their land sold to outside investors. 

 

Is the actions or whatever happened there . . . it fell through, 

but has that got anything to do with the purpose of this Bill, is 

what was happening there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well certainly that was one of the 

things that alerted us to the inadequacies in the Act that were 

there.  We don't know whether those deals were outside 

ownership.  They were being piloted by Saskatchewan people, 

whether it was . . . whether there were actually options taken on 

land which were not exercised. 

 

We don't know why the deals didn't come to pass, but it did 

point out to us that we had no . . . the board itself had no power 

to investigate to see if this huge sale was going to be legal or 

not.  All they could do was wait for the sale to take place and 

then rule afterwards.  And if they ruled that indeed the sale was 

not legal, then they would have to resell the land.  And that 

seemed to us to be a bit of an anomaly in the Act.  It hadn't 

been updated for a good number of years, and so that's one of 

the reasons that I think prompted us to look at the Act and 

make some of the amendments that we made. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, what 

you're saying then that you could see problems with those types 

of sales.  What were your problems that you seen with it?  If 

there were outsiders coming in or outside money coming in, 

maybe dealing through somebody from here, what was your 

own personal view what was wrong with what may have been 

happening.  I understand we don't know exactly, but what is it 

about those types of agreements or sales we heard about that 

bothered you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well I guess perhaps the member 

opposite could answer that question himself.  Those were the 

same restrictions that were in place all during the time the 

members opposite were in power.  I guess it's always been a 

Saskatchewan desire to own and control our own farm land 

within the province, and that was . . . you know, certainly we 

have grave concerns about outside interest buying up large 

tracts of Saskatchewan farm land and having the rent or profit 

from that land continually flow out of the province over a large 

number of years. 

 

And again we didn't change the regulations or the restrictions 

on foreign ownership. They remain the same, 320 acres for 

residents of Canada and 10 acres for foreign investors, and we 

didn't change that restriction.  All we changed was sort of the 

timing and the power of the board to enforce those regulations 

a little more practically we believe. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Now, Mr. Minister, you can say that yes, 

those regulations were in place when we were in government, 

but as time is going on through our nine years, close to 10 years 

in government, we could see the need to maybe loosen up on 

some of these regulations.  And I'm sure that a lot of your 

officials will know that the feeling of . . . especially in the debt 

situation and people out of money and banks not wanting to 

finance land, there was a tendency for 



May 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1953 

loosening up. 

 

Now what you've done here is you've tightened up.  I know that 

it didn't happen in the regulations, and no Bill to that effect, 

but, Mr. Minister, there was a strong feeling among our 

government, and I'm sure if we had had one government again 

in 1991 that we would have been going the other direction, 

loosening up. 

 

I wonder what you have against other countries or other people 

that are non-Saskatchewan residents or non-Canadian residents.  

What have you personally got against them coming in here 

with some money and buying land?  Just want your feeling on 

it, not that I'm saying that.  I just want your feeling on it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I guess the 

feelings of the government are that we would like to certainly 

restrict that in some way.  We do not, would not, like to see a 

large percentage of Saskatchewan farm land owned by foreign 

investors for the reasons that I have articulated earlier, the lack 

of control that we have, the effect it has on traditional family 

farms, and on the economic benefit and the well-being of the 

province having the rent or profits from that land continually 

flow out of the province. 

 

And I think that those are the reasons behind why the Act was 

enacted way back in 1970 and probably the reasons why it was 

not changed by the previous administration. 

 

And again, we haven't tightened up those restrictions or 

changed them in any way.  All we've done is give the 

independent board . . . that it enforces them, a little more 

leeway and power to do its job. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, that's the difference between 

your thinking and my thinking.  I'm not speaking on behalf of 

all of our caucus because I'm not sure where they stand on it, 

but I think majority-wise they support what I'm going to say. 

 

You see, we've had a tragedy happen in Saskatchewan here.  

And as you know it, in rural Saskatchewan there's another 1939 

approaching -- or the 1930s, I should say, '30 to '39 -- where it's 

a disaster in rural Saskatchewan.  We need some cash inflow.  

We don't need it all going out.  And you just finished saying it 

there, Mr. Minister, that we don't need to have non-residents 

owning land and people out of country owning land because 

the rent and what not would be going out. 

 

Well what do you think is happening now?  What do you think 

is the situation if you borrow money from Farm Credit or the 

Royal Bank or whatever?  Where do you think that money 

goes?  Do you think it stays in Saskatchewan?  Did you think it 

even stays in Canada?  If you borrow money from Farm Credit, 

who's making the only money?  It's the people lending the 

money to Farm Credit who comes from New York, for 

goodness' sakes. 

 

It's the same kind of thinking you people had back in the days 

you sold the potash mines.  I can remember 

the debate in here, oh, we got to own those potash mines so 

let's make a Bill in this House and kick those Americans out 

and make sure that we own and Saskatchewan owns that soil -- 

and they'll always own the soil -- they'll own the potash mines, 

they'll own the businesses. 

 

So what did you do?  It cost multimillions of dollars to kick the 

Americans out, go to New York, borrow the money to pay 

them off; and we're still in debt to New York.  Where do you 

think the profit's going?  For goodness' sakes -- and I'm not 

hard over on this because I might be wrong -- I'm just 

suggesting that, Mr. Minister, that maybe we need . . . maybe 

the point is that we need some outside money coming in. 

 

When this country was broke up in the first place, there was no 

money out here when the first people came west at the turn of 

the century and prior.  They come out here with very little 

money, but what they did have came from European countries.  

They're all migrated from Europe to the East, and then West.  It 

was brand-new money in the West. 

 

Don't you think it's time now that it's . . . I would just as soon 

somebody from Italy or Hong Kong or Africa, India -- I don't 

care where.  If they come and bought some of my neighbour's 

land -- that they're going to lose it to the big corporation, to the 

bank, or to the provincial government through ACS 

(Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan) or 

whatever, I'd rather have rented from them than have to have it 

to the Royal Bank or the Bank of Montreal or whatever.  I 

mean what's wrong with some new money coming in?  If you 

had a few hundreds of millions of dollars worth of money come 

into Saskatchewan to pay for this land . . . that they cannot take 

the land away.  The soil will always be here. 

 

So I know it's been a situation that we didn't deal with too 

much in the prior years of the '80s.  But the latter part of the 

'80s, we were sure starting to change our mind and getting a lot 

of requests from farmers.  For goodness' sakes, I'm losing my 

land.  I've got a chance to sell it to an outsider.  I've got a 

chance to sell it to somebody from Switzerland, Germany, 

whatever, and I can't because of your restrictions. 

 

Now I know your officials know that we were starting to loosen 

up on our thinking.  Instead we get this Bill in here, and it won't 

be the direction from the officials; it'll be the direction from the 

government.  Let's tighten up and let's control. 

 

Now what's wrong with some new money in, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well certainly we have no problem 

with new money coming in, and we certainly welcome people 

from anywhere coming here and buying farm land and farming 

the land and moving to our province.  That's how our province 

was built, and we certainly have no problem with people 

coming in. 

 

But I think what would be a catastrophe, as we go through a 

very tough period in agriculture, is to have 



1954 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1993 

billions of dollars from offshore or elsewhere come in and buy 

up the farm land, have the price of grain turn around, and have 

all the benefits of that flowing outside the province. 

 

And we as a province always, because we are a province that's 

rich in natural resources and our scattered population and very 

expensive to service, we have always tried to get our fair share 

of the natural resource income to stay within the province and 

to be used within the province.  And I think the farm land is no 

different than other natural resources.  In fact, there's a very 

strong feeling among Saskatchewan farmers that they would 

like to own their land, and I guess that's the explanation. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Yes, Mr. Minister, I agree that farmers 

would like to own their own land.  But there's very, very small 

percentage of land in Saskatchewan owned by the farmer.  He 

might have a bill of sale on it, but if he has a loan from any 

lender other than a credit union -- the credit union would be the 

only Saskatchewan-owned lender that would be money 100 per 

cent Saskatchewan -- but if you have any major bank or Farm 

Credit, the money is owned out of province, and in most cases 

out of country -- right out of country. 

 

Now you know right well if they come in and bought land here 

right now, it'd be an influx of cash into this country, and it 

would give security for the farm that's in that position.  He's 

losing his land; it's going.  Just like an auction sale, it's going, 

going, and maybe gone.  So here's a chance for them to . . . 

they're lots of people who will come in and buy.  There's a lot 

of investors that'll come in and buy.  I'm sure it's the laws of 

Saskatchewan that stops the big sales of land that was going on 

out in the Eston area. 

 

Now I'm not blaming your government before that because 

those laws were in place by us.  I understand that, Mr. Minister.  

But it's those kind of restrictions that will stop anybody from 

coming in.  And I guess what I'm saying here, Mr. Minister, 

that maybe we should have had a Bill in this here House 

opening it up to anyone that would like to buy land.  They can't 

take the land away.  They're going to . . . not likely going to 

come in and farm it; they're going to have our own people from 

here farming it. 

 

The most people that farm the land in Saskatchewan now didn't 

. . . their ancestors didn't come from Saskatchewan; they come 

from Europe.  If the money wants to come in and buy . . . if 

people want to come in and bring cash in to buy some more 

land, I can't understand what you'd have against that, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well again, Mr. Chairman, we 

have no problem with people coming in and buying land if they 

intend to be Saskatchewan residents.  And we certainly . . . and 

the board has powers to make exception for border areas and so 

on.  But I guess there's a basic disagreement on whether 

we just do not believe that we would like to see huge tracts of 

our farm land owned by foreign owners.  And I guess maybe 

we're in basic disagreement on that item. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, you bet we got 

a basic disagreement on that because that's what this 

government wants to do.  They want to put a wall right around 

Saskatchewan and just retain it and hold it and nobody else 

come in -- no investors, no nothing.  They just want to sit here 

till we all just have less money and less money, and we 

eventually go broke.  That's what you want. 

 

That's why your socialists are all against free trade.  They didn't 

want to deal with anybody.  They want to put a wall around.  

That's what causes wars, when you put a wall around.  That's 

what happened in Germany.  They put a wall around Germany, 

and they said . . . in both wars, we won't trade with anybody; 

we're going to take it.  Well they found out it doesn't work that 

way.  You've got to trade with people.  There's nothing wrong.  

It's just you socialists that are want to protect . . . you think 

you're protecting a few labourers, and maybe you're right but 

maybe not.  Maybe in the long run you're not protecting them 

either.  Maybe you're not protecting anybody in Saskatchewan. 

 

Maybe you got to open up, get new money in.  You're against 

trading with Mexico; you're against trading with United States.  

If it wasn't for United States here we couldn't even exist, and 

you people don't want to even admit that. 

 

But I see you're getting much quieter about this here trading 

and what not, because you got a socialist across the border 

potentially trying to make a mess of that country down there.  

He's gone downhill so bad that we should have sent somebody 

down to New York to the Democratic convention.  We sent the 

Economic minister down, the member from Elphinstone.  The 

member from Elphinstone went to the States when Clinton was 

elected as their leader.  We should have sent somebody else 

and give a better direction because they're going the same 

direction you are.  The socialists are just going to try and put a 

wall right around the United States the same as you people are 

here.  And that's what's going to happen.  The more socialists 

take over this country, the bigger wall we're going to have 

around. 

 

For goodness' sake, open up, loosen up, and let some new 

money come in.  I'm very disappointed in this Bill, and as I 

said, Mr. Minister, I want to be fair.  These rules and 

regulations were there when we were there and we didn't 

change them.  But boy, I'm sorry we didn't, sorry we hadn't 

loosened up.  But it wouldn't make any difference because you 

people are going to return back the best as you can, to take 

over.  You're going to try to control. 

 

Somehow or other you'll never be able to bring the word land 

bank back in here because you lost the election in '82 on the 

land bank issue, buying Saskatchewan.  But you're going to get 

a form of it somehow or other, and it's going to happen because 



May 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1955 

as farmers lose their land, they'll do anything they have to.  

There's something going to happen.  You people are not 

right-wing enough sitting in that front row and the second row 

and maybe the whole of the four rows.  The only way you think 

is control and how do we take over, but we got to do it smarter 

than we did in the '70s. 

 

When this Bill gets public to the people out in Saskatchewan, 

you think that the farmers are saying to you, we want to own 

our own land.  You bet they do.  But when they're starting to 

lose it, they would rather have somebody . . . If I was losing my 

farm -- and goodness' sakes my family has had enough trouble 

-- instead of dealing with a big lender, I would have loved it if 

some stranger from Hong Kong had've drove in one day with a 

cheque and says we're ready to buy out your lender and lease 

you this land for 25 years.  Well it's a way of staying on that 

farm; it's a way of life. 

 

The member over here seems to know a lot about farming.  

Maybe he can get up and talk about this.  Well if we'd gained . . 

. even if that happened, if somebody wanted to come in and 

farm it, it's better than what's happening in our country.  We're 

losing . . . When I was elected in 1978, there was 76,000 

farmers with quota books and now there's 60,000. 

 

We're going down. And I'm not blaming your government for 

that; I'm blaming all the conditions in North America.  We're 

going down and down and down and down.  Maybe we got to 

have some new people in here with money to farm or we're not 

going to . . . We can't have all just one big co-op farm.  When 

you people get through, that's what we're going to have -- is 

one big co-op farm in Saskatchewan. 

 

The government will have to own it all because the farmers 

aren't going to be able to.  The only farmers that can exist out 

there, Mr. Minister -- and you should know this; you're a 

farmer -- the only farmer that can make it out there, he's got to 

have some prior bucks before this '80s came along.  He couldn't 

survive. 

 

If somebody just up and started farming in 1980,'82, and started 

right on their own with their bare hands and went out to work, 

they could not become a farmer.  They'd have to have help 

from their parents or family or somebody would have to help 

them get started to farm.  And you know that. 

 

And so we needed this here influx of money coming in here.  

But the biggest thing I don't like about this . . . we know we 

can't outvote you; we know you're going to get this and it's . . . 

But the biggest thing I don't like about it, you're putting all the 

power into your cabinet. 

 

Since when should a few people sitting in your cabinet room 

decide who's going to come in and do this or whether this is 

kosher or whether that's kosher or not.  Why did you give the 

power to your cabinet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chair, I thought I 

understood this Bill quite well.  I didn't realize that it was about 

to start wars and create this stop to trading. But I think the 

member opposite goes a little far in his judgement of the impact 

of this particular Bill. 

 

As to cabinet powers that he made reference to, the Bill gives 

power to the independent Lands Appeal Board.  All the power 

that was given to cabinet was the right to request the board to 

investigate a particular land sale that's brought to our attention.  

I think again that's in reaction to a sale like the Eston land deal 

which we were made aware of, was going on. 

 

The Department of Justice thought that it could well be 

interference and illegal for us to even ask the board to 

investigate it.  The board certainly did not have the power on its 

own to investigate the sale.  All we could do was wait for the 

sale to happen, and then if it was not legal, to order that land to 

be resold. 

 

And I think nobody wanted to have that scenario develop, and 

therefore the regulations doesn't give any power to the cabinet.  

The power still rests with the Appeal Board. It's an independent 

board, but it gives the cabinet the authority to ask them to 

investigate a particular land sale.  And that's all that's in the Bill 

that gives power to cabinet. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, I don't think you or any 

government's got a right to investigate a potential land sale.  No 

right whatsoever.  I don't care whether it's a quarter section or 

200 quarters, they know the law.  Anybody coming in out of 

province, it's up to them to find out whether they're within the 

laws of Saskatchewan.  And if they make a mistake they would 

have to suffer and it would have to be resold or whatever.  I 

agree with you that it would have to be sold.  But it should 

come to that point before we have an overpowering cabinet 

looking into it and looking into potential sales and scaring them 

off. 

 

For goodness' sakes, it might have been a very legitimate sale.  

It might have been . . . because I understand there was people 

from Regina involved in it and it was never proved whether it 

was out of province or not.  If somebody out of province wants 

to lend money to somebody in Saskatchewan to go and buy 

land with it, that should be legit.  And I think it is. 

 

So I don't think your government or your cabinet has any right 

if they hear about a land sale, read it in the Leader-Post, has 

any right whatsoever to go out and start investigating it.  Why 

would you investigate it?  Why wouldn't you just stay out of it 

until after it's done and then you investigate it and see if it was 

done right or not?  Because you don't know.  You can't be 

investigating every sale of land that happens. 

 

What's your comments on that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well I think that somebody who 

was buying land and then doesn't know whether it falls within 

our . . . legally falls within our law would like to know before 

they make the deal that it's illegal and not after they make the 

deal.  So I guess that's our approach. 



1956 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1993 

We did not do any investigation of the Eston land deal because 

all we know is what we heard from hearsay.  We had no right 

to investigate and therefore we didn't investigate it.  The deal 

fell through on its own.  So that's the reason for that. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister.  Mr. 

Minister, you mentioned earlier in response to a question from 

the member from Arm River that your concern about money 

coming into Saskatchewan and buying up farm land, that there 

would be billions of dollars potentially moving into 

Saskatchewan buying up farm land and then the price of grain 

perhaps would turn around and all of the money that's made by 

the farmers would essentially go out of the province. 

 

And I'm wondering if you could let us in on where this billions 

of dollars of potential investment is coming from.  Or have you 

done any kind of study or any kind of . . . is there any kind of 

information available to support that kind of contention? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well certainly there were the land 

deals that were begun, and as we say, fell through for whatever 

reason.  Rather a huge tract at Eston, several others around the 

province -- Nipawin area, and a couple of others which were 

very, very sizeable chunks of land. 

 

We don't know; I don't think we make laws based on what we 

know to be happening today or tomorrow.  We make laws 

based on principles that we like to see over the long run. 

 

We do know that there are huge pools of international capital 

that are becoming available in the world and huge pools of 

money that could well one day, if some investor sees the 

turn-around in the grain market and believes that Saskatchewan 

farm land is underpriced, it's certainly within the realm of 

possibility that there would be billions of dollars in a fund that 

would move into Saskatchewan to buy up the land and wait to 

reap the capital gain. 

 

So we don't know that it would happen, and certainly I guess if 

there's no great turn-around happening in grain prices that we 

can see, and this probably would not happen at the present 

time.  But because of the deals that were going on, we wanted 

to look at the Act.  And it hadn't been rewritten since some time 

in the 70s, and we just wanted to update it a bit. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you.  So, Mr. Minister, you have nothing 

to base it on -- your reasons for wanting to move on this 

legislation -- nothing to base it on other than the thought that 

maybe at some point down the road Saskatchewan land will be 

viewed by outside investors as underpriced and therefore 

willing to invest into Saskatchewan.  Nothing to base it on 

other than just you feel that maybe that might happen. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well certainly the law is based on 

the fact that we want to retain ownership of farm land and by 

and large within the province of 

Saskatchewan, against whatever contingencies should occur. 

 

I guess, as the member pointed out earlier, the members 

opposite were in power for 10 years and had those regulations 

in effect.  I don't know if you foresaw at that time that there 

was going to be huge investors coming and therefore didn't 

repeal the Act.  I think it's been in place since some time in the 

early '70s and we just believe that it should continue to remain 

in place. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, you mentioned that the large tract 

that was being assembled in the Eston area was the primary 

reason why your government felt that this legislation may have 

to be updated, as you call it, or changed.  And I'm wondering if 

you could provide us with any information to support that 

claim. 

 

Was there a large number of calls to your office or to the farm 

land ownership board with respect to that?  Were there a lot of 

people calling, saying that they didn't believe that that 

transaction should be able to go ahead? 

 

(1515) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well I don't have documentation.  

Certainly I received 10 to 20 calls in my office.  I think a 

number of MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 

approached me saying that they'd received phone calls -- not all 

opposed -- many curious about what's happening, some 

concern.  And, you know, I don't have documentation on it 

other than certainly was . . . it was in the newspaper.  It was a 

prominent issue about for a time.  And I think when those sorts 

of issues arise, you immediately look at what your options are. 

 

If this was not a legal sale, obviously we would be involved 

and you want to know that.  We found that the legislation that 

we had really hamstrung us in saying we have to sit back and 

wait for this sale to take place and check its legality.  And if it 

was illegal, you know, I thought that would be . . . or we 

thought, as government, that would be very disruptive to have 

people invest their money and then have to resell the land, and 

it would certainly be devastating for the community involved. 

 

And so I thought that was one of the reasons that prompted . . . 

I guess all legislation gets reviewed from time to time.  We, I 

think, have something like a hundred different Bills in the 

House.  Many of them are amendments of legislation. They 

need to be updated from time to time.  So I don't think it's 

terribly unusual to look at a Bill that hasn't been revised for 10 

or 15 years and update it as needed. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well, Mr. Minister, while you may have felt there 

was a need to update this legislation, I think there's a lot of 

people in Saskatchewan believes that the problem we're faced 

with in Saskatchewan right now in agriculture is a lack of 

capital.  And that's based primarily on the fact that we have low 

grain prices and a whole host of other international factors that 

we're dealing with. 



May 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1957 

But I think a lot of people in Saskatchewan feel that if there 

was outside investment available to Saskatchewan farmers, 

outside money to be able to bring in investment into 

Saskatchewan, I think that they would perhaps welcome that. 

 

I know in the Eston area -- which I incidentally farm in the 

Eston area -- I know there was a great deal of concern, but 

there was also a great number of people that felt that it was the 

best thing that could ever happen to them.  They were looking 

at the opportunity to be able to sell out at a very, very attractive 

price potentially, and therefore they were more than happy to 

look at the opportunity that was presented in front of them. 

 

And I'm wondering, Mr. Minister -- you mentioned that there 

was a few calls, a few MLAs, that sort of thing -- was there any 

kind of concerted outcry from the people in the Eston area 

about this land transaction, potential land transaction? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, again I'd like 

to point out that although the Eston land transaction was one of 

the things that triggered us looking at our Bill, we did not in 

any way interfere with that transaction.  We have no indication 

that it was foreign money that was doing the deal . . . or were 

being done by people from Regina.  So we assume the deal fell 

through for some reason, and unlikely that it was our foreign 

ownership law. 

 

Because presumably anybody doing that large a tract of land 

and offering that much money would certainly have 

investigated the foreign ownership laws before beginning to 

make that sort of deal.  So to say that somehow this Bill has 

crushed that deal, I think is unlikely and pure speculation at 

best. 

 

All I'm saying is that certainly those sorts of deals with foreign 

money certainly would be possible if it weren't for the law, and 

we just felt that the law needs to be there and we wanted to 

give the independent board that administers it a little better 

power to administer the law that was there. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, did your officer of the farm land 

ownership board conduct any kind of an investigation or make 

any kind of inquiries with respect to the proposed land deal at 

Eston? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Essentially there was no 

investigation.  There was a bit of monitoring that went on.  

There was certainly information was, I know, phoned into . . . 

people volunteered information to the board as they did to my 

office.  I had people phone my office telling me that, you know, 

they had an offer and who it was from. But there was no formal 

investigation of the land deal. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well, Mr. Minister, just to conclude here; I won't 

take up too much more time on this.  I certainly recognize that 

your government is intent on changing this.  I just want to I 

guess go on the record as saying that I think in the province of 

Saskatchewan 

that people should have . . . And if the prior legislation 

restricted that, I guess that's another matter. But the prior 

legislation, in my view, wasn't correct either and it should have 

been changed, and I'm disappointed that it wasn't changed.  I 

wasn't a part of that administration, but unfortunately it wasn't 

changed.  And I think in hindsight of the government, the 

previous administration may have looked at that. 

 

But nevertheless, I think I want to go on the record as saying 

that I think the people of Saskatchewan should be able to sell 

out if they want to sell out to people with outside interests.  In a 

business community it happens all the time.  I'm not restricted 

if I have a business in Saskatchewan, from seeking outside 

capital to buy out my business.  And I think that farmers want 

that opportunity as well. 

 

I know in the Eston area it was an interesting time, to say the 

least, and when that transaction was perhaps coming together, 

there was a lot of people that viewed it as their opportunity to 

retire.  And that's basically the way it was looked on.  And 

because it was such a . . . the price was an attractive price, there 

was a lot of people made some pretty serious decisions based 

on the fact that that attractive price was being offered. 

 

With the ageing population that we have in agriculture right 

now and continues to get . . . the average age of a 

Saskatchewan farmer continues to increase, I think we'll see in 

this province where more and more and more land becomes to 

the stage where people want to divest.  They want to sell down 

their holdings and retire or move on to other pursuits, whatever. 

 

And I think this is going to be a continual problem.  I think 

your legislation's going to make it even worse.  For example, in 

the area that I am from, I think there is . . . the youngest farmer, 

probably the youngest farmer is over 30 years of age.  There is 

no new ones starting up.  It just isn't happening.  And I suspect 

that's the case pretty much all over Saskatchewan.  There isn't, 

in large numbers anyway, any big migration back to the farm.  

It just isn't happening. 

 

And the member over here says they need land bank.  Well I 

think that's probably the last thing that's needed in this 

province.  That's probably the last thing that's needed in this 

province and I suspect even the Minister of Agriculture 

recognizes that.  If he wants any political future in this 

province, I expect he recognizes that anyway. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, I think that I would like some kind of 

response from you with respect to that concern.  There are 

farmers in this province that are at the age where they want to 

retire.  They want out of agriculture.  They have worked their 

entire lifelong in agriculture.  Their family perhaps isn't 

interested in it.  They want an opportunity to be able to sell out 

to whoever happens to have the money. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I wonder what your thoughts are on that.  

Should the people of this province have the opportunity to sell 

out, or do you think that the 



1958 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1993 

government should be putting forward legislation that restricts 

them on their ability to retire? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well certainly the government 

believes that farmers should have the chance to retire and retire 

with dignity and with some financial security. 

 

I guess there's two sides to the coin: higher land prices for 

retiring farmers means a tougher start for the young farmers.  

And I think if it means that we sell out the future of the 

province by having huge tracts of lands become owned by 

foreign owners and forever become serfs on our own land, I 

guess that's where -- as I mentioned to the member opposite -- 

we agree to disagree.  We believe that these foreign ownership 

restrictions are important, that our land is a natural resource and 

should benefit Saskatchewan people, and that's our position.  I 

guess the member opposite disagrees with that, but I think 

that's basically the difference. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- And yet, Mr. Minister, there's absolutely no 

evidence whatsoever to suggest that that is going to happen.  I 

asked you earlier if there was any evidence to suggest that 

there's large tracts of land . . . large amounts of money going to 

be flowing into Saskatchewan.  You have no evidence 

whatsoever to support your contention that that's going to 

happen.  The only thing we have to go on is the feeling that this 

government has that it might happen somewhere down the road 

if grain prices happen to turn around or somebody recognizes 

perhaps there's an opportunity. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- There won't be an opportunity. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Incidentally, that's probably true too.  You won't 

be in office for that eventuality to happen, I would suggest, Mr. 

Minister, especially in light of the kinds of things you're . . . in 

light of the things you're trying to do in this province. 

 

There's no evidence, no evidence that you can give us today to 

support your claim that there is huge pools of capital just 

waiting with bated breath to move in here and scoop up 

Saskatchewan farm land.  And yet you have to bring in 

legislation to deny . . . or to try and stop that perceived problem 

that you see. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, in the first 

place we're not bringing in legislation; it's been here for 10 to 

14 years.  I guess we know that it won't happen as long as the 

legislation is in place. 

 

I guess . . . I don't know what the member's line . . . where he's 

going with his line of questioning.  He's saying if there's no 

money coming in, then nobody's ready to invest in 

Saskatchewan farm land, then I guess repealing the Act and 

allowing it wouldn't make it happen anyway.  And if it is going 

to happen, as long as the law's in place we know that it won't 

happen.  And I guess if it's something that we don't view as 

desirable, we just keep the law in place through good times and 

bad times.  And we know it won't happen as long as the law is 

in place. 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, in the Act you limit non-agricultural corporations to 

10 acres.  Then if they hold . . . in those corporations if the 

shares are held in the majority by Saskatchewan residents, 

they're allowed to have 320 acres.  What effect will this have 

on Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, Ducks Unlimited lands, 

etc., the wildlife lands? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- If the member opposite 

understands the procedure, the Farm Ownership Board has the 

power to make exemptions.  In the past, the wildlife federations 

have gone to the board for exemptions.  They've been routinely 

granted.  There's nothing in this legislation which changes that 

process. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- What about any other wildlife-oriented 

group that may come forward with the purchase of land?  Will 

they be given a blanket consideration that's similar to 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation?  And how do they know 

that this will be guaranteed to carry on? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- There are no guarantees.  The 

process now and has been in the past is that they come forward 

to the independent board and ask for an exemption.  They have 

been routinely granted.  There's no reason why the board will 

change; however there's no change in the legislation which 

affects that at this time. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well you say that there's no reason for 

concern about this, but contracts have normally been fairly 

sacrosanct in Saskatchewan, but that no longer is the case.  And 

what is to keep these contracts sacred when others are being 

broken all across the place?  I think that there needs to be 

something different in this Bill giving wildlife lands some 

special consideration under the legislation that you as a 

minister or any of your colleagues can't, on a whim, change 

that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well I think there are no contracts, 

and as I said there are no guarantees.  It's the independent board 

which makes the decision, and at some point maybe if wildlife 

were to own 90 per cent of Saskatchewan they might decide to 

start defining them.  And I certainly understand the member's 

concern, because there are no guarantees that the board will 

grant exemptions, but that's the process that's been in place in 

the past and has worked well, and we think it will probably 

work well in the future. 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  On section 5 you 

deal with the homestead and talk about it in some substantial 

kind of way.  Would you provide me the explanation for 

section 5 so that I know what you're trying to say there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- This amendment has to do with 

apportionment of debt against the home quarter, so if there's 

land involved that's not a home quarter or land that is, when the 

court's going through . . . when there's a foreclosure, the court 

will apportion the debt 



May 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1959 

to those quarters equally. 

 

There's a court ruling which denied that apportionment, put it 

all against the land that was not a homestead, which could be 

foreclosed on, and that was not the intent of the legislation 

when it was passed.  Therefore this legislation clarifies that the 

debt should be apportioned to all land equally, including the 

homestead. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So if you had, Mr. Minister, if you had 

$100,000 worth of debt that was going to be written off and 

you had five quarters of land and the fifth quarter was the 

homestead quarter, you'd have $20,000 allocated to that 

quarter, and the rest would be done away with.  Is that the 

explanation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, that's essentially true.  The 

home quarter might be worth more money, but in essence that's 

the effect. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well doesn't this in fact take away the waiver 

function that normally applies to the homestead?  Isn't that a 

requirement?  Shouldn't that be continued as it is?  In what way 

do the courts say that they could or could not do it in the way it 

was happening previous to this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- This doesn't affect the waiver on 

the homestead.  It still would be protected against foreclosure.  

But it does just technically apportion the debt to it so that 

there's not . . . it's not apportioned to the other quarters and 

another claim necessary to start over again. 

 

It just says that that portion of the debt is apportioned to the 

homestead.  It's still protected under the homestead rights, but 

the debt is apportioned there. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, so that . . . just running 

another scenario by you and that is that if $100,000 on these 

five quarters has been assigned . . . four quarters of those five 

and the fifth one, the homestead, has not been assigned, will the 

action that takes place then have an opportunity to have it 

assigned against that quarter because of the individual's 

responsibility to the whole debt?  Will that happen if this is put 

into place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The situation is, if you take your 

example, if you had the $100,000 debt, 20,000 is homestead, 

but there's one mortgage that covers all, say five quarters, 

homestead included.  If there's a foreclosure action, only 

80,000 of that debt will be applied to the other land and the 

20,000 would be applied to the homestead and would be 

protected under the homestead rights. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So then if the bank or the credit union or any 

lender would want to go after the extra $20,000, they still have 

the right to go after the $20,000 under the basis on the 

homestead.  Or they would have the right in court to attach it to 

that homestead whether he wanted it there or not.  Is that 

accurate? 

Which is in whose best interest?  Is it in the banks' and the 

credit unions' and Farm Credit Corporation, or is it in the best 

interests of the farmers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- All that would happen is that the 

mortgage, the 20,000 that was under homestead, would then be 

protected and the bank wouldn't have access to the full 

$100,000 loan because only 80,000 of it is proportionate to the 

land that's available to be claimed on and the other 20 would 

remain owing but be protected under the homestead. 

 

This is the way the Act has operated since 1988, and that was 

the original intention of the Act, we assume.  The Act has been 

administered that way for a number of years and they got a 

court ruling that said that's not what it says, or the court 

overruled the way it was run.  So this just brings it back to the 

way it's been run since 1988. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Under section 7, the individuals who are 

assigned the farmer's rights, is this the leaseback function in the 

leasing program that the government has in place?  Is that the 

assigning functions are being adjusted, and would you explain 

that to me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, that's essentially correct.  This 

deals with the leaseback; it's to correct a gap.  Somebody who 

is eligible for the leaseback after the Act is enforced has the 

right to assign that to a child, but people who were not eligible 

for the leaseback or who were on lease when the Act was in 

place are eligible for the leaseback but not the assignment, and 

therefore it is to correct that deficiency. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Would the minister explain to me . . . I had a 

gentleman from my constituency ask me about why bachelors 

were not allowed to transfer their lease rights to other 

individuals.  Would you give me an explanation as to why you 

think that it shouldn't be included as an amendment to allow 

single individuals the opportunity to transfer to nieces and 

nephews because they obviously don't have children, and give 

that opportunity to them to do that. 

 

This individual raised the point and I want to raise it too.  And I 

think it could just as easily be included as an amendment in this 

section of the Act and then allow the opportunity for people 

who are in agriculture, whether they are male or female, who 

are single, who own land, and have an opportunity for a 

leaseback . . . have it stymied by the fact that they can't transfer 

that lease to whoever they wish -- a niece or a nephew.  And 

that, I would suggest to you, could cause a serious concern in a 

lot of places.  And I even raise it from the point of view of 

whether in fact your Human Rights Code would be able to 

withstand the scrutiny of that item if it was ever presented in 

court. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well the member makes a good 

point, and it's certainly something that was discussed when the 

Act was drawn up. 

 

The definition of family in the Act is spouse and 



1960 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1993 

children.  It's not only bachelors but other people who . . . 

we've had occasions where people wanted to assign to nieces 

and nephews and the Act doesn't allow it.  I guess it's a 

question of how far you want to go. 

 

And certainly it's a program of government funding to try to 

keep family farms on the land. And to have assignments 

outside of family was, I guess, we viewed as stretching it a 

little far.  Although certainly the member makes a good point, 

and we could have included nieces and nephews or we could 

have made it quite a bit broader. But the decision was made to 

restrict it to families. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I don't think that that's necessarily fair.  This 

case, and there are many cases like that in the community that I 

live where individuals, have only as a part of their family, their 

nieces and nephews.  And that can apply to women as well as 

men, because there's women that function as farmers as well 

and they own this property and have transferred it back to a 

lending agency and now are restricted in that opportunity.  And 

I would say to you that that is no less reasonable than for a 

father and a mother to transfer it to their son, than for having a 

single person transfer that to an individual who is a niece or a 

nephew. 

 

Today in the way the separation in farm families and the 

separation of land, if those families that separate do not have 

any children, they run the same risk as a single individual.  And 

that, sir, is I think a little out of order because it should be 

allowed to happen not as it relates to individuals, as it relates to 

farm land.  That's where the function should be. 

 

And I think that it would be far more beneficial to individuals 

to have that across the board as it relates to land rather than to 

the individuals, and deal with it in that light. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well certainly that was an option.  

We could have broadened it out. We could have included 

brothers, sisters, we could have included strangers in the Act 

and tied it to the farm land as the member suggests.  Certainly 

that increases the cost of the program and therefore probably 

the scope of it in some other way.  But the decision I guess we 

made was, it was for preservation of family farm and therefore 

it was restricted to families. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- On section 77 we start talking about the farm 

ownership portion of the Bill: land holdings by non-residents 

restricted to $15,000, including an . . . excluding any 

assessment for buildings and similar improvements. 

 

Would you give me an explanation of that and why you put in 

March 31, 1974 and why you put in September 15, 1977 and 

why you put in September 15 . . . no, May 6, 1980 and May 5, 

1980 and March 31, 1974 and September 15, 1977?  I'd like to 

have an explanation of each of those dates in relation to what 

you're doing and why they're in there so that the public can 

understand what you're doing. 

(1545) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, to begin with, this 

is not a change to the Act; this is what was in the Act, was 

passed from 1974.  It's basically a phase-in period when the Act 

began.  We were allowed a 15,000 assessment to a certain date 

and then a lesser amount.  It was basically a phase-in at start-up 

of the program and this has just been left in there.  It is not 

changed with these amendments that we've made.  It just 

remains as part of the Act, as it was when it started up in 1974. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So what's the last date that you can own land 

as a non-resident Saskatchewan individual in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- If you're talking about foreign 

ownership or someone who doesn't reside in Canada, first 

restrictions begin in, I think, March 31 of '74, you could own 

15,000 of municipal assessment; September 15 of '77, 160 

acres; May 6 of 1980, down to 10 acres.  And changes were 

made again in July of '88 which still remained at 10 acres for a 

foreign resident, a foreign person. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well in section 85 it says, "shall dispose of 

the excess land holding by January 1, 1994."  You said a 

non-Canadian resident, I believe you said.  You need to tell me 

about a non-Saskatchewan resident because a non-Canadian is 

almost the same as a non-Saskatchewan, and give me an 

explanation of that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- A Canadian resident which is a 

non-Saskatchewan person residing in Canada for 183 days.  

Prior to 1974 there was none.  March 31 of '74, 15,000 

municipal assessment; September 15, 160 acres; May 6 of 

1980, down to 10 acres; and July 1 of '88, back to 320 acres. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- By January 1, 1994, which is coming up very 

shortly, any person "shall dispose of the excess land holding by 

January 1, 1994."  Who is that, and how much is going to be 

left to be delivered?  And then what I want to find out is how 

many acres are still owned by individuals who have an 

exemption as of that date who are in excess of the requirements 

of January 1, 1994. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- There are 185 non-farm 

corporations who are still in excess of their limit which will 

have to be dealt with by the '94 date.  They are in the process of 

either divesting or applying for exemptions at this present time. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Do they include all of the major lenders, 

credit unions, and agencies, trust companies, Credit Foncier, all 

of those?  Would you be able to provide a list of the names?  

You don't have to tell me who . . . how much each one of them 

has.  But if you gave me the aggregate total of acres -- you gave 

me the total of . . . the numbers of individuals or corporations -- 

would you be able to give me the list and the aggregate total of 

acres? 



May 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1961 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Under section 88 you'll find that 

there's exemptions made for lending institutions for . . . 

exemptions made in the Act for lending institutions who 

acquire land by foreclosure or quitclaim and so on.  So they are 

not included in that list of 185. 

 

We have a list, I believe, of the amount of land that the lending 

institutions hold.  The non-agricultural is 185 non-agricultural 

corporations.  We have neither a list of those or the acreages.  

But we can get those and deliver them to you. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay.  I wouldn't mind having that. 

 

It says here:  "Where an agricultural corporation becomes a 

non-agricultural corporation, the corporation has: (a) one year 

from the date of becoming . . . to move its land off and its 

ability to function as a land-holding entity. 

 

How many of these have received exemption as of today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- There aren't a large number of 

those.  Again we don't have the exact number.  The officials tell 

me it's under 10 of those companies that are in that position. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Would you be able to tell me if the individuals 

who have lived here and moved away in the last . . . well from 

1930 till now we've had a significant amount of land change 

hands, and for various kinds of reasons people came . . . I have 

relatives of mine who moved to British Columbia, who become 

typically non-resident.  Can they in fact come back and buy this 

land?  Can they come back and have . . . if they still own it, do 

they have to divest themselves of it?  Do they have an 

opportunity to transfer it to their children if they live outside of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Section 83 lays out the exemptions 

for relatives.  If you are a resident of Saskatchewan and own 

land and move out, you do not have to divest that land; you can 

continue to own it and you can transfer it -- the rules are in 83 

-- but you can transfer it to spouses, children, and so on. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Even if they are non-resident? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, you can transfer that land to 

your children even if they are not residents of Canada.  It's the 

second transfer, then I think there's five-years rule kicks in that 

they have to divest in five years. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- They have to then divest themselves of it in 

five years after the transfer? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Not on the initial transfer.  If I 

move out of the province and transfer it to my children, they 

can maintain ownership.  If they pass it on to their children, 

then they would have to divest. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay, if the individual passes it on to 

his grandchildren and then they have that right to transfer it for 

five years, is that the way I read it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, that would be correct. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Section 96 says: 

 

Subject to the approval of the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council, the minister may direct the board to investigate 

any matter regarding farm ownership, and on the 

completion of its investigation the board shall submit a 

written report to the minister. 

 

That, Mr. Minister, I think is repulsive.  I think that the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council, executive branch of this 

government is . . . through this has the capacity to become 

involved in every land deal in the province of Saskatchewan, 

whether I like it or not.  And that, Mr. Minister, is not correct. 

 

I will point out this to you too, sir.  If you did this with business 

in the province of Saskatchewan -- let's take Imperial Oil, for 

example -- and you said to them, you cannot own any more 

than three service stations in the province of Saskatchewan, and 

if you have any dealings in any of the framework of ownership 

in the province of Saskatchewan, you then have . . . we will 

investigate you and all of the corporation and tell you to get 

out. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, is typical of what you're going to be 

doing on Friday as a part of an overall strategy to heave out 

Federated Co-op.  And then, Mr. Minister, the head office out 

of Saskatoon to Edmonton.  What are you going to do next to 

keep money and individuals and people out of the province of 

Saskatchewan?  And then are you going to put a border guard 

on so that nobody can get out? 

 

(1600) 

 

That, Mr. Minister, is what we're coming down to.  If you can't 

control it, you haven't the confidence in people to deliver any 

kind of a positive opportunity because you think you can run it 

better than anybody else.  I think it's disgusting.  And I'd have a 

lot stronger words for this kind of stuff if I was outside of this 

House, Mr. Minister. 

 

Will you give me an explanation of why you put that in there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the member 

again I think is getting some . . . (inaudible) . . . I think I 

explained to the previous questioners: this was put in so that we 

could investigate before sales were made.  It's not intended to 

investigate every sale in the province; it's to prevent the rather 

serious problems that we foresaw with the Act as it is, as 

having only . . . the board having only the power and the 

government having only the power to order divestiture after a 

sale is made, which I think is not good for business. 

 

I don't think people who are buying farm land, is 



1962 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1993 

doing any other business, want to come in and proceed with a 

business transaction and find out afterwards that it's in 

contravention of the law.  I think they'd much sooner find out 

beforehand. 

 

I think . . . You know, the member opposite makes reference to 

businesses.  Anybody who wants to sell shares has to do a 

prospectus and have public information.  So I think certainly 

the intention of this is to make life easier for people who are 

doing land sales and not have them caught unwittingly by the 

laws that, as I point out, were in . . . the same laws that were in 

effect during the . . . when the members opposite were in 

government. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, I'm going to ask you this 

question.  Does this apply to only new land purchases or any of 

the land owned in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- What this clause does is gives the 

Farm Ownership the power to advise cabinet on land ownership 

matters.  It is not intended to track every sale in the province or 

to be Big Brother looking in on anybody. 

 

All it does is that if there's a land sale going on, as for example 

the Eston sale, and there's a huge transaction taking place and 

there appears to be foreign money, that the minister can ask the 

board to investigate and advise as to what's happening there, so 

that some action can possibly be taken at appropriate time and 

not after the fact when it would cause great difficulty for 

businesses involved. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it says here the minister 

may direct the board to investigate.  The minister -- that's you, 

sir, or the minister responsible for this, who is the Minister of 

Justice, can say to him, you can say to the board that you will 

investigate company ABC, individual so-and-so.  You can say 

that, and then they will have to do it. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, do you think that that is fair to any other 

jurisdiction?  You would never do that to any . . . you wouldn't 

do that to any holding downtown here in Regina.  You wouldn't 

do that in Canora to any business in that community.  And that, 

Mr. Minister, is the reason why we have a problem with this.  

You don't say that this is to investigate land purchases assumed 

to be happening in the future.  You're saying this: you can 

designate anyone under the order of the executive branch of 

government to investigate any land holding in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  You can come in and investigate mine, and 

then the board will have the responsibility to submit a report to 

you, and I say that that's wrong, Mr. Minister.  It's wrong in 

every function. 

 

Does that mean the next step is you're going to take Federated 

Co-op and tell them to have every one of the people that they 

pay a dividend to report to this Assembly in the same fashion 

you're doing here?  Is that the kind of thing that you want to 

do?  And, Mr. Minister, I'll even go so far as to say this: they're 

doing away with that in Russia today.  The KGB (Komitet 

Gosudarstvennoy Bezopasnosti) is gone.  Why are you putting 

it back into Saskatchewan where you, as an executive member 

of Executive Council, have that right?  I don't believe you have 

that right.  And I believe that you should move that and strike it 

from the record.  It should be gone.  That, Mr. Minister, is what 

you're doing.  And you can investigate every land holding. 

 

In fact I've been reading a book about how they took over in 

Stalin's time in Russia, and it deals . . . similar functions were 

occurring to the people that were representing my family in 

Moscow, is exactly what they were doing there.  Do you know 

why?  So they could gain control of the agenda on the land.  

That, Mr. Minister, is what you're doing.  You say you're not.  

Well then take it out of there.  Why are you put it in there?  

And that's the question we're going to be asking every person in 

the province of Saskatchewan as we travel around with this 

Bill, saying do you know that the Minister of Agriculture and 

the Minister of Justice can look at your land holdings and ask 

you to submit every land holding and every share value that 

you have in land, in agricultural land in the province of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

And they can order that and then turn around, if you don't 

submit to that, Mr. Minister . . . And of course you can make an 

exemption to your friends -- which is something they also do 

over there -- you make an exemption to your friends, and the 

ones you don't exempt, they go to jail.  And those that don't go 

to jail, they pay a hundred thousand dollar fine, Mr. Minister.  

You think that's fair? 

 

Are you going to put the corporation called the Royal Bank in 

jail for this?  No, you wouldn't do that because they have a 

special exemption status.  But you will do that to individuals 

who contravene this Act.  You'll put them in jail, fine them 

$10,000.  If it's a non-agricultural corporation, you get a 

$100,000 fine.  And it's based on your investigation, and we 

think that's wrong.  It's been wrong for ever. 

 

As a matter of fact, the people in the province of Saskatchewan 

came from that, and they don't want it back. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I think the member opposite is 

somewhat carried away.  I don't see anything relating to the 

KGB in this particular Bill.  And I think if the opposition is of a 

mind to travel the province with this particular clause as their 

issue, I think that bespeaks rather poorly of their talents and 

their performance of their job, because I think there should be 

more serious issues available to them to criticize than to try to 

make a KGB issue out of a rather innocuous clause. 

 

I think all this is intended is to use the expertise of the 

independent board, to give them the power to enforce the Act 

that's there -- that was there, as I point out again, under the 

previous administration.  I think the provisions before were 

rather sloppy that we would say: go ahead, you know, we're not 

going to stop you from buying this land; except after you get it 

sold, 



May 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1963 

we're going to order you to sell it again. 

 

I think that's very disruptive for any community and for any 

business that's in the province.  I think this is very simply a 

matter of trying to give the board the proper administrative 

ability to enforce the law that's been on the books for 15 years. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, people are beginning to 

believe that that law shouldn't be there any more.  People are 

beginning to believe that there should be an opportunity to sell 

the land to whoever you want. 

 

Mr. Minister, you have two classes of people -- your Health 

bureaucrats said it right -- there's going to be two classes in the 

province of Saskatchewan, rural and urban.  And what you're 

doing is making a different class of people with rural people. 

 

And in my paper, the one that you handed to me, it says: 

 

". . . the minister may direct the board to investigate any 

matter regarding farm ownership . . . 

 

It doesn't say any purchase possibilities.  It doesn't say any 

future considerations by individuals to purchase land.  It doesn't 

say anything like that at all.  It says "any matter concerning 

farm ownership" in the province of Saskatchewan.  You can do 

that, sir, and we don't think that that's right.  We don't think that 

that is at all right. 

 

As a matter of fact, have you taken and told SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) what 

you're doing with this?  Have they told you that's a great idea?  

I'll bet you you haven't even talked to them about it.  And you 

wouldn't even dare talk to them about it because they don't 

believe that's the right thing to do either. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, it says here, the board will be required upon 

the minister's request "to investigate any matter regarding farm 

ownership" and then submit that report back to you, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

And then what does the board have to do?  It can make: 

 

. . . an order declaring null and void any instrument or 

document by which a land holding is or may be acquired 

in contravention of this Part;" 

 

So you can order the board to order a divestiture of any land.  

You can say that to any individual who owns land in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  And that, Mr. Minister, I believe is 

wrong.  It's never right. 

 

And what you have done, sir, you've stood in your place in this 

Assembly and said that every contract with the crop insurance 

people in the province of Saskatchewan, the farmers, is null 

and void.  You said that.  And how should we expect to respect 

any 

decision you make that isn't going to do exactly the same thing 

with the people in the province of Saskatchewan who own the 

land.  And that, Mr. Minister, is wrong. 

 

And I think you need to qualify your powers in this base 

because I think it contravenes the Human Rights Code.  And 

the Human Rights Code has pre-eminence over every other 

law.  And that, Mr. Minister, is wrong in Saskatchewan; it's 

wrong in Canada.  And I also believe, Mr. Minister, that you're 

out of order on the Canadian Bill of Rights as excluding 

Canadians from owning land in Saskatchewan. 

 

And I want to tell you this too, Mr. Minister:  under the Charter 

of Rights and Freedoms, freedom was given for individuals to 

move from province to province without restriction in any job 

opportunity.  And yet in farm land, you decide that you have 

the right to investigate anyone who comes into this province, 

anyone who is here.  And that, Mr. Minister, is wrong.  It's 

wrong as wrong can be.  And that, Mr. Minister . . . You may 

make light of it, but the people in the province of 

Saskatchewan, when the justices come to this section of the 

Bill, they will have nothing left to do but respond to it and you, 

sir, can do anything you want. 

 

My question to you is this: will you unilaterally be able to 

transfer land bank land or lease land under lands branch at your 

discretion any time you want knowing that you have this 

authority to do this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Section 96 is in no way connected 

to the powers of the board under the Act.  The member 

opposite makes great to-do about the Canadian Bill of Rights 

and so on, and that's a rather interesting phenomena for . . . It 

was okay for 10 years while they were in power for these two 

Acts to coexist, but now it's a great wrong and needs to be 

corrected.  That, I think, the voters of the province will 

certainly see through that. 

 

I think the issue here is not any great change in an Act that's 

been in place for 15 years, and it's strictly administratively 

better to administer.  And I think this will make the Act better 

for people who are wanting to sell their land and better for 

people who are wanting to buy land and clears everybody 

involved. 

 

I think it was just simply improvement of an Act that's been in 

place, and I think the member makes wide-ranging accusations 

which I think are totally groundless. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well that's your interpretation of it.  But 

you're not going to do the interpreting when it comes down to 

the fact that the court is going to make a decision about an 

individual going to dispose of his land.  The board will make a 

decision on the basis that the minister who appoints the board 

will determine what they have to live with. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, is what we're talking about. 



1964 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1993 

You're going to make the decision for the board to investigate.  

The board will turn around and give back its findings and then 

you, sir, are going to make the decision.  You're going to make 

the decision whether this individual has to pay a fine or 

whether he goes to jail. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, is what we think is in contravention of 

every right that an individual in the province of Saskatchewan 

has.  And that, Mr. Minister, is why we don't like this Bill. 

 

Would you be able to tell me -- you didn't answer the question 

-- would you be able to tell me whether you have the right to 

transfer on a sale arrangement with an individual on leased 

land?  Would you be able to transfer that to a new individual 

without that individual knowing it, based on the fact that the 

board has made a recommendation to you that the individual no 

longer qualifies to own land in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No, that is absolutely not the case. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- How do you handle a person who lives in 

Alberta and owns land in Saskatchewan?  How will he be dealt 

with under the framework of this Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- If a person living in Alberta . . . 

again, if he's moved from Saskatchewan, has the right to 

maintain the land.  If he does not, if he's an Alberta resident, 

then the board, which is independent, has the power to order 

the person to divest the land.  If the person fails to do that, then 

the board is obliged to apply to a court to have the order carried 

out, and at no point does the minister or the cabinet come into 

that equation. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Oh yes they do, Mr. Minister.  They come 

into the equation when you order the board to do an 

investigation.  And that, Mr. Minister, is where the problem is. 

 

And I would say to you: who appointed the board?  The board 

was appointed by you and Executive Council.  And you have 

the authority over the board.  You have the responsibility for 

the board.  You can tell the board what to do and what to say 

and where to draw the line.  And you, Mr. Minister, have a 

problem.  And I think the people of Saskatchewan have even a 

bigger problem.  And if I'd had my druthers, I'd of druther have 

this thing thrown out completely and allow the people in 

Canada to be able to buy land in Saskatchewan. 

 

Are we Canadian or what?  Do you want to build a wall around 

Saskatchewan?  Well yes, sir, you have.  Do you want to have 

Canadians be able to come in and buy land?  I don't have a 

problem with that at all.  This is just as exclusive as Bill 101 or 

105 in Quebec dealing with French language. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- 101. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- 101, thank you.  And I don't think that 

this is any different than that, Mr. Minister.  You have 

exclusive rights for only the people in the province of 

Saskatchewan, and I think that's wrong.  If you're a Canadian, 

you're a Canadian and you ought to be treated that way. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister is where this Bill should be going -- not 

more restrictive than it was before, not with you having the 

powers to investigate, and not with you having the authority to 

determine whether an individual is out of line or not, and then 

beginning to change the rules as you go along, like you do with 

every other contract that you have in place.  That, Mr. Minister, 

is the reason why we're complaining about this. 

 

Would you provide for me an estimate of . . . or an evaluation 

or an explanation of how the court or you or the board will rule 

to have contravention of this Act, have the individual qualify 

for an exemption, or be put in jail or get a fine?  Can you give 

me the distinction of those three possibilities and what will 

happen to each of them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Section 96 again has no connection 

to the enforcement.  The enforcement hasn't changed.  It's 

interesting to me that all the members opposite stand up and 

say that this is a bad Bill and should be done away with.  Ten 

years of government they didn't do it.  I think that bespeaks of . 

. . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Don't get political now or you'll be in 

here a long time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well I know they don't like me to 

bring this to their attention.  But for 10 years they were there.  

They had a Bill they didn't like but they kept it there and they 

enforced it.  That I think bespeaks a bit of their government. 

 

All we've done is continued with the Bill.  We disagree with 

their views on foreign ownership.  We believe we should have 

controls on foreign ownership and we've cleared those up a bit. 

 

As to the questions, it's the board has the power to order 

divestiture, as it always had.  That hasn't changed.  If somebody 

fails to obey the order, then the board goes to court and the 

court has the power to enforce the rulings of the board. 

 

And I think this is no more or no less than what was there 

before.  All we're saying is that yes, we believe there should be 

restrictions on foreign ownership and we want a system that 

allows us to enforce that in a logical manner. 

 

And I think that's as complicated as it gets.  There's no KGB in 

here; there's no Stalin; there's no great plot.  It's simply just the 

same foreign ownership laws that they put up with for 10 years, 

only they certainly disagreed with them, but in power they 

didn't change.  And that's all it does.  It just makes it a little 

easier to enforce those laws that were on the books for the last 

20 years. 



May 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1965 

Mr. Martens: -- Section 96, Mr. Minister, does far more than 

anything that we ever did.  Section 96 says that you can order 

it.  You can tell the board what to do.  The minister through 

Executive Council has the authority now to order at any time he 

wants.  And that's where it's wrong.  And that's where we're 

saying it's wrong, Mr. Minister.  And that makes a whole thing 

just absolutely totally different than anything that we ever did.  

As a matter of fact, that should be kicked right out of there, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I want to get this absolutely straight about 

what the minister is saying.  My family is in the situation where 

I have cousins in Alberta right now who are on the second 

exemption.  Their parents moved there prior to the Second 

World War, owned the land.  They've now transferred it to their 

children. 

 

Under section 96 of the Act, are you saying that my cousin's 

children can be ordered to divest that land on the personal order 

of the minister, that the minister has the power to tell my cousin 

in Alberta that they have to divest that land or order an 

investigation of them by your hand-picked board?  Is that true? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No that's absolutely not true.  The 

minister cannot order any divestiture.  That has not changed.  

The board has the power to order that divestiture and still have . 

. . all section 96 does is gives a minister power to do an 

investigation and have a written report.  And that's all section 

96 does.  It was put there to use the expertise of the board to 

investigate large land sales that are occurring and has no 

connection to the enforcement section. 

 

Your cousin has the same right of appeal, as the board has the 

same power to order divestiture as it had before this Act, and 

nothing has changed in that regard. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well the reason I don't find that reassuring, 

Mr. Minister, is that you bring laws into this legislature and 

courts interpret them.  That's where the nub hits it all the time. 

 

The arrangement that my cousin has with someone else, 

vis-a-vis farming arrangements or a potential sale that they've 

worked out amongst themselves, that type of thing, if that goes 

awry, as I understand this legislation, you have the ability to 

personally order the board to intervene in that.  If that tenant or 

that person who has an agreement for sale with my cousin, 

whatever, lays a complaint with you, in the past it had to go to 

the board.  The complaint would have gone to the board if there 

was something there.  But the board would have then had to 

fight it out in the court. 

 

As I understand it now, you have the ability to order the board 

to interfere in that situation.  And I say any time a minister has 

that ability, that you can play politics with your friends, that 

you can play politics with the lives of people.  You can say, 

Mr. Minister, that we didn't change that.  I regret that every day 

that I'm in this Legislative Assembly that Canadians are 

excluded.  I think you exclude all kinds of opportunities 

because you do that. 

But I don't see where you and executive powers of government 

can order anyone to do anything in regard to ownership of land 

in this province.  I think that's abusive.  And I don't know that 

you can assure me today that the courts won't interpret this 

thing down the road exactly like my colleague from Morse has 

been saying.  Otherwise you should have left it alone.  If you 

weren't afraid of how the board might deal with these things 

and you weren't afraid of the court system, you would have 

simply left it.  It would have stayed on the books as it was since 

1974. 

 

But you have seen that you have to inject yourself and your 

cabinet colleagues and your political process into land tenure in 

this province where it didn't need to be before.  Otherwise you 

simply would have let the courts deal with it; you would have 

let the board deal with it; you would have let the independent 

bodies that were in existence deal with it. 

 

Tell me what power you were afraid of.  Tell me what power 

you were afraid of that makes you as the minister have this 

extraordinary power in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Again I point out section 96 is only 

a report and has nothing to do with the enforcement powers.  

That continues as it has been.  I think the members opposite, if 

you make the argument that we shouldn't have foreign 

ownership controls, that's a fine argument to make.  I mean . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Foreign is a whole lot different than 

Canadian. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, or Canadian.  If you don't 

agree with the context of the Bill, that's fine.  We agree to 

disagree.  We believe we should have ownership controls on 

farm land.  Obviously you disagree.  I think, you know, you 

can make that argument and there certainly are arguments on 

both sides.  But to stretch the bow to then go into some great 

thick plot that somehow, you know, that the Act that's been 

there for 10 years is a devious communist plot, I think is 

stretching the bow a bit far. 

 

And I think if this Act continues and if it was a horrible thing 

that you lived with for 10 years but you managed to live with it, 

and now to say that because we put in section 96 which simply 

allows us as government to use the expertise of the board to 

investigate ownership problems is somehow a major change to 

the direction, is just not true. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well my final point, Mr. Minister.  The first 

time that someone in the province finds political meddling by a 

minister using this Act, are you willing to put your seat on the 

line and resign because of it?  That's what I'm going to ask you 

to answer today. 

 

Are you going to stand in your place in saying that I am 

absolutely confident that the political process won't be used in 

any way and that if it is found, that you're willing to vacate this 

Legislative Assembly and move out? 



1966 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1993 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well I think the members opposite 

know all about political meddling.  As a minister, I do not 

indulge in it, and I have no intention of indulging in any 

political meddling with the farm land ownership board.  And I 

don't think that this Act even gives the authority to do that sort 

of meddling. 

 

And I think that . . . I suppose if a government, as you probably 

know, any government that's bent on doing political meddling 

will find a way regardless of the Acts that are in place.  And 

this government is not into that sort of thing.  So clearly I think 

the changes to this Act do not create opportunities for political 

meddling. 

 

(1630) 

 

Clause 1 agreed to on division. 

 

Clauses 2 to 17 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 18 agreed to on division. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chair, I'd just like to thank my 

officials for coming, and the opposition members for questions.  

Thank you. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I'd like to 

thank the officials for coming in and assisting the discussion 

here today. 

 

Bill No. 73 -- An Act to amend the Crop Insurance Act 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the Minister of Agriculture to please 

introduce his official. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, with me I have 

Mr. Dale Sigurdson who is the ADM (assistant deputy 

minister) of Department of Agriculture. 

 

Clauses 1 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like to 

thank my official for coming in and doing such a wonderful job 

of handling the questions, and the members opposite for 

expediting the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 20 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Superannuation Act 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the minister responsible for SaskTel 

to please introduce the officials who have joined us. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Sitting on my immediate right is the 

vice-president of corporate affairs and counsel.  On his 

immediate right is Tom Norris, senior planner, human 

resources. 

 

Clause 1 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, in this Bill you're giving the power to administer the 

superannuation, the monies there, to the government, basically 

to the Lieutenant Governor in Council which is the cabinet.  

Why is the cabinet taking the power to administer these funds 

rather than allowing that power to rest with the employees and 

management of SaskTel? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm informed by corporate counsel 

that there is in fact no change.  The power to appoint them has 

always rested with Executive Council.  The make-up is being 

changed, but the method of appointment remains the same. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- How is that make-up being changed?  Is 

there going to be more appointees from the Lieutenant 

Governor or the cabinet, or is there going to be . . . or how is 

that change going to affect the employees? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We're increasing the number from 

three to five.  The substantial change is that we're appointing a 

superannuate to the board.  Legislation makes provision for 

that, so that's really the substantial change.  The increase from 

three to five is consequential to that. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 5 

 

The Chair: -- I understand there is an amendment.  If there is, 

then I would ask the minister to move it at this time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move the amendment, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

The Chair: -- Has the amendment been distributed?  Can we 

take the amendment as read or as circulated?  Is the amendment 

agreed? 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, would you mind explaining the rationale for this 

amendment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The amendment is designed to 

provide the government with an additional degree of flexibility.  

We are caught between a need to downsize this Crown 

corporation as it moves from being a monopoly in 

telecommunications to being a competitor in 

telecommunications.  That's one of the things we're trying to 

meet.  We're trying not to get too far out of sync with other 

Crown corporations since employees inevitably make 

comparisons. 

 

We also have ongoing a study on pensions, the pension review, 

and thus want to retain the flexibility to comply with any 

conclusions that may arise out of that study. 

 

For all of those reasons, we want the additional 



May 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1967 

flexibility which is given to the Executive Council to bring this 

to an end.  This is not something that's being done because it's 

an inherent right that employees ought to have.  We are 

providing this benefit in order that the company can downsize, 

but when that goal is met, we wouldn't necessarily want to have 

it continued for ever. 

 

There are the additional complexities I've mentioned of 

comparisons with other Crown corporations which we want to 

be able to meet, and the whole matter of pension review. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Basically this amendment would allow 

you to give one-time consideration to a certain number of 

employees to use as a downsizing method within the 

corporation.  But I find when you talk about . . . because of the 

downsizing, you've turned around and increased the number of 

board members within this group. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- It wasn't as the member said -- I think 

in a jocular fashion -- to provide additional jobs for our friends.  

One is to permit superannuants to be represented; they've long 

demanded this and it's felt fair that their voice be heard.  The 

additional position . . . that accounts for one of the two 

additional positions. 

 

The second additional position was the desire to appoint 

someone with financial expertise and a financial background.  

And so we're doing that as well.  So that suggests the . . . that 

accounts for the extra two members. 

 

The Chair: -- I'm informed that the time-saving device to take 

the amendment as circulated simply won't do to get it on the 

record, so I would ask the minister at this point to read the 

amendment and move it formally. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Could I ask the page to bring from 

the Table a copy of what you have.  I'm not 1,000 per cent 

certain the copy which I have is the last draft.  Thank you very 

much. 

 

I move, seconded by the member from Moose Jaw Palliser: 

 

That section 6 of the printed Bill be amended by striking 

out clause (b) and substituting the following . . . 

 

The Chair: -- I need the amendment at this point for section 5 

of the printed Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Okay.  All right.  I assume the 

member . . . 

 

The Chair: -- And we won't . . . in committee we won't require 

a seconder. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well, you know, it takes a while 

before a person gets the rules here -- that is very complex -- 

gets them down pat. 

I move this Assembly: 

 

Amend clause 11.1(2)(a) of the Act, as being enacted by 

section 5 of the printed Bill, by striking out "as provided 

for in" and substituting "in accordance with". 

 

I so move. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 5 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 6 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move that this Assembly: 

 

 Amend section 6 of the printed Bill by striking out clause (b) 

and substituting the following: 

 

 "(b) by adding the following subsections after subsection (2): 

 

  '(3)  Subject to subsection (4), where an employee retires 

before becoming entitled to a superannuation allowance 

pursuant to this Act, resigns or is dismissed from the 

service of the corporation or where the employee's 

office is abolished and the employee is no longer 

employed, at the employee's option all contributions to 

the superannuation fund that have been deducted from 

an employee's salary and standing to the employee's 

credit in the superannuation fund, together with accrued 

interest and an amount equal to the amount deducted 

from the employee's salary together with accrued 

interest, shall be transferred to an account in the 

employee's name in the Public Employees (Government 

Contributory) Superannuation Plan established pursuant 

to section 38 of The Superannuation (Supplementary 

Provisions) Act and administered in accordance with 

that Act if: 

 

   (a) the employee has not elected pursuant to subsection 

(1) to receive a refund of contributions and 

interest; or 

 

   (b) the employee has not elected pursuant to section 15 

to receive a deferred allowance. 

 

  '(4) The Lieutenant Governor-in-Council may prescribe 

the date after which the option mentioned in subsection 

(3) may no longer be exercised by an employee, and 

after that date the option mentioned in subsection (3) 

ceases to exist"'. 

 

I so move. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 6 as amended agreed to. 



1968 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1993 

Clause 7 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to thank the 

opposition for their questions, the officials for their assistance, 

which was not inconsiderable, but for their wait, which was 

considerable this afternoon.  So I'd like to thank all concerned. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We'd like to 

thank the minister and his officials for coming in today to 

answer our questions.  And if the minister had been briefer with 

his answers, his people wouldn't have had to sit there so long. 

 

Bill No. 80 -- An Act to amend The Tobacco Tax Act and to 

make certain Consequential Amendments resulting from 

the enactment of this Act 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  On my 

right is the associate deputy minister of Finance, Craig Dotson; 

behind him is Len Rog, the assistant deputy minister.  Next to 

Len is Kirk McGregor, the executive director, taxation and 

intergovernmental affairs.  We also have Doug Lambert, the 

director, revenue programs and legislation; and Murray 

Schafer, director, education and health tax. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

these particular pieces of taxation legislation, I would have 

preferred -- and I think the taxpayer would have preferred -- 

coming much earlier in the session after the budget, given that 

you've been collecting this stuff all of this time, and they really 

haven't had the blessing of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

And I would hope in the future that you would be more 

expeditious in moving this stuff forward to the Assembly after 

it is a budget item.  I think it's only fair.  I do remember 

distinctly those arguments being made by the former opposition 

whenever tax Bills were late in coming to this Assembly.  I'll 

let you respond to that as to why they weren't brought ahead 

quicker. 

 

But I also would say to you today that the opposition is 

prepared to move all three of these Bills through this Assembly 

very quickly if I can have your assurance that during your 

estimates . . . if I can have your assurance, Madam Minister, 

during your estimates that these issues can be dealt with and 

you simply won't stand up in here and say, well you had ample 

opportunity during discussion of the Bills to talk about them, I 

don't really feel like it any more. 

 

So I guess if you would give me some response as to why you 

didn't bring these Bills ahead a lot quicker, and also your 

assurance that we can deal with all of these areas and anything 

that may be remotely related 

to them on your estimates, then I'm prepared to move these 

taxation Bills through this House at this time. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, yes.  Thank you very 

much for those questions.  I just checked with the officials.  

The tax Bills were introduced into the House May 5, the budget 

was March 18, so the time lag was not great. 

 

But I will say this.  I agree with your essential point that 

because the parliamentary tradition is based on the fact that no 

taxation without the approval of the legislature, when the taxes 

are being collected the day of the budget, which has to occur to 

prevent difficulties, I agree with the point that the tax Bills 

should then be brought to the legislature as quickly as possible. 

 

With respect to your other point, I certainly have no problem 

making the commitment that anything relating to these Bills 

can be raised in estimates.  And we will give you as thorough 

an answer in estimates as we would here today.  And this may 

very well be a better way to use the House's time, to do it in a 

consolidated fashion.  But I have no difficulty at all making the 

firm commitment that we will be willing to discuss these Bills 

in estimates in a thorough way. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill on division. 

 

Bill No. 63 -- An Act to amend The Fuel Tax Act, 1987 

 

Clauses 1 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill on division. 

 

Bill No. 64 -- An Act to amend The Education and Health 

Tax Act 

 

Clauses 1 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

The division bells rang from 5:54 p.m. until 5:58 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Wiens Johnson 

Tchorzewski Draper 

Shillington Whitmore 

Kowalsky Sonntag 

Mitchell Roy 

MacKinnon Cline 

Penner Scott 

Cunningham Kujawa 

Hagel Crofford 

Bradley Stanger 

Koenker Knezacek 

Lyons Harper 

Pringle Kluz 

 



May 26, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1969 

 

Calvert Carlson 

Murray Langford 

Hamilton Jess 

-- 32 

 Nays 

Swenson Boyd 

Neudorf Britton 

Martens D'Autremont t 

-- 6 

The committee reported progress. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 74 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Farm 

Security Act 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a third time and 

passed under its title. 

 

Bill No. 73 -- An Act to amend The Crop Insurance Act 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 20 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Superannuation Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move the amendments be now read 

a first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- With leave, I move the Bill be now 

read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 80 -- An Act to amend The Tobacco Tax Act and to 

make certain Consequential Amendments resulting from 

the enactment of this Act 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 63 -- An Act to amend The Fuel Tax Act, 1987 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed 

under its title. 

 

Bill No. 64 -- An Act to amend The Education and Health 

Tax Act 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:06 p.m. 

 

 


