




















































Hansard: March 10, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 229 

 March 10, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that 

I shall on Friday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

 Regarding the Workers' Compensation Board: (1) why in the 

face of job action is the board allowing out-of-scope 

employees in the payment section to take holidays if the 

board's first concern is the fate of our injured workers; (2) 

after moving from its past location, what was the value of the 

furnishings disposed of and were those furnishings sold 

according to SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation) guidelines; (3) how much money was paid to 

Brown & Associates in the past year and for what purpose 

was this payment made; (4) what is the cost of the electronic 

security system purchased by the Workers' Compensation 

Board; (5) what was the cost of the contract with Information 

Systems Management and how many consultants were hired 

as a result; and (6) were the contracts referred to in questions 

(3), (4), and (5) awarded after an open tender? 

 

I give notice that on I shall Friday next ask the government the 

following question: 

 

 Regarding Department of Health and the Wascana 

Rehabilitation Centre: (1) has the Regina Health Board 

withdrawn its proposal to close the pediatric wing of the 

Wascana Rehabilitation Centre in favour of closing up to 30 

rehabilitation beds in the same facility; (2) how many 

patients might be affected by such a proposal; (3) what is the 

minister going to do to accommodate longer waiting-lists of 

patients, including those with neurological disorders, accident 

victims, injured workers, stroke victims, and others who will 

be affected if such a proposal is accepted; (4) how many 

employees might be affected by such a proposal; (5) how 

much money will be cut as a result of these bed closures; (6) 

what has the minister done to determine what proposals for 

bed closures have actually been put forward and discussed 

with the staff of the rehabilitation centre; and last, how does 

this approach to rehabilitative medicine fit the NDP 

government's wellness model. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise as the minister 

responsible for the Public Service Commission to introduce to 

you, and through you to members of the legislature, a group of 

I believe 22 public servants who are here today on a visit to the 

legislature. And they will spend the entire day within this 

building visiting various parts of the building and exploring 

some of the things that 

we do here. 

 

They're in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. They're the group on your 

right. And I want them to know that we welcome them here, 

that I speak on behalf of all members of this legislature in 

saying how much we value the public service that we have in 

this province. We think it to be an excellent one -- a long-time 

tradition in this province of excellence in the public service, 

and we all intend that that tradition should continue in the 

future. 

 

And I'd like members of the legislature to join me in 

welcoming these guests here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the opposition, I too 

would like to join the minister in welcoming our guests from 

the public service here this afternoon. Certainly people across 

Saskatchewan are proud of and pleased to have men and 

women who work with such integrity in our public service, and 

welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm pleased to be 

recognized. And I would like to introduce to you and through 

you to members of this Legislative Assembly two young men 

who are very active in participating in the political life of this 

province. 

 

I would like to introduce to you Mikeal Fosty, sitting in the 

west gallery, and Cory Fletcher. They are strong and dedicated 

members of the Saskatchewan Young New Democrats. And I 

welcome them here to this House. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

take this opportunity to introduce to the legislature Donna and 

Grey Cowie, farmers from the Alida area in my constituency. 

And Donna was also my campaign manager during the election 

last . . . in '91. 
 

I'd like to ask the Assembly to welcome them to this Assembly. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with the 

member from Souris-Cannington to welcome the Cowie's. I 

didn't realize they were here. But they're long-time . . . here 

somewhere . . . long-time neighbours of ours on the farm back 

in Carnduff, and great people. So I would just like to join the 

member in saying, welcome here and all the best to you. Good 

to see you. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Funding Cuts to Wascana Rehabilitation Centre 
 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question today is to the Premier. 



230 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1993 

Mr. Premier, yesterday we had some people sitting in the 

Speaker's gallery, parents of children who were very concerned 

about the situation at Wascana Rehabilitation Centre. Those 

parents were quite shocked yesterday, Mr. Premier, when 

during questioning of your government by our Health critic, 

that those parents saw members of the government laughing 

about the situation that their children were involved in. 

 

And I would think, Mr. Premier . . . And I'm asking this 

question today not on behalf of the opposition but on behalf of 

those parents who requested that we come here today and ask 

your government, a government that always said we are the 

champions of medicare and now we're becoming the 

champions of I don't care. Would you, Mr. Premier, on behalf 

of your government and your members, who laughed about that 

situation yesterday, stand and apologize on behalf of your 

government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. member 

for the question, but I think the hon. member is misdirecting 

where our laughter was directed. It was directed at the 

incredibility, the incredulity of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, that the official opposition would, after nine 

years of desolation and destruction, have the gall to get up in 

the legislature and pretend that they care about the health care 

situation. The laughter is directed to you, sir, not in this 

Chamber but throughout the entire province of Saskatchewan; 

not to the people that are affected. Everybody is concerned 

about the people that are affected. 

 

But when you get up after nine years of giving money to the 

GigaTexts and the Weyerhaeusers and the Cargills and 

bankrupting the health care system, I say to you, sir, that is 

laughable. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I can tell you, Mr. Premier, that the 

parents of 800 handicapped children in this province don't find 

what your Minister of Health has been doing as laughable at 

all. 

 

This is a minister, Mr. Premier, who says that she doesn't know 

anything about the situation, a minister that has already seen 40 

positions removed from Wascana Rehab, $2 million in funding. 

And now the entire pediatric ward of that institution is gone 

and your minister knows nothing about it. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you commit today -- because obviously this 

minister is so callous that she will not -- will you commit today 

that before the budget, you personally will meet with the 

parents' association of those 800 handicapped children who 

your Minister of Health, through her callous nature, is putting 

at risk? Would you do that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health in 

the province of Saskatchewan, of the current administration, is 

doing, in my judgement, a marvellous job in meeting with 

individuals and parents and the 

providers of health care as we try to restructure the health care 

system in the province of Saskatchewan, to fashion it to the 

next generation where we can lead once again in the province 

of Saskatchewan, and also to fashion it in consequence of the 

destruction that you, sir, wreaked on the people of handicapped 

children and others in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

She has offered, as she did yesterday in question period, to 

meet with this group. I take her at that word, that she will meet 

with the group. I have confidence in the Minister of Health. 

And I'm sure that the concerns of that group or any other group 

will be met as the result of any such future meeting. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A question to the 

Premier. Well, Mr. Premier, unfortunately the actions of that 

minister make your words ring hollow. This minister has been 

receiving letter after letter after letter from parents concerned. 

She has had invitations ignored. 

 

Mr. Premier, when I said this is the party of I don't care, that is 

what hundreds of people around this province are saying to the 

official opposition, to third parties, because it is obvious that 

this minister is afraid to face the very people who she takes 

services away from -- the same minister who stood here in 

opposition and demanded more of the government in health 

care. 

 

Sir, because those words ring hollow, will you give the 

commitment today that you will meet with the parents of those 

800 handicapped children in this province? Will you do that, 

sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I think it's important for the 

members opposite to understand that in the health reform, what 

we are attempting to accomplish is to set up district boards with 

local control and local decision making. The Regina Health 

Board is in the process of looking at the facilities in Regina and 

trying to rationalize them and determine how best to provide 

quality health care services. 

 

Now what has happened as a result of the events over the last 

day or two and what was taking place at Wascana Rehab -- and 

the members opposite should know this -- was a consultation 

process by the Regina Health Board. There had been no 

decision made, unlike what they tried to portray -- no decision 

made. All options were being reviewed. And there'd been a 

document put out. The Regina Health Board offered to meet 

with those people and discuss their concerns because no 

decision had been made. They were going through a 

consultation process. 

 

Now I was in Saskatoon this morning at SARM (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities). However, when I came 

back I noticed that a press release had been put out by the 

Regina Health Board today which indicates that following the 

consultation, which took place earlier this week, the decision 

has been made that at this time the best interests of the patients 

will be met by maintaining the five pediatric beds at the 

Wascana Rehab Centre. 



March 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 231 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the Minister of Health. Madam Minister, the only option that 

has been explored in the last 24 hours was how to save your 

skin. You know darn well, Madam Minister, that there had 

been decisions made about moving those children to hospitals, 

other hospitals in the city. And you also know, Madam 

Minister, that that was one reason that the parents were here 

yesterday, is because the care that was potentially there for 

their children wasn't the same as what they would get at 

Wascana Rehab. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, I want you to commit today that not 

only will the five beds be there, that before any major decisions 

are made, that you will meet with the parents' association and 

that that entire wing -- that entire wing, Madam Minister -- will 

be available to handicapped children in this province, as it 

should be. Will you do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- First of all, Mr. Speaker, the fact is, is the 

Regina Health Board is exploring all options and they'll 

continue to explore options. And I am always prepared to meet 

with patients. There's no problem with that. I'll meet with 

people who want . . . with parents and patients who may want 

to meet with me. That's not a problem. 

 

But the decision as to what happens with health care facilities 

in Regina is the decision of the Regina Health Board and I am 

not going to interfere with their consultation process and their 

decisions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A question to the 

same minister. Madam Minister, everyone in this Assembly 

and nearly everyone in the province is beginning to understand 

how you're trying to get other people to wear the goat's horns in 

this province on as far as decisions in health care. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, we're getting there. You're saying that 

you're prepared to meet with people. What we want from you 

today, Madam Minister, is not an attempt to pass this off onto 

the Regina Health Board. We want you, the Minister of Health, 

to meet with the parents of 800 handicapped children. That's 

not a big request, Madam Minister, but it's a very important 

one. Would you give that commitment today? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I have said in the past that I will meet 

with parents. And I am going to tell you this, sir: we are 

moving to community control of health care services in this 

province because the people of Saskatchewan asked for that. 

We have made arrangement in our district board legislation to 

have elected people. You never had the courage to do anything 

like that when you were in government. 

 

We are looking at more community control, more community 

involvement in the delivery of health care services. And what 

we are doing is empowering people 

and empowering communities across this province to deliver 

health care services for their people. And if you look at what 

the press release from the Saskatoon Health Board yesterday . . 

. shows how we will reap the benefits in this province by 

putting more control in the hands of local people who know 

best what to do for their communities and their citizens. 

 

And I am not, as Minister of Health, going to second-guess 

every single decision these local people make. It's their 

decision. I will meet with parents, I will meet with patients, but 

I will not second-guess the health boards because I trust them 

and I trust the decisions they make. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A question to the 

same minister. Let's talk about your health boards, Madam 

Minister, for a minute. Madam Minister, it's very obvious to 

people around this province that you and your government 

don't know exactly what you're doing. 

 

Madam Minister, there's a pretty striking piece of evidence to 

show that. We have your Premier trot off to the SUMA 

(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) convention 

and say that none of these new initiatives would fall back on 

the tax base of Saskatchewan, on the property tax base. 

 

Today you and your colleagues were at the SARM convention 

in Saskatoon. And SARM puts through an emergency 

resolution today saying that they would like the hospital 

revenue tax Act repealed. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, they know the difference between 

union hospital levies and the hospital revenue tax. They know 

the difference, Madam Minister, and yet they asked you and 

your Premier, as has SUMA and as has the official opposition, 

to repeal that tax. 

 

Now why don't you prove to people you know what you're 

doing and give the commitment to the legislature today that 

you will satisfy that want and that need of the people that 

control local government in this province? Would you do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I think it's important, Mr. Speaker, to 

note that there were resolutions at SARM this morning that 

totally opposed the health care reform in the province and they 

were defeated. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- And the members opposite want to repeal 

the hospital revenue tax. You know what they want to do, Mr. 

Speaker? They want to take $23 million out of the institutional 

sector. That's what they want to do. Because they know there 

are limited funds in this province and there's only so much for 

health care dollars. 

 

And what they want to do by putting that Bill forward is to 

grab 23 million out of the institutional sector, that's what they 

want to do. Because they do not come forward with 



232 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1993 

any recommendations for offsets or alternate funding -- just 

grab 23 million out. 

 

They know we're facing a tough health care budget, they know 

there's going to be reductions in health care expenditures, and 

they don't care -- take another 23 million out. That's how 

shallow their analysis is. That's how absolutely politically 

driven their motives are with respect to health care. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister used a 

phrase in the House the other day about smoking things, and I 

think what she's implying by her response is that SUMA and 

SARM are smoking the same kind of stuff that she must be. 

Because SUMA and SARM, Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, 

understand very clearly the difference. They understand very 

clearly the difference between union hospital levies and the 

potential of this particular tax Act to come back on the property 

taxpayers of this province to pay for your changes to the health 

system. They know that difference, Madam Minister. And 

because they know that difference, they're asking you to repeal 

the Act. 

 

Madam Minister, would you give a commitment today to 

SUMA and SARM and to the taxpayers of this province, the 

property taxpayers, that you and your government, before 

moving on to Bill No. 3, will look at the repeal of that 

particular Act? Will you do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, we have given a 

commitment to SUMA and SARM. And we gave it when the 

Premier spoke to SUMA and that was a commitment -- and this 

morning as well -- and that was a commitment to meet with 

SUMA and SARM and look at alternative financing in the 

health care system and to review the hospital revenue tax. 

We've given that commitment and we're in the process of doing 

that. 

 

The difference between SARM and the members opposite is 

that SARM is meeting with us and talking about alternatives 

and working with us to look at alternative financing. They 

recognize that there is a gap if the hospital revenue tax is 

pulled. 

 

The members opposite, however, are standing there with 

blindfolds on, or blinders on, looking at their narrow political 

agenda, not recommending any alternatives, not engaging in 

any sort of discussion about how we finance health care into 

the future, being totally political, totally political. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. Next question. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Question to the 

same minister. Madam Minister, you are the individual that 

stood in this House and trashed the Murray Commission before 

you'd even read the paper. 

 

Now you talk about politics, Madam Minister. Madam 

Minister, you were the epitome of politics when you sat on this 

side of the legislature. 

Now, Madam Minister, what SARM and SUMA and property 

taxpayers across this province are saying to you is that they 

know the difference. Don't try and tell this House that they are 

one and the same. They know the difference between union 

hospital levies and the potential of this Act. Before you proceed 

on Bill 3, Madam Minister, before you use your majority to 

ram that Bill through this House, they are asking you to 

consider repealing this potentially harmful Act so that your 

government can't break this promise the same way you've 

broken every other one that you committed to in October of 

'91. Will you do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, it's not this government that 

trashed the Murray report; it's the members opposite. They 

threw it in the trash can. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- They threw it in the trash can or they put 

it on the shelf, but they didn't have the courage to do anything. 

In fact their former minister of Health, George McLeod, even 

refused to take a position on it -- $1.8 million later, no position, 

into the trash can. That's what the members opposite did with 

the Murray report. 

 

With respect to the hospital revenue tax, we have made a 

commitment to SARM and SUMA, to health care stakeholders, 

and we have been proceeding on that commitment to look at 

alternative financing. 

 

You cannot simply grab $23 million out of the institutional 

sector without having an alternative in place. And those 

discussions are taking place. That's the rational approach; that's 

the reasonable approach; that's the responsible approach to the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Future of Whitespruce Treatment Centre 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, we have heard in this House how 

the NDP (New Democratic Party) intend to close or convert 

rural hospitals in this province. We've also heard how 800 

handicapped children will be affected by the possible closure of 

a wing in Wascana Rehab Centre. We've heard about cuts to 

drug plans and dental plans, and the list goes on -- cuts that 

affect people's lives in a dramatic way. And we saw how the 

NDP reacted to those cuts. Champions of a government of: I 

don't care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Health regarding 

the future of another health care facility in this province -- the 

Whitespruce Treatment Centre at Yorkton. Question, Madam 

Minister. We believe, the opposition has been told, that your 

government is planning to eliminate this most important 

facility. Can you tell us at what stage your government is at in 

this plan? Or can you lay these real concerns to rest and assure 

us that Whitespruce has not been scheduled for closure? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 233 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the Department of Health 

will be doing a paper on institutional services within the 

province and how it should break down in the future. And that's 

going to be coming out very soon, within a few weeks. There is 

also the budget that we have to look forward to, Mr. Speaker. 

And I am not going to stand up in the House today and say 

anything that may or may not be happening in the budget or 

speak to the institutional paper that is going to be put out in the 

future. The members opposite will have to wait for that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, we 

can talk about papers and we can talk about the budget, but 

there are some real concerns in rural Saskatchewan. You and 

your colleagues applauded the establishment of the facility of 

Whitespruce. You cheered our government on, Madam 

Minister, and of course that was while you were on this side of 

the House. But I am sure even now you recognize the real need 

for made-in-Saskatchewan substance abuse programs which 

takes a family approach, Madam Minister. 

 

Unfortunately you haven't offered much hope, Madam 

Minister. Those aren't assuring words for the people who need 

this kind of a treatment for their families, or for the many 

people who work at Whitespruce. 

 

The budget is done, Madam Minister, so we know you have the 

answer. The answer must be a simple yes or no. Question: does 

your government have any plans to close or alter in any way 

the Whitespruce treatment facility? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned in my earlier 

answer, information with respect to institutions and 

institutional sector in Regina and across the province will be 

forthcoming in the weeks to come and the members opposite 

will have to wait. 

 

I also want to speak to the fact that the members opposite are 

standing up in this House asking questions without even 

recognizing the fact that many of the reductions that are taking 

place across the province, not just in the health care sector but 

in other sectors, is due to the legacy that they have left this 

province. It's due to the huge deficit and debt that they have run 

up that's costing us $750 million a year interest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is half of the health care budget. Can you 

imagine what we could do with that 750 million a year? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, it's 

clear you don't understand the effect your policies in health 

care are having on people. If you care about politics, then why 

throw the blame on somebody else? Are you trying to avoid 

looking totally hypocritical? You don't seem to care about 

people. You don't care about the people who work, the 

employees, nor the people who have been lobbying your 

government to keep the facility 

open. 

 

The question, Madam Minister: will you not lay these concerns 

at rest? Will you not simply answer the question, or is 

substance-abuse treatment not a priority of your government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Substance-abuse treatment is very 

important to the government, Mr. Speaker. But let's talk about 

people who don't care about people. Let's talk about people 

who took a $150 million surplus and turned it into a $15 billion 

debt. Let's talk about that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let's talk about how they did not care about the future of our 

children because of the way they mismanaged the funds of this 

province. And not only our children, the future of our 

grandchildren and our great grandchildren and our great great 

great grandchildren, because that's the legacy that you've left 

and that makes it necessary for this government to make tough 

decisions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Plea Bargaining and Early Release Program 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I took notice of a question 

from the hon. member from Moosomin on March 2 and today I 

would like to answer that question, Mr. Speaker. The question 

was: 

 

 I'm wondering if the Department of Justice indeed did take 

the time to consult the Dove family before they entered into 

this process with the convicted killers. 

 

In this case, Mr. Speaker, a corporal from the RCMP (Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police) crime prevention Victim Services 

Unit was asked by the prosecutor to contact the Dove family 

and indeed did so on the day on which the accused persons 

entered guilty pleas, but prior to the announcement of the guilty 

pleas to the media. 

 

And after communicating the decision in person to Mr. Dove's 

son in Yorkton, the corporal travelled to Mrs. Dove's residence 

to discuss the matter with her. 

 

In addition, shortly after that visit, the chief investigator on this 

file personally telephoned Mrs. Dove and again advised her as 

to the decision. And this corporal from the Victim Services 

Unit has had extensive dealings with the Dove family since 

then, keeping them informed as the case progressed. And he 

continues to consult with them. 

 

He became involved with the Dove family on the day of Mr. 

Dove's death and has consulted with them extensively 

thereafter. He has indicated he was in contact with them at least 

twice weekly for the first month after the death, and at least 

weekly thereafter up until this time. 

 

He has assisted in arranging counselling for Mrs. Dove and the 

family and helped others with other family matters. 



234 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1993 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Increases in Gaming Commission Fees 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Gaming 

Commission. In September of '92, the minister responsible for 

the Gaming Commission indicated an increase in licence fees 

for bingos, raffles, and casinos by some 2 per cent, when 

indeed that 2 to 4 per cent increase equalled 100 per cent of an 

increase. Casino licences were increased from 7 to 9 per cent, 

which equals a 28 per cent increase. 

 

Can the minister tell us for what purposes all of the revenues 

generated by these increases have been and will continue to be 

used. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you very much 

for that question. There were mainly two purposes for the 

increase in the fees. Fees across government have been 

increased because of our deficit situation. 

 

The other main purpose for the fee increase was, because of the 

move to a new association model, more staffing was required 

to provide assistance in the transition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 13 -- An Act to repeal The Mineral Taxation Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that An Act to repeal The Mineral Taxation Act be now 

introduced and read the first time and I'll give an explanation of 

this Bill in the second-reading stage. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 14 -- An Act to amend the Statute Law 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

amend the Statute Law be now introduced and read the first 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 15 -- An Act to amend The Limitation of Actions 

Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

amend The Limitation of Actions Act be now introduced and 

read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 16 -- An Act respecting the Interpretation of 

Enactments and prescribing Rules Governing Acts 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill 

respecting the Interpretation of Enactments and 

prescribing Rules Governing Acts be now introduced and read 

the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 17 -- An Act to amend The Fatal Accidents Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

amend The Fatal Accidents Act be now introduced and read the 

first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 18 -- An Act to amend The Victims of Crime Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill to 

amend The Victims of Crime Act be now introduced and read 

the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 19 -- An Act respecting Survivorship 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill 

respecting Survivorship be now introduced and read the first 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on a Point of Order 

 

The Speaker: -- Before orders of the day, I would like to 

respond to a point of order made by the member from 

Greystone. Yesterday the member from Saskatoon Greystone 

raised a point of order concerning her right to be recognized in 

question period pursuant to rule 26 of the Rules and 

Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 

 

Rule 26 has been a standing order of this Assembly since 

Saskatchewan became a province in 1905. It was borrowed 

directly from the House of Commons in Ottawa, which, like 

this Assembly, continues to maintain it in its original form. 

Oral question period however has a relatively recent origin. 

Members of this Assembly will be aware that the guiding 

practices of our question period were shaped largely during the 

1970s during a time when there were two opposition caucuses 

represented in this Assembly. 
 

Out of necessity, the issue of recognition in question period 

became a matter of concern. In a ruling of the Chair dated 

March 17, 1976, the Speaker indicated that it would be the 

Chair's policy in question period to recognize members of the 

official opposition before recognizing members from other 

opposition parties. 
 

This ruling and subsequent practice shows that application of 

rule 26 has been qualified by usage during question period. 

Given this practice, it is important 



March 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 235 

to realize that even in question period, rule 26 remains a 

guiding principle for Speakers when there is competition for 

the floor. 

 

These situations might involve not only the opposition, but, as 

well, government private members. In these situations, the 

Speaker has used his judgement to permit a fair rotation of 

questioners. Even when rule 26 is applied to debate, 

Beauchesne clearly indicates on page 137 of the 6th Edition 

that ". . . the Speaker is the final authority on the order of 

speaking . . ." But Beauchesne points out that: 

 

 The Speaker has traditionally been careful to ensure that an 

independent . . . Member is not overlooked (in any rotation). 

 

I want members to know that I am very conscious of this 

responsibility and I do monitor the situation in question period 

in an effort to be fair. 

 

As an example, last session the member for Saskatoon 

Greystone was recognized to ask the first question on 7 out of 

75 question periods, and received eight and a half per cent of 

the total questions asked. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- And now she wants more. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. It is my intention to continue the 

tradition of this House, which accepts rule 26 as a basic 

principle, but also recognizes that the rule has been qualified in 

practice to give the official opposition some preference at the 

beginning of question period while nevertheless ensuring that 

other members have fair opportunity to participate. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker, for your 

comments. Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Yesterday in question period the Minister of Economic 

Development made some remarks that concerned me. And I 

thought of raising this immediately but I wanted to examine 

Hansard before doing so. 

 

While referring to a comment I made about the government's 

labour force statistics, the minister accused me on page 210 of 

Hansard of, and I quote, "dishonesty" and "not being honest." 

 

I would like your ruling, Mr. Speaker, on the propriety of the 

minister's comments, given the February "Statistical Review", 

page 2. 

 

The Speaker: -- I think I will rule on that now, and that's a 

matter of debate. You're talking about facts and whether or not 

your facts are correct or his facts are correct. That's not a point 

of order; that's a point of debate. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as this relates to the 

question no. 80, put by the member from Greystone, I 

would request it be converted to motions for returns 

(debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- I was not able to hear the member, but I think 

he said: return debate . . . Order for return. 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, just so I get it straight 

on the last motion, it was motions for returns (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Motions for returns (debatable). 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- As it relates to . . . respond to re: 

motion for returns (not debatable) 178, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 

table the document. 

 

The Speaker: -- Answer tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 3 -- An Act respecting Health Districts 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I believe later this day. 

 

The Speaker: -- I'm sorry. I'm sorry. Will members just give 

me a moment here? 

 

The difficulty arose that I couldn't hear the minister's answer, 

but I think he said later today on item no. 2, Bill No. 3, and 

leave is not required for that. 

 

Later today. 

 

Bill No. 4 -- An Act respecting Local Improvements in 

Urban and Northern Municipalities and to Effect Certain 

Consequential Changes 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 

reading of The Local Improvements Act, 1993. This Bill 

replaces the existing Act which was first enacted in the early 

1960s. It has undergone only minor amendments over the years 

and thus requires an updating to meet the current financial 

needs of urban and northern municipalities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill results from a long and extensive process 

of consultation which extended over a number of years. There 

was consultation with the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association, with the urban municipal administrators' 

association, with Saskatchewan cities and with other 

organizations with an interest in local improvements. 

 

For those not familiar with the term, a local improvement is a 

work of service undertaken by a municipality which specially 

benefits particular lands. A local improvement is paid for partly 

or entirely by a special charge or assessment against the 

benefited lands. 

 

This Bill is intended to achieve a number of objectives 

respecting local improvements. It represents a balance of 



236 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1993 

these objectives. It clarifies and fills in the gaps in the 

administrative and procedural requirements pertaining to local 

improvements as well as a role of the Saskatchewan Municipal 

Board. 

 

(1445) 

 

This Bill broadens a range of undertakings which may be 

carried out as a local improvement. At the same time, the 

principle that local improvements must be specially benefiting 

is reinforced. 

 

The Bill offers municipalities more choices as to how the cost 

may be allocated to achieve greater equity and better reflect the 

degree of benefit received. 

 

The Bill enhances and protects the rights of property owners to 

be notified of proposed local improvements and to participate 

in the process leading to their approval. I will highlight some of 

the changes which have been made to achieve these objectives. 

 

The Bill more clearly sets out the process according to which a 

local improvement may be undertaken. There will now be three 

distinct ways in which one may be initiated. First, by petition 

from landowners requesting it; second, by a municipal council, 

subject to the rights of owners to petition against it; or third, by 

a council where it considers the improvement should proceed 

notwithstanding the owner's views. 

 

Among the procedural changes which have been made to 

reinforce the public's rights are: lengthening the period for 

property owners to petition against a proposed local 

improvement; formally providing an opportunity for owners to 

petition to initiate a local improvement; clarifying the process 

and information required for a municipal application to the 

Municipal Board; requiring preparation of a municipal report 

on a proposed local improvement; and specifying the 

information to be included in this; setting out criteria for the 

Municipal Board's decision to approve a local improvement, in 

particular that it must specially benefit property owners who 

are to be specially assessed by part of the cost; and requiring 

the notice of a proposed local improvement to indicate when 

council will consider it so owners may appear to make 

representations and precluding council from acting until the 

end of the lengthened period for petitioning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill now clearly states that lands specially 

assessed for a local improvement must specially benefit from 

it. This legal principle which involved in the court was not 

previously included in the Act even though it fundamentally 

distinguished local improvements from other general municipal 

works and services. This special benefit is the justification for 

local improvement special assessment. 

 

The Bill sets out principles for determining the special 

assessment with a renewed focus on equity and the relative 

degree of benefit for lands to be specially assessed. The Bill 

expands the basis upon which special assessments may be 

levied, or on benefited lands, from not only frontage to include 

other approaches as well. This is to provide municipalities with 

greater flexibility 

and to help ensure that the allocation of costs equitably reflects 

a distribution of benefits. Many situations will continue to 

warrant use of frontage charges, but other options will now be 

available. 

 

Expanded discretion is provided for a municipal council to 

assume a portion of the cost of a local improvement if it is 

considered to benefit the municipality in general as well as 

benefiting particular property owners. Appeal provisions 

continue to be included in the Act relating to local 

improvement special assessments. The notice periods related to 

these have been lengthened. The Act now specifies a content of 

notices rather than having the form in the statute. 

 

Appeals are first addressed locally by a municipality's board of 

revision which reviews special assessments against the 

requirements of the Act. It does not have the authority to 

review municipal councils' policy decisions relating to the 

municipal's contribution to the cost of a local improvement, for 

example. An owner has a right to further appeal a special 

assessment to the Saskatchewan Municipal Board. In fact, 

scope for appeals by residents respecting local improvements 

has been expanded by dropping section 5(4) of the existing 

Act. 

 

I will say more about this in a moment. There are a number of 

other changes which will affect municipalities as well. The Bill 

gives a municipality increased flexibility to adopt various 

repayment plans, to permit early pay out of an owner's balance 

due to a local improvement special assessment, to permit either 

advancing or deferring payment of instalments, and to set terms 

and conditions relating to these charges to the payments. These 

changes respond to a request from SUMA for this greater 

flexibility. 

 

By-laws to fix uniform rates for certain types of local 

improvements will still be permitted; however, now there must 

be update from every three years to ensure that the rates are not 

years out of date and hence unfair. In the case of unusual 

circumstances, the Saskatchewan Municipal Board will be able 

to permit higher or now lower rates for particular projects. 

 

Provisions related to unpaid special assessments have been 

clarified. If unpaid in any year, after December 31 the special 

assessment is added to and treated as part of the arrears on 

taxes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few words now about how 

this Bill responds to a case involving the existing Local 

Improvements Act referred to in the 1988 report of the 

Ombudsman. The concerns of the Ombudsman focused on 

whether a local improvement approved by the then local 

government board was consistent with the principles that such 

works should specially benefit properties against which special 

assessments are imposed. 

 

This Bill specifically defines local improvements as works or 

services which specially benefit properties to which special 

assessments are charged. The principle of special benefit will 

now be directly incorporated in the Act, rather than relying on 

the interpretation of past court decisions for this basic premise. 



March 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 237 

The Saskatchewan Municipal Board retains its approving role 

for local improvements; however it will now be guided by this 

explicit direction in the Act that a work or service must 

specially benefit in order to be approved as a local 

improvement. 

 

In addition, subsection 5(4) of the existing Act, which made 

anything approved by the Saskatchewan Municipal Board a 

local improvement, has not been retained. Formerly, this 

subsection constrained any judicial review of whether a project 

approved by the Saskatchewan Municipal Board should be a 

local improvement. 

 

It broadens a range of types of works and services which may 

be undertaken as local improvements, provided that these can 

be shown to be specially-benefited properties to which special 

assessments are charged. It thus expands municipalities' 

options for improving and financing municipal works and 

services. 

 

The Bill increases the options available for allocating costs 

associated with local improvements in order to achieve 

improved equality. 

 

Lastly, the Bill represents an improvement in terms of the 

clarity of the procedures to be followed by municipalities for 

local improvements. I intend to have my department reinforce 

this by following up the new Act with advisory assistance and 

an administrative manual to be prepared in consultation with 

the Municipal Board. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of the legislature to join 

me in supporting this Bill. I move second reading. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I was 

listening to the minister and certainly the Bill before us is a Bill 

that affects a lot of individuals. And I take it from the minister's 

comments that some consultation, or a fair bit of consultation 

took place. But I'm quite assured that my colleague, the 

member responsible for urban development, would like to offer 

a number of comments and certainly look more in depth at the 

Bill, and so therefore at this time I will beg leave to adjourn 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 5 -- An Act to amend The Planning and 

Development Act, 1983 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move 

second reading of the Bill No. 5, An Act to amend The 

Planning and Development Act, 1983. 

 

The amendments proposed in this Bill reflect our commitment 

to be responsive to the needs of local governments. The 

changes are aimed at providing better, more efficient 

administration of planning issues to assist municipalities and 

the general public in the implementation of this Act. The 

amendments have been suggested by the Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association and by municipalities themselves. 
 

We recognize that community planning and 

development decisions must consider the availability and 

adequacy of municipal infrastructure. With development of 

older neighbourhoods, our municipalities are often faced with 

inadequate servicing and the cost of upgrading municipal 

systems. 

 

Mr. Speaker, local governments have expressed the concern 

that existing provisions on servicing charges do not adequately 

address the cost of redevelopment projects. They have also 

suggested that proponents of new developments must pay their 

share in ensuring a sound municipal infrastructure. 

 

Our government supports the concept of proper planning by 

and for our communities. Municipalities must have the means 

to ensure that municipal services are capable of 

accommodating development. Mr. Speaker, we are therefore 

making provisions for municipalities with policy plans to 

charge development levies which would generally be applied to 

redevelopment of older neighbourhoods. 

 

In addition to revenues such as provincial grants, municipal 

taxes, and local improvements, these levies will be an 

important source of municipal financing for ageing 

infrastructure. 

 

I would stress that municipalities will be required to do their 

homework in determining fair development levies. Both the 

private and the public sectors will be required to work together 

so new developments can continue in a planned manner and 

not be stymied by deteriorating and inadequate infrastructure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these amendments also recognize that 

municipalities must have the administrative tools and the 

flexibility in implementing local land use regulations. 

Municipalities will therefore be able to establish a procedure 

for dealing with minor variances in their zoning by-laws. This 

will streamline the development review process and facilitate 

the issuance of development permits. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government recognizes that administering 

local zoning by-laws is not without cost. And municipalities 

should be able to recover administrative costs. The government 

further recognizes that municipalities are capable of 

establishing their own fees for administrating zoning by-laws 

and for a subdivision of lands where the municipality is the 

approving authority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill contains amendments which will clarify 

the type of administrative fees that may be assessed for 

development on a cost-recovery basis. Fees can be prescribed 

for development permits, minor variance permits, zoning 

by-law amendments, and discretionary-use applications. 

 

Mr. Speaker, local governments have often asked for control 

over the architectural details of buildings. We recognize that 

architectural control would be of benefit to both the 

municipalities and development proponents in districts 

designated for architectural control and municipal zoning 

by-laws. 



238 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1993 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill provides amendment allowing 

municipalities with policy plans to guide architectural detail in 

such districts. It is to be used to control the physical character 

of an area or to promote an established theme of an area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these amendments recognize the role of 

municipalities in maintaining inner-city residential buildings. 

Demolition control districts are proposed as zoning techniques 

will . . . which will provide added flexibility in dealing with 

development. It will increase local decision-making powers 

and protect the public interest. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, these amendments will permit 

municipalities with policy plans to designate areas of 

demolition control in their zoning by-law. They are intended to 

give municipalities a way of preserving existing housing stock 

in inner-city areas. 

 

It is our feeling, Mr. Speaker, that good-quality housing, near 

and in the downtown area, is an important element of 

promoting social sustainability and wellness in our urban 

communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are proposing amendments which will allow 

the local development appeals board to use ordinary mail as a 

means of serving public notice of appeal hearings. These 

amendments will provide an alternative to the present use of 

registered mail or personal service and reduce administrative 

costs to municipalities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, subdivision approving authority and municipal 

councils can negotiate agreements with development 

components. Often these agreements are secured by way of a 

development caveat on the title of the property. This notifies 

future landowners of the municipal interest in that property. 

Amendments will clarify this process so that all development 

caveats registered under The Planning and Development Act, 

1983 are treated in a similar manner. 

 

Lastly we are proposing administrative amendments requiring 

municipalities to place monies collected through servicing 

agreements into a separate account from general revenues. 

Together with the accrued interest, these monies are collected 

at the time of subdivision and can be expended for specific 

municipal services. This action parallels proposed amendments 

for development levies previously mentioned. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments proposed in this Bill is evidence 

of our support for local autonomy and it clearly demonstrates 

our confidence in municipal governments. Councils have a 

major task in meeting the challenges associated with promoting 

sound community development. We have a commitment to 

work with local governments to provide a suitable framework 

and mechanisms for directing community development. And 

together with my colleague, the Minister of Rural 

Development, I would now urge each and every member of this 

House to support this Bill. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to thank you and thank the 

minister for presenting us . . . giving us a better idea of what 

the Bill represents. Certainly my colleague would like to have 

some more time just to reassess it before we get into 

deliberations on the Bill. Therefore I move adjournment of 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 8 -- An Act to amend The Uniform Building and 

Accessibility Standards Act and to make Related 

Amendments to Certain Other Acts 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to move second 

reading of the Bill No. 8, An Act to amend The Uniform 

Building and Accessibility Standards Act. The amendments 

proposed in this Bill clarify the intent of the Act by defining 

improved provisions for administration and enforcement. This 

clarification will assist municipalities, building owners, 

building designers, and building contractors throughout the 

province. 

 

These amendments have been suggested and considered by 

people who use the Act and by people who are affected by the 

Act. The Uniform Building and Accessibility Standards Act 

provides for the safety of building users by legislating control 

over building construction. 

 

The Act requires building owners to ensure that buildings are 

constructed, renovated, relocated and demolished in 

conformance with regulations under this Act. 

 

Regulations under the Act set building accessibility standards. 

Local authorities control building construction within their 

jurisdiction by administering and enforcing the Act and 

regulations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill contains amendments that will designate 

local authorities for regional and provincial parks. Designation 

of urban and rural and northern municipalities as local 

authorities will not change. 

 

Building owners will continue to be responsible for 

conformance to the building and accessibility standards 

throughout the province. Local authorities will find 

improvements in the procedures that are prescribed. 

 

The process for review and for filing of building by-laws will 

be standardized, based on the zoning by-law model of The 

Planning and Development Act. Consequential amendments 

within this Bill will eliminate duplicated provisions in The 

Urban Municipality Act, 1984 and The Northern Municipalities 

Act, and simplify the local authority's authorization for 

controlling building construction. 

 

Local authorities will be authorized to request restraining 

orders from the courts when they have evidence that an owner 

plans to contravene a building official's order. 
 

Mr. Speaker, members of the Saskatchewan Building and 

Accessibility Standards Appeal Board have gained sufficient 

experience in hearing appeals to advise us how 



March 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 239 

the Act can be approved. 

 

This Bill contains amendments that specify the application 

procedures and the process for appeal board hearings. The 

basis for appeal board decisions is better defined to provide 

fairness to appellants, local authorities, and appeal board 

members themselves. Provisions will be added to ensure that 

the decisions on the appeal board are enforced. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Act currently authorizes licensing of building 

officials. This Bill contains amendments that will authorize 

regulations to formalize the licensing requirements and the 

process, and that will allow local authorities to appoint their 

own licensed building officials. 

 

Mr. Speaker, regulations under the Act currently adopt the 

National Building Code of Canada, 1990. The National 

Building Code is issued every five years. Between editions, 

revisions and errata are issued to update the standards. This Bill 

contains an amendment that will implement automatic adoption 

of these revisions so that improvements to the National 

Building Code are available to users immediately, without the 

need to amend the adopting regulations. 

 

Unwanted revisions can be deleted if necessary by amending 

the regulations. Amendment regulations will still be required to 

adopt new additions to the National Building Code. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill contains amendments that will clarify 

and reinforce the local authorities' position of prime 

responsibility for eliminating dangers to public safety in 

buildings. 

 

However, if a local authority does not or is unable to fulfil this 

duty in the case of inordinate danger, the province will be 

allowed to take the same actions available to the local authority 

to alleviate the danger. 

 

The remainder of the amendments amount to housekeeping 

items such as an addition of definitions and incorporation of 

accurate titles for enforcement personnel. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments proposed in this Bill reinforce 

the right and responsibility of building owners, local authorities 

and their employees, and the members of the Saskatchewan 

Building and Accessibility Standards Appeal Board, in their 

effort to provide safe buildings for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

These amendments clarify the intent of The Uniform Building 

and Accessibility Standards Act and make the legislation more 

useful and usable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of this Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to just say to 

the minister that the critic is not here today and will be 

providing that backdrop for the information that we would like 

to have from you, with his speech. And we 

therefore move adjournment of debate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 9 -- And Act to amend The Emergency Planning 

Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, The Emergency Planning 

Amendment Act, 1993, primarily provides a more sound legal 

basis for the provincial disaster assistance program. Other 

amendments are of an administrative or housekeeping nature 

relating to the structure of the Emergency Measures 

Organization. 

 

Currently the regulations derive their authority from The 

Department of Urban Affairs Act. The Department of Justice 

and the solicitor for the Special Committee on Regulations had 

advised that The Department of Urban Affairs Act may not 

provide sufficient local authority to support these regulations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the regulations authorize the Minister of Finance 

-- the Department of Finance administers the program -- to pay 

compensation to individuals, small businesses, municipalities, 

and others for uninsured losses related to natural disasters. It is 

desirable to have legislation that supports the regulations 

without being associated with municipal legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Emergency Planning Act is the appropriate 

vehicle to provide a more sound legal basis for the provincial 

disaster assistance program. 

 

Other amendments of a housekeeping nature include renaming 

the existing Emergency Measures Organization to 

Saskatchewan emergency planning, recognizing that 

Emergency Measures Organization is now part of a larger 

department; replacing the reference to executive director 

appointed by order in council with a reference to the Public 

Service appointment; and enabling participation of regional and 

provincial parks in mutual aid areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, again there are many areas and a 

number of technical points that I know my colleague would 

like to raise on this Bill. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, whereas both the Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association and, this morning by way of an 

emergency motion, the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities have called for the immediate repeal of The 

Hospital Revenue Act, I move: 

 

 That the Assembly now proceed to consideration of second 

reading of Bill 10, An Act to Protect Municipal Property 

Taxpayers in the Province of Saskatchewan through the 

repeal of The Hospital Revenue Act. 

 

The division bells rang from 3:11 p.m. until 3:18 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 

Swenson Toth 



240 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1993 

Martens Britton 

Boyd D'Autremont 

Haverstock  

-- 7 

Nays 

 

Van Mulligen Koenker 

Thompson Lorje 

Wiens Lyons 

Simard Pringle 

Tchorzewski Calvert 

Lingenfelter Murray 

Teichrob Hamilton 

Shillington Trew 

Anguish Serby 

Solomon Sonntag 

Goulet Flavel 

Atkinson Cline 

Kowalsky Scott 

Carson Wormsbecker 

Mitchell Crofford 

MacKinnon Stanger 

Penner Knezacek 

Upshall Carlson 

Bradley Jess 

-- 38 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The opposition will 

be reviewing the statements made by the minister and we will 

conclude our remarks on another day. And therefore I move to 

adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 11 -- An Act to amend The Wakamow Valley 

Authority Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

rise today to move second reading of Bill No. 11, which is to 

amend The Wakamow Valley Authority Act. 

 

Just in passing, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say, as the 

member who proudly represents Moose Jaw Wakamow and 

now as minister responsible for the Wakamow Valley 

Authority, I am particularly pleased that my first piece of 

legislation to introduce into this House is a Bill regarding the 

Wakamow Valley Authority. And even more pleased, Mr. 

Minister, that this is a welcome piece of legislation for the 

Valley Authority in Moose Jaw. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this short Bill includes just two amendments 

which will indeed, and are intended to, provide the Wakamow 

Valley Authority with added financial flexibility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the past 10 and now 11 years, Wakamow has 

successfully undertaken a number of park development and 

restoration projects in the Moose Jaw River valley. And the 

Authority on that count, and all who've been involved with it 

over the years, are to be highly commended for the work 

they've done in our community. There are plans in place, Mr. 

Speaker, for additional projects over the coming years that will 

be undertaken as the financial resources permit. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the current section 60 of The Wakamow 

Valley Authority Act requires the Authority to allocate fully 

one-third of its funding to construction of capital projects each 

and every year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the earlier and initial construction phases that 

was an appropriate requirement, and now greater flexibility is 

required by Wakamow Valley Authority to balance the needs 

of construction with the needs of maintenance on existing 

construction. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, section 60 of the Act is 

proposed to be repealed by this Bill in order to give the 

Wakamow Valley Authority the desired flexibility to schedule 

construction work as resources permit, rather than having 

projects done piecemeal, a little each year in order to meet 

statutory requirements. 

 

The second amendment, Mr. Speaker, proposed by the Bill, is 

to section 70. It will be amended . . . is proposed to be amended 

to reduce the frequency of the mandatory review process of 

Wakamow's development plan from every five years to every 

seven years. 

 

Some of the pace of development has slowed, Mr. Speaker. 

And also given the fiscal and financial squeeze that 

Wakamow's endured over the last decade and ongoing financial 

difficulties faced by us all in this province, reducing the 

frequency of the development plan review makes good 

financial sense. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm happy to say that both of these changes have 

been discussed with the Wakamow Valley Authority. In fact 

both have been recommended and suggested by the Wakamow 

Valley Authority. They are in agreement with these proposed 

changes. And so, Mr. Speaker, I would hope that all members 

of the House would see fit to support this Bill. Mr. Speaker, I 

therefore move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We are going to talk 

a little bit about the amendments and therefore today we are 

going to just ask for an adjournment of debate. And so I do 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 12 -- An Act to amend The Wascana Centre Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am 

pleased to have this opportunity to rise today and move second 

reading of a Bill amending The Wascana Centre Act. 

 

I want to first of all say that since its beginning the Wascana 

Centre Authority idea and concept has become a model for 

similar kinds of projects throughout this whole country of 

Canada. 

 

It was one of the first of its kind and it has provided an 

opportunity for the long-range planning and development of an 

important part of an inner part of a city, in this case our city of 

Regina, which has provided opportunities and recreation and 

green space and beauty for the people of not only this city but 

everyone who comes to visit Regina. Most people who do, do 

not lose 



March 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 241 

the opportunity to come and visit the Wascana Park and the 

Wascana Authority. 

 

These amendments make a number of changes, most of which 

have been requested by the Wascana Centre Authority, with a 

couple that were suggested by the provincial government. But I 

want to say, Mr. Speaker, that all have been agreed to by the 

Wascana Authority. 

 

The Bill includes a repeal of legally redundant provisions 

relating to boating, since this is a federal jurisdiction, and an 

amendment to give the Authority a little more flexibility 

relating to approving temporary improvements or minor 

buildings valued under $25,000, even though they may diverge 

from the Authority's long-term development goals. 

 

There are also amendments, Mr. Speaker, which I want to 

outline for the information of the members in the House, two of 

which I want to speak to directly. One is to reduce the 

frequency of review of Wascana's master plan from every five 

to seven years, recognizing the maturity of the park at a slower 

pace of development for financial reasons. 

 

And secondly, to provide authority to include landscape or 

service facility restoration work in the annual expenditures 

required by the Act for construction. This recognizes that as a 

relatively mature park, the focus will be on replacement rather 

than all new work. 

 

The present provision, Mr. Speaker, is such that the Authority 

does not have the flexibility to focus more on the restoration 

and rehabilitation of existing facilities because the legislation 

requires that a certain portion of the funding be spent on new 

construction. 

 

It is clear to all of us that, one, the park has developed to a 

mature state and therefore there is less need for the 

development of new construction; and secondly, with limited 

resources, as we all face in all jurisdictions and all kinds of 

things that we do, there is less money available, and therefore it 

is important to focus on maintaining the infrastructure and the 

structure that is there to keep it from deteriorating. 

 

These two changes, Mr. Speaker, were initially suggested by 

the government. And the Wascana Centre Authority, having 

considered it, has agreed that they are important and 

appreciates that these amendments are being brought forward 

today. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the boundary of the Centre is adjusted 

slightly to take into account a change in the size of the 

University of Regina president's residence. 

 

None of these amendments represents a major change in the 

purposes or operation of Wascana Centre. Some are 

housekeeping, while others are intended to add financial or 

operational flexibility at a time in the Centre's development 

when this is needed. 

 

As I noted, there has been consultation with Wascana's board, 

which includes representatives of the other two participating 

partners, the city of Regina and the University of 

Saskatchewan, and the package has the 

support and approval of the Wascana Authority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with these explanatory remarks, I move second 

reading of this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We will review the 

remarks made by the minister responsible for The Wascana 

Centre Act and we will provide our remarks in return from the 

individual who's responsible for the critic post of this. And 

therefore I move the adjournment of the debate today. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, before I introduce the 

Bill, I'd ask for leave to introduce some guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to 

introduce to all members of the legislature, four members of 

the Saskatchewan Association of Social Workers. In particular 

I'd like to introduce Pat MacKenzie, who is the president of the 

Saskatchewan Association of Social Workers; Sheila Brandick, 

who is the chairperson of the regulations of practice committee; 

Linda Wacker, past president of the association; and Ray 

Pekrul, a member of the association. 

 

I would ask all members of the legislature to welcome these 

guests today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 7 -- An Act respecting Social Workers 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise today 

to move second reading of Bill No. 7, The Social Workers Act. 

This Bill revises and replaces The Registered Social Workers 

Act which has been in effect in Saskatchewan since 1967. 

 

As Minister of Social Services, I'm particularly pleased to 

present this Bill which addresses a number of issues that have 

been identified to me by clients of the department as well as 

employees and by the Saskatchewan Association of Social 

Workers and interested members of the community. 

 

Their collective work has contributed to the legislation that was 

tabled a few days ago, and this legislation will promote high 

quality services for the people of our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Social Workers Act will help to strengthen 

and support social work in Saskatchewan. This legislation will 

enhance the public's confidence and will protect the interests of 

the public by allowing the 



242 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1993 

Saskatchewan Association of Social Workers to develop and 

enforce professional standards for social workers. 

 

Standards will be developed which are based on the social 

work values of humanitarianism and egalitarianism. Standards 

will be based on the principle of striving toward equality of 

social conditions and achieving social justice for all members 

of our society. These values, Mr. Speaker, I believe, were at the 

heart of the profession. 

 

The Bill also recognizes social workers' commitments to gain 

education, skills, and confidence in order to provide 

meaningful and effective services to the clients. It is my hope 

that social workers will continue to participate as agents of 

social change. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill further recognizes that any person 

engaging in the practice of social work by using the title of 

"social worker" must be a member of the Saskatchewan 

Association of Social Workers. 

 

We have not limited the practice of social work to association 

members. Many of the diverse skills and knowledge required 

of social workers are shared by other helping professions. For 

example, individuals may still call themselves counsellors, 

therapists, and mediators. Licensing provisions of this Act 

would not apply to them. 

 

There are however, Mr. Speaker, individuals who call 

themselves social workers and practise social work but do not 

have specific training. These people have proven their skill and 

knowledge and they will be offered an opportunity to seek a 

licence. 

 

In my view, the Bill provides the appropriate balance of 

protecting the public without placing unrealistic controls and 

expectations on human service organizations and individuals 

currently practising in the helping professions. 

 

With the complexity of social problems and social issues facing 

social workers, now more than ever it is imperative that we 

strengthen social work in our province. 

 

This legislation is consistent with other legislation in the 

province in that it allows the professional association to set 

standards and govern its membership. In order for the 

association to effectively govern the profession and protect the 

interest of the public, it must be able to enforce the standards 

and procedures established in the association's by-laws. 

 

I would like to outline, Mr. Speaker, some of the areas where 

the association may establish standards in their by-laws. These 

include registering and licensing members; developing a 

professional code of ethics; setting standards of professional 

conduct; proficiency and competency of members; setting 

standards for continuing education; and prescribing the 

procedures for investigations and hearings by the professional 

conduct and discipline committee. 

 

In the event of professional misconduct or incompetence, the 

Saskatchewan Association of Social Workers will now have 

the authority to discipline social workers. The 

discipline provisions in this legislation strike a fair balance 

between the need to protect the public from professional 

misconduct or incompetence and the right of the individual 

social worker to adjust investigation and hearing. 

 

The process provides for investigation of complaints, discipline 

hearings, and where warranted, discipline resulting from the 

findings of the hearing. All decisions will be subject to appeal. 

 

The standards and ethics established by the Saskatchewan 

Association of Social Workers will be reviewed and approved 

by the Minister of Social Services and the Legislative 

Assembly to ensure that they are in the best interests of the 

public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's important to note that while this legislation is 

making its way through the legislature, we will continue to 

respond to input from human service organizations, union 

representatives, and interested community groups, as we work 

with the Saskatchewan Association of Social Workers in 

developing the by-laws. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity last Monday, or this past 

Monday, to be at a luncheon where the Saskatchewan 

Association of Social Workers recognized one of their fellow 

workers. And I was impressed by what he said in his remarks 

to the luncheon, so I would like to conclude my remarks today 

by quoting him. 

 

And the quote comes from Mr. Ray Pekrul, a Regina social 

worker who happens to be in the gallery, and who was recently 

recognized as an outstanding social worker by the Canadian 

Association of Social Workers. 

 

In his speech, Mr. Pekrul referred to the sideline people of our 

society and asked, and I quote: 

 

 Who are these people? In essence they are part of all of us; 

categorically, they are the unemployed, the impoverished, 

the physically and emotionally unhealthy, often the young 

and the elderly, the young parents raising children alone 

and the lost adolescent, who are often facing prejudices 

against them for their gender, race and sexual orientation. 

 

 Yet, so much can be done to alleviate the pain, the isolation 

and confusion of those who are sidelined. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we believe that we are initiating an Act 

which supports the setting and monitoring of standards for 

professional social workers, the kind of people that Mr. Pekrul 

represents, and the idea is with the aim of addressing the many 

needs of Saskatchewan people. This Bill is about making the 

profession more professional. 

 

I am very pleased, Mr. Speaker, to move second reading of Bill 

7, The Social Workers Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 



March 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 243 

Speaker, I beg leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: -- Does the member have leave to introduce 

guests? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker and 

members. I want to join with the minister to welcome the 

delegation from the profession of social work, Pat, Ray, Linda, 

and Sheila. I've known these people for many years as a 

practising social worker myself. I've been along the way with 

these folks. 

 

This Bill has been a long time coming, and I want to reinforce 

what the minister has said that these are dedicated, professional 

social workers and citizens who have worked very hard over 

many years to commit themselves to their community and to 

the clients they work with. 

 

And I want to offer my congratulations to Ray Pekrul, a 

long-time, outstanding, distinguished social worker in 

Saskatchewan for the award that you received, and it was well 

deserved. 

 

So I would ask again that members join with me in welcoming 

them again. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 7 (continued) 

 

Mr. Pringle: -- I won't repeat many of the fine comments the 

minister repeated. I think she hit the highlights of this Bill very 

well and I know that social workers appreciate the leadership 

and the support that the minister has provided in coming to this 

particular point. 

 

I support the Bill as well. And there are many, as the minister 

said, there are many challenges facing the community, facing 

our society. The issues are very complex. And the challenge of 

good, effective social work practice is very great and requires a 

tremendous amount of effort on the part of the profession and 

on the part of practising social workers. It's an increasingly 

complex job. 
 

And it means that with this Bill that, as the minister has said, 

this will allow for I think greater quality of practice. It will 

allow for greater accountability to the public for ethical and 

high quality practice. And it will give the profession, through 

strength in numbers and more members, a greater potential for 

research and policy development and for the kind of support 

that social workers need in the field, so a good support to 

members. 
 

There are only positive aspects to this Bill, as the minister has 

outlined. I've been proud to be a member of the Saskatchewan 

association for the last 19 years. I think the profession has a 

very positive value base, a high set of principles. This Bill will 

ensure the accountability that the 

 public has a right to deserve. And the confidence of the public 

will be guaranteed and we will be able to provide, as social 

workers, a high quality practice through the standards that will 

be set. 

 

And so I take great pleasure, Mr. Speaker, in joining with the 

minister in supporting this Bill. And I know that it'll receive the 

support of the House as well. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to rise 

and speak briefly in support of the Bill that's presented to us, 

and in support of the many hours of work and dedication of 

people who have gone out with care and a great deal of concern 

about the practice of the profession, and those people who are 

now practising outside the profession but calling themselves 

social workers as well. And I think the Bill does address that 

and try and be inclusive to those people and have them come 

within the mandate of the Act. 

 

I also feel that it is consistent with the broad range of 

care-givers and professionals that we have in other Acts in 

health care and so on. And I know with the hard work of the 

people that have been introduced this afternoon and others who 

have participated in the process of bringing the Act forward, 

that they too feel that this will strengthen and support the work 

that they do, for they are the front line of support to those 

people who need a great deal of care and compassion. 

 

And the Bill being brought forward shows that we too want to 

support their work and to provide accountability and the 

credibility of the profession. I would like to thank everyone 

involved and add my support to the Bill that's now before us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I just want to reiterate the fact that 

this Bill is a Bill that we want to review. And I'm sure that 

many on this side will have a number of comments regarding 

the Bill, just to let the minister, in a review, to see where the 

Bill is really going, and the recognition of the individuals who 

are here as well in support of the Bill, just so we know that 

everyone is served fairly. So at this time I move to adjourn 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 3 -- An Act respecting Health Districts 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

have the pleasure today of rising to move second reading of An 

Act respecting Health Districts. 

 

Some 30 years ago, Mr. Speaker, our province demonstrated 

leadership and caring as it introduced a publicly funded 

universal health system. Through that system this province 

became the birthplace of medicare in North America and our 

system became a model for providing quality health care to all. 

 

It removed the financial barrier for people seeking 



244 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1993 

physician and hospital services. No Saskatchewan resident 

need fear the potential economic disaster of hospitalization and 

long-term care. Tommy Douglas recognized that this was only 

the first step in terms of medicare because more recently he 

pointed to the need to revamp and reorganize the entire health 

care system. And he said, that's the tough item; that's the big 

item. 

 

(1545) 

 

The benefits brought to the residents of this province by our 

health system are clear. However, the present system must 

change to better address the health needs of the 1990s and to 

reflect a broader view of health care, a view which recognizes 

that health care is more than physicians and hospitals, but that 

our health is impacted by factors such as poverty, housing, 

employment, education, and the environment; that these factors 

all have a role to play in the health of our population. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many people have said, why do we need health 

reform? Well it has been long understood in this province by 

people working in the health care area and many other people 

outside of the health care area that there is a need for health 

reform. 

 

We have had a whole series of commissions and reports on this 

very issue. And the similarity of many of the recommendations 

are quite astounding. But to date we have had absolutely no 

action. Today, Mr. Speaker, this government is moving ahead 

with legislation that is going to implement reform that will 

provide for future generations a high quality health care system 

and preserve medicare from the ravages that have been 

wreaked on the financial situation in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Health reform is occurring all over 

Canada, Mr. Speaker, in virtually every province and territory 

in this country -- virtually every province and territory. And 

they're proceeding in different ways. In some provinces they 

are imposing a blueprint on the province, outlining the 

boundaries, wiping out boards overnight, expropriating them 

and replacing them with their own board. In some provinces it's 

been occurring in that fashion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan we chose a developmental and a 

consultative process. We tabled a vision paper on August 17, 

1992 and we spent the next six months talking with people at 

the grass roots levels and meeting with thousands and 

thousands and thousands of people across this province. 

 

And we asked them what their concerns were. We listened to 

what their concerns were. And many of their concerns are dealt 

with in this legislation, Mr. Speaker. We took their advice and 

we consulted. 

 

And let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, that the people of 

Saskatchewan know much better than the members opposite 

that health reform is necessary. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The people of Saskatchewan understand 

the very urgent need for us to proceed with health reform if we 

are to preserve medicare for future generations. They 

understand that. The members opposite of course would like to 

bury their head in the sand as they did when they trashed the 

Murray report in the trash can. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me just itemize some of the reasons why we 

need health reform in Saskatchewan and indeed across Canada. 

There is a lack of service integration and coordination which 

results in the fragmented delivery of services in our system. 

And there are gaps in the system with people falling in those 

gaps. 

 

There is a lack of community participation in and control of 

health resources, and we need to rebalance the roles of 

government in community in the health care sector. We need to 

rebalance governance responsibilities. 

 

The members opposite in one hand, Mr. Speaker, will scream 

and holler that you're not giving community control, and on the 

other hand they say, why aren't you making the decisions? Why 

do you let the health board make the decisions? 

 

And there's an inconsistency in their approach, and the reason 

why there's an inconsistency, Mr. Speaker, is they've never had 

a vision. And they don't have a vision today. It's political 

expediency, and it changes from minute to minute, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In the health care system there has been an overemphasis on 

institutions and institutional care and expensive equipment, Mr. 

Speaker, which overshadows community-based services and 

preventative programing. Something like only 2 per cent of the 

health care budget in Canada is spent on health promotion and 

disease prevention -- only 2 per cent. By far a huge amount of 

money is spent on institutional services. 

 

Now it is extremely important for us to maintain high quality 

institutional and acute care services, but we must rebalance the 

emphasis so that more emphasis is put on health promotion, 

disease prevention; more emphasis on community-based 

services like home care; and more emphasis on other things 

that impact on our health such as the environment, such as 

education, such as housing, such as your economic situation, 

Mr. Speaker. Those things must become a part of the vision for 

health care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are structures in place in Saskatchewan, for 

example, in the health care system that encourage user 

dependency on the system and do not empower people to take 

more responsibility for their own health care where it is 

appropriate. And I say where it is appropriate because there are 

people in Saskatchewan, because of their particular illness, 

who cannot take that responsibility. 

 

But by far the majority of people in this province can take more 

responsibility for their own health care and they should be 

empowered to do that rather than to be encouraged to be 

dependent on the system. 

 

The health reform attempts to address that, Mr. Speaker.  



March 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 245 

There have been dramatic social and economic changes in 

society since the early 1960s. We know that today most of the 

illnesses that we suffer from are as a result of lifestyle and 

living conditions. We know that, Mr. Speaker, and our health 

care system has not adapted to meet those specific challenges. 

And through the health care reform, we are focusing attention 

on those needs. 

 

We know, Mr. Speaker, that there has been no real analysis of 

health outcomes in the health system in Saskatchewan or across 

Canada, that money is poured into the system without us 

determining what the health outcomes are. We know that other 

countries spend more than we do on health care and have a 

better health status than we do in Canada. 

 

It's time, Mr. Speaker, for Saskatchewan people to stand back, 

take a long, hard look at the health care system and determine 

what our health needs are and focus our funding on where the 

needs are. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- In the last 10 years, Mr. Speaker, we 

spent some 489 million on capital construction in this province, 

which increased our operating budget by some 80 million. And 

we only use a fraction of that rated bed capacity, Mr. Speaker. 

It is time for us to address these inequities in the health care 

system, and the health reform proposes to do that. 

 

This legislation, Mr. Speaker, follows "A Saskatchewan Vision 

for Health," which was released on August 17 and which has 

been discussed in all corners of this province. I have personally 

attended meetings at Langenburg, meetings at Shaunavon, 

meetings at Neilburg, meetings in other parts of the province in 

communities that did not expect to see a Health minister, I 

must say, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have been out talking to people at the community level, at 

the grass roots level about the vision for reform, and this 

legislation embodies many and addresses many of their 

concerns. The vision outlines a framework for the revitalization 

of our province's health system -- a revitalization, Mr. Speaker, 

which is following the same caring and leadership our province 

demonstrated some 30 years ago. 

 

One of the key points of the vision, Mr. Speaker, is the 

involvement of Saskatchewan residents and health service 

providers in a partnership with government -- a partnership to 

plan, deliver, and manage our health services. One important 

part of this partnership is the reform of the health service 

delivery system. 

 

And I want to speak about this partnership because as we've 

moved through health reform we have had meetings with 

doctors and nurses and CNAs (certified nursing assistants) and 

SASCH (Saskatchewan Association of Special Care Homes) 

and SHA (Saskatchewan Health-Care Association) and home 

care and other health care providers sitting at the same table 

and developing health reform for the province and giving us 

their input, giving us their ideas, expressing their concerns. 

And this has been an ongoing process since we formed 

government, Mr. Speaker. That's the kind of partnership we 

need as we rebuild this province and rebuild our health care 

system to preserve medicare for future generations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- And the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, 

have tried their level best to destroy these initiatives and to 

undermine the work of these people. They tried their level best 

to attempt to destroy the work of hundreds of health care 

providers throughout this province. And they are trying their 

level best to destroy the work of some 35 planning groups that 

are out there working right now -- people who are health care 

providers, people who sit on municipal governments. They are 

trying their best to destroy the last nine months of work that 

these people have put into the process of health reform. 

 

They say that we're pitting community after community. And 

let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, that I am enheartened by what has 

happened in our communities in the last six months. 

Communities and people from all walks of life have come 

together across Saskatchewan, have talked about what health 

reform means to them, and have talked about their future and 

how they could develop a district and move to a more 

wellness-oriented health care system in their area. They have 

been meeting; community with community. They've been 

cooperating and they've been participating. 

 

But instead of the members opposite recognizing that this is the 

spirit of cooperation that has made Saskatchewan so successful, 

instead of them recognizing it, they are trying out there to drive 

wedges in between these communities. They are trying to 

destroy the health reform and pit communities after 

communities. It's not us who're pitting communities after 

communities. We're encouraging cooperation. They're 

disseminating rivalry and fighting amongst communities. That's 

their objective and that's the Tory way, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I want to say once again that I am extremely enheartened, 

extremely enheartened by what I've witnessed across this 

province by people -- those members excluded -- from all 

political stripes, from all walks of life, working together to do 

what's right for future generations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Reform of our health system, Mr. 

Speaker, includes the creation of health districts. The health 

districts are one of the first building blocks. The health district 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, is enabling legislation that allows 

boards to amalgamate together under one board. 

 

It's not the final answer to health reform. It only sets the stage, 

the framework for the building blocks to be laid, the building 

blocks which will allow our community-elected boards to 

move to a health care system that is much broader, more 

comprehensive, and that provides a more well-rounded health 

care system for the people of 



246 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1993 

Saskatchewan. Today in this legislation we are putting forward 

a mechanism for the building blocks to be established to take 

us toward our goal of a health system based on wellness. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- This legislation will allow communities 

to come together and to form districts based on a number of 

factors of importance to them, such as population, and trading 

and commuting patterns. District formation will allow for an 

increased role for local involvement in the health system, and 

allow the system to become better integrated and more flexible, 

and the flexibility, Mr. Speaker, will allow for development 

and implementation of more community-based health 

programs. 

 

For the first time in the history of Saskatchewan what we will 

have are boards that will have the flexibility within global 

funding, Mr. Speaker, to meet very specific needs that may 

arise in their communities, to address specific problems. These 

boards will be a single point of entry in the health care system, 

so the gaps and the fragmentation can be reduced. This will be 

a first, Mr. Speaker, in the history of this province and a first in 

the history of Canada, because many of the other boards that 

are established only deal with institutions in Canada and not 

with comprehensive health care services. 

 

(1600) 

 

The importance of this reform to our health system obviously 

requires new and innovative legislation, legislation which will 

allow for a system of community-controlled health service 

delivery, a system which is unprecedented in Canada and 

places Saskatchewan at the forefront of health service 

development. 

 

The Health Districts Act is enabling legislation. It promotes the 

integration of services through the creation of health districts 

and district health boards. Integration is encouraged through 

the amalgamation of existing health corporations such as union 

hospitals, home care boards, special care homes, and 

ambulance boards, with district health boards. 

 

This integration, Mr. Speaker, will bring real benefits to the 

health system by moving many hundreds of fragmented health 

delivery structures into 25 or so integrated, coordinated boards 

-- boards which have a clear mandate to effectively plan for 

and deliver a full range of health programs. 

 

And I want to say this. The Saskatoon Health Board put 

forward their plan in Saskatoon yesterday, and I encourage the 

members opposite to take a look at it. Because what we have is 

a health board that has provided a plan for all of the health care 

services in Saskatoon and area, that has repriorized funding to 

start providing such services as suicide prevention and other 

services in the system, other community-based programing. 

 

We have a health board that has come forward . . . 

An Hon. Member: -- Two hundred thousand dollars coming 

out of the property tax there too. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- And the member from Morse is shouting 

from his seat because he can't stand the fact that the Saskatoon 

Health Board is so successful. He can't stand the fact that the 

vision for health care is already shining through in the 

Saskatoon Health Board. It is moving to a much broader, more 

comprehensive form of health services. It's making the tough 

decisions it has to make to get there, and it has a plan before 

the people. And it's done it with massive consultation. 

 

Never before in the history of these folks being in government 

has this kind of process been embarked upon. They never had 

the courage to go to the people. For 10 years they tried to 

integrate health services in Saskatoon, and they failed, Mr. 

Speaker. They failed. 

 

Why did they fail? Because they didn't have the leadership and 

they didn't have the courage to do it. And within months of this 

government being in power, we had a Saskatoon Health Board 

in that was doing exactly what they failed to do for 10 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, this legislation reflects what 

the people of Saskatchewan, particularly those involved in the 

health care system, have asked for. This Act is based on 

extensive consultations that have taken place throughout the 

province. 

 

In recent weeks an additional message has been coming 

through from the people of Saskatchewan. That message was 

the need for more direction -- more direction and detail 

regarding how districts will be formed, the structure of district 

boards and their roles, local contributions to health, and other 

important issues. This legislation, Mr. Speaker, provides that 

direction. 

 

Specifically, it allows for the creation of health districts and 

district health boards. It prescribes the make-up of district 

health boards, with the majority of members being elected by 

district residents through a ward system. It provides for the 

amalgamation or merger of existing health corporations with 

health boards to better integrate and coordinate service 

delivery. It prescribes the powers and duties of district health 

boards, which includes the ability to plan, manage, and deliver 

health services to district residents. It allows municipalities to 

enter into voluntary funding arrangements with district health 

boards. And it ensures that district boards are accountable to 

both district residents whom the boards serve and the 

provincial government which provides most of their funding. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, there are several important features of this 

legislation related to what it does not do. This Act does not 

provide district health boards with any property taxation 

powers, in keeping with a recent commitment made by the 

Premier in his address to the annual convention of the 

Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association. 

 

The Premier also undertook a review of the community 



March 10, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 247 

contribution to health care that is presently in place, some $23 

million, and those consultations and that review is now taking 

place. 

 

This Act does not predetermine health district boundaries. We 

are asking communities to come together and to develop health 

districts as much as possible through consultation with their 

adjacent communities. It does not affect existing 

health-provider labour agreements, which must be honoured by 

district health boards; nor does it require private health 

corporations to amalgamate with district health boards, in 

recognition of the unique character and mission many of these 

corporations bring to our health system. Of course, we will be 

encouraging them to amalgamate, but it doesn't require it. And 

where we have encouraged this amalgamation in the province it 

has taken place, in some cases with very little encouragement 

from us. 

 

The importance of this legislation to the people of 

Saskatchewan and to our health system, Mr. Speaker, cannot be 

understated. It represents a fundamental shift in the nature of 

health service delivery. It empowers people to take direct 

control of the health system and to plan and manage the 

delivery of health services to their own communities, and it 

presents a balanced and workable approach to health reform 

that best meets the concerns and needs of both the health 

providers and the people who rely on health services. 

 

Since August, communities throughout Saskatchewan have 

begun working together, discussing how they can best shape a 

health-delivery system which will take this province into the 

21st century. 

 

It is important however, Mr. Speaker, to remember that health 

reform is not an end in itself. Health reform is a means to 

achieve our goal. Our real goal is a system that is more 

wellness oriented. To achieve wellness, we need a health 

system where wellness can be nurtured, indeed where it will 

flourish. 

 

We need a system that is more coordinated and integrated to 

deal with the problems that I've indicated to you, and a system 

that is capable of providing a broad range of comprehensive 

services within a district. And we are working to set in place 

the structure that will promote and sustain wellness and allow 

us to achieve our goal, a system based on wellness that will 

result in improved health for Saskatchewan people. 

 

Clearly we can be doing more to meet the health needs of 

Saskatchewan residents. I am confident that the same 

community spirit of innovation and caring demonstrated 

throughout this province some 30 years ago remains today. 

And, Mr. Speaker, that spirit will guide us as we shape the next 

generation of health service delivery in Saskatchewan. And the 

members opposite, Mr. Speaker, were on the wrong side last 

time around and let me tell you, they're on the wrong side 

again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, as I move second reading of 

this Act, I encourage, I encourage all members of this 

Assembly to join with me to support this legislation 

and the improvements it will bring to our health system. I so 

move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I've 

been sitting here listening to the Minister of Health espouse all 

the virtues of the Bill she's bringing to this House, it begs me to 

wonder which side of the fence the minister was on when she 

was on this side of the House in opposition. And all the 

promises and innuendoes that were made by her in opposition, 

the accusations that were levelled at the government of the day 

in trying to bring control into the health care system and bring 

a sense of reason to health care in this province, certainly one 

begins to wonder what transformation has taken place in the 

minister's life. 

 

The minister used the term grass roots. And I had a colleague at 

home suggest to me that grass roots isn't a very sound 

expression to be using, as coming from a rural background he 

suggests that grass roots, where do the roots develop? They 

develop in the ground. And it would seem to me that the type 

of legislation and health initiatives being taken today, people of 

Saskatchewan are feeling more than happy and really elated 

with what's taking place, they feel more like they're being 

trodden upon. 

 

The minister talked very glowingly this afternoon of the fact 

that regional boards will be elected. But in fact, Mr. Speaker, 

what do we find? Eight elected, eight elected. However, that's 

fine. We appreciate that, and we don't disagree with the elected 

members. But what about the six government appointees? 

 

Mr. Speaker, if this is going to be a totally open and honest 

board, a board that's going to really be able to act in 

consideration of the concerns in their region, why isn't the 

board totally elected? Why are there any provincial appointees 

whatsoever? 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that yes, communities want to be 

involved. But from what I've heard, Mr. Speaker, over the past 

number of weeks and months, many communities really don't 

feel like they have been involved. In fact, Mr. Speaker, they've 

been led to believe that the system is in place, and you either 

do it our way or no way. 

 

And the feeling is out there, people just don't really know 

where the government is coming from today. Even this Bill 

doesn't leave people with much of an assurance that this 

government knows where it is going in health care other than to 

say to rural Saskatchewan that rural Saskatchewan really 

doesn't count any more -- many communities. 

 

And we raised the concerns in question period today, even the 

concern regarding the facility at Whitespruce which when it 

was introduced and when it was constructed, Mr. Speaker, 

members on this side of the House, present members when in 

opposition, talked about the virtues of a treatment centre for 

addicts here in this province -- a treatment centre where you 

treated the whole person and had their families involved rather 

than just individuals so you could really address the concern. 



248 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1993 

Mr. Speaker, as well, I just want to remind the minister. Was it 

wrong to bring to the minister's attention? Was it wrong to put 

the thousands of dollars into Wascana Rehab Centre, to build a 

facility that could meet the needs of individuals, men and 

women and children across our province? Was it wrong to do 

that? 

 

Was it wrong, Mr. Speaker, to design and build care home 

facilities, 2,400 care home beds across this province in rural 

Saskatchewan, in urban Saskatchewan, in Regina, in 

Saskatoon? Was it wrong to provide the opportunity to provide 

those beds for our seniors who have devoted themselves and 

worked so diligently over the years to develop this province? 

Was that wrong, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, what about the health card? It seems to me many 

people across this province really appreciate what the health 

card has done for them. And there's so many other areas and 

avenues that it could be that card . . . with which that card 

could be used to address some of the conceptions out there that 

certainly the health system is being abused. There are many 

opportunities. What is the government doing with the . . . 

Maybe looking at further expanding the use of the health card 

system beyond the purchase of drugs into medical 

appointments, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think there are a number of areas that we as opposition 

members would like to bring to the government's attention 

regarding the Bill. And certainly I believe this Bill has opened 

up a lot of doors for us to debate. And so at this time, Mr. 

Speaker, I move adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, before I adjourn the 

House for the day, I wonder if I could make a point of order. 

 

The Speaker: -- Point of order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Actually I have two of them. First 

of all, just to remind members that the Saskatchewan Council 

for International Co-operation is having a reception here in the 

building. And seeing as we're adjourning a few minutes early 

today it might be a good idea if we could drop by their display 

and see some of the good works that are being done by that 

organization. 

 

Secondly, on another point of order, I listened carefully to the 

independent member raise the issue of words that I spoke 

yesterday. The word in particular was "dishonest," and I would 

like to withdraw that comment. 

 

The Speaker: -- Let me first of all make a . . . By the way, the 

first point of order was not a point of order; it was a point of 

information. 

 

The second one was a good point of order and I want to thank 

the member for withdrawing those words. And I have also 

looked at the transcript. Yesterday at the time the member 

made the statement I did not hear those words clearly. And I 

want to thank the member for withdrawing that particular 

unparliamentary word. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:16 p.m. 

 


