




















































Hansard: April 30, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1355 

 April 30, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my pleasure 

today to point out a guest who's behind the bar and joined us 

for this morning's deliberations — the leader of the 

Saskatchewan Liberal Party from 1981 to 1988, Member of 

Parliament for Assiniboia from 1974 to 1979, and MLA 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) for 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg from 1986 to 1988. Would all the 

members of the Assembly warmly welcome Ralph Goodale. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We drew straws in our 

caucus and I won. I have the distinct pleasure today to 

introduce guests in the east and west galleries to you, Mr. 

Speaker, and through you to all members of the legislature. 

 

What we have are the CAA (Canadian Automobile 

Association) Saskatchewan school safety patrol . . . individuals 

in for the school safety patrol jamboree. They are ages 11 to 

14, with the exception of the 20 chaperons who are headed by 

Louise Holdsworth. I will not list other names but simply want 

to indicate, Mr. Speaker, I look forward to meeting with this 

group at 11 a.m. 

 

I want us to welcome them very warmly, and also it's a way of 

acknowledging the very important work these school patrollers 

do in seeing that our sons and daughters and neighbours and 

friends get to and from school safely each and every day 

throughout Saskatchewan. I ask all members to join me in 

welcoming them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I too would like to 

extend my congratulations to the students as minister in charge 

of SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) in regards to the 

tremendous educational work and knowledge on the 

interchange of information in regards to safety. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to also introduce to the members of 

the legislature and to yourself, we have 12 students, grade 11 

students from across the province of Saskatchewan in the 

Speaker's gallery here, Mr. Speaker, and they are also with two 

teachers, Mr. Jack Kindrachuk and Mr. Paul Hildebrand. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they are part of the Interchange of Canadian 

Studies group and they'll be travelling to Toronto for a 

conference. The theme of this conference, Mr. Speaker, will be 

on peace keeping. And we wish them the best on their trip next 

week to Toronto, and I'll be meeting with them right after 

question period. So let's extend them a welcome in 

this legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Free Vote on Bill 38 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question this morning will be to the Premier or whoever he 

should designate to answer this question. Yesterday, as Leader 

of the Progressive Conservative Party, I called for a free vote 

on Bill 38. Mr. Speaker, the members of the opposition caucus 

will have an opportunity to consider this legislation and vote on 

it based on their own consciences and based on the views of 

their constituents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was extremely disappointed to hear that a 

Justice minister immediately dismissed this alternative with 

absolutely no consideration. So I would say to the Premier of 

Saskatchewan, I think it's time that there is some leadership 

showed on this issue. Mr. Premier, will you allow your MLAs 

to vote their conscience and the wishes of their constituents on 

Bill 38? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 

member for his question and I want to say to the House that the 

legislation, which is the amendments to the human rights Act, 

is a matter of government policy. We are prepared to say that it 

is the right policy. Anyone who heard the speech by the 

Minister of Justice yesterday would have recognized the 

importance of this issue and the importance of eliminating 

discrimination in our society wherever and however we can. 

 

And we are proud of the policy position that we have taken 

with regard to eliminating such discrimination, Mr. Speaker. 

We are also disappointed that the members opposite do not 

share that view and I think that that is their choice, but they're 

going to have to answer to the society in which we live why 

they chose to take that position. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, my question will 

be to the Deputy Premier. Mr. Deputy Premier, I think the 

people of Saskatchewan are very disappointed to hear your 

answer. Most MLAs in this legislature have received 

tremendous volumes of mail from concerned Saskatchewan 

people, not because they wish to discriminate against anyone, 

simply because, Mr. Minister, they don't think the government 

has been as forthcoming on the issue as they would like. 

 

And I refer you to a document put out by the New Democratic 

Party in January 1991, and I'll quote from that, Mr. Deputy 

Premier. It's called "Enhancing the role of private members" in 

the legislature of 



1356 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1993 

Saskatchewan. 

 

 The Legislative Assembly today provides too few 

opportunities for Private Members to speak . . . on behalf of 

their constituents (and commitments). The role of Private 

Members needs to be enhanced in order to restore public 

confidence in the role of the peoples' representatives and 

improve the ability of all MLA's to act directly on their 

constituents' concerns. 

 

Mr. Deputy Premier, this would be a perfect opportunity to 

make good on the commitment of your party. Would you 

allow, Mr. Deputy Premier, a free vote on Bill 38? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I find it of some 

interest that the Leader of the Opposition would raise this 

question, as if he was interested in this kind of a reform. 

 

I simply want to say to him that he should carefully consider 

the fact that it was he and it was members of his caucus who 

last year quashed the reforms to this legislature, which were in 

place and which were being practised and utilized, and were 

working quite effectively, Mr. Speaker, to give private 

members of all sides of the House and all political parties roles 

which they have never had before. 

 

And the only reason that those rules are not in place, Mr. 

Speaker, is because it's members of the Progressive 

Conservative Party, led by the member from Thunder Creek, 

who said that those rules would not be able to put into place, 

and I think that they stand judged by that kind of a decision. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question will 

be to the Deputy Premier. Well, Mr. Deputy Premier, once 

again what you say and what you do are two different things. 

This from a Deputy Premier of a party which has used closure 

more often in this legislature in 16 months than all the history 

of our province. 

 

In spite of all this talk of reform from you people, you do 

everything in the power that the front benches have to muzzle 

your members. You've muzzled them on the health Bill, Mr. 

Deputy Premier. You're saying now to the people of 

Saskatchewan that individual MLAs should not have the right 

to vote as their constituents wish on Bill 38. 

 

I guess you're following the example set by your federal leader 

who has fired her Finance critic for speaking his mind about 

Bob Rae. I think she got a chance . . . she did that before he had 

a chance to say what he thinks of your government, Mr. Deputy 

Premier. 

 

Are you afraid of giving your members the opportunity 

to speak and vote freely in this legislature? Be open and 

accountable, Mr. Deputy Premier. Don't muzzle your members. 

Give members of this legislature an opportunity to stand in 

their place and have a free vote on this Bill. Will you do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 

opposite that members of this legislature have the right to 

speak. They speak freely. And members on the government 

side of the House I might add, Mr. Speaker, contribute 

considerably to the debates here in spite of the efforts by the 

members of the Conservative Party opposite to try to limit that 

speaking opportunity by the incessant delays and 

obstructionism which they have imposed on this legislature 

both in the last session and in the present session. 

 

I don't know where they have been for the last two years, but if 

they would spend some time talking to their constituents they 

would know that those constituents are saying that they elect 

the members of this Assembly to represent them and to get on 

with the affairs of the province of Saskatchewan and things that 

are important to them. 

 

They no longer will tolerate the kind of obstructionism that 

they have imposed on this legislature. And that's why from 

time to time we have had to bring in time allocation, because 

the public demands it, because the public deserves fair value 

for the dollar that they spend on the operations of this 

legislature. 

 

And it is the opinion and the commitment of this government to 

make sure that they are going to get fair value for that dollar 

that they're spending and that they will get policies which are 

of interest and good to all of the people of Saskatchewan, 

rather than some narrow interest groups from time to time 

which the members opposite try to represent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question will 

be to the Deputy Premier. Mr. Speaker, what the Deputy 

Premier is saying to this House today is that this document, this 

document which on page 17 talks about reform and about 

allowing members of the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan to participate more freely on behalf of their 

constituents, was simply another electoral sham, sir, an 

electoral sham brought forward on the people of Saskatchewan 

in 1991 so that you could achieve political power. It means 

nothing. It means not the paper that it's printed on, Mr. Deputy 

Premier. 

 

If you honestly believe what you say in this document, then 

you would know the tremendous amount of concern and 

volume of mail which I know several of your members of this 

legislature have had on Bill 38. If you would allow them the 

opportunity, the opportunity . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Would the 



April 30, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1357 

Deputy House Leader please come to order. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Premier, what do you say to your own members to justify the 

fact that you will not allow them the opportunity in this 

legislature to stand and vote and voice the concerns of their 

constituents which have been in overwhelming numbers on this 

particular issue. Mr. Deputy Premier, subscribe to the views 

that you wrote in '91 and say to those members, you will have 

the opportunity to vote freely in this legislature. Do that, sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, the member may try 

to sound as sanctimonious as he might, but he is not being very 

credible. Let me explain why in response to his question. 

 

Last year in this legislature, with the cooperation of the whole 

legislature, the rules were proposed to be amended and in fact 

were used for a while as a trial run. Here is what the changes 

were. We had provisions for private members to make 

statements daily in the House. We had provision for private 

members in the private members' debate to have a 

question-and-answer period. We had a provision where a 

member of the House would not need a seconder to the motion; 

the member from Greystone was interested in that. We had 

provisions for change of hours of sitting so to better utilize the 

time of this House, and once again to give private members a 

bigger role to play. We had extended use of committees so that 

private members could be more involved in the work of many 

of the things that this legislature is responsible for. 

 

Everybody in this House thought it was a good idea and it was 

working well except the members opposite who, in a huff over 

a debate on another piece of legislation, for no good reason 

refused to let those rules be implemented and put into place, 

Mr. Speaker. And I say to the member from Thunder Creek, 

shame on them. And their arguments here today hold no 

credibility because their actions prove otherwise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Is the member from Rosthern on the same 

topic? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — The member from Rosthern has a question, 

yes. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the member from Rosthern on the same 

topic as the Leader of the Opposition? 

 

An Hon. Member: — No. 

 

Lab Services 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 

directed to the Minister of Health, Mr. Speaker. Madam 

Minister, have you instructed health boards in Regina and 

Saskatoon to move work from 

the private labs to public labs? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, the decision with respect to 

labs was announced here in the House. The decision was, was 

to maximize the public sector wherever possible, but there 

would be two systems existing side by side. The funding with 

respect to lab services will be transferred to the health boards, 

and they will determine exactly how they are going to allocate 

this funding in conjunction with the general guidelines to 

maximize the public sector as much as possible because of the 

facilities that are already there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Madam Minister, can you then assure the 

people of Saskatchewan that public labs are equipped to handle 

the necessary requirements and that there will not be any new 

expenditures on new equipment . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

I'll repeat my question then, Madam Minister. 

 

Madam Minister, can you then assure the people of 

Saskatchewan that public labs are equipped to handle the 

necessary requirements and that there will not be any new 

expenditures on new equipment? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — What has to be done, I want to say to the 

member from Greystone, is that the health boards are going to 

have to take a look at what facilities are there, the funding that's 

allocated, and they will make the best decision in the context of 

their communities — the funding that's available, the facilities 

that are available. I am not going to get into telling them 

whether they should buy this equipment or not buy this 

equipment, and so on. The point is, is that we have established 

a general policy guideline. The policy guideline is to maximize 

the investment that has been made and to . . . but they have the 

responsibility of delivering lab services in the area of their 

district with the funding that we've allocated. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Madam Minister, your changes to health 

care have subjected people who work in the health care system 

to a great deal of uncertainty. In order to take over the 

workload of private labs, can you confirm whether hospitals in 

Regina and Saskatoon are in need of $10 million computer lab 

systems which already exist in the private lab system? And if 

so, how do you rationalize this expense? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I will have to get 

information on the computer situation that you're referring to, 

because the jurisdiction of the health boards looking after the 

labs and administering lab services in their area is there. 

 

As I said earlier, the government has allotted funding to the 

health boards to provide lab services. They will have the 

obligation to make the best decisions for their district in the 

context of that funding. 

 

Now if there's something about a specific decision 



1358 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1993 

that has been made, that the member opposite has concerns 

about, we can check it out. I do not have all the details of their 

decision. 

 

Because what we have done with our district board legislation 

is to decentralize much of this decision-making power. The 

government sets the policies and guidelines; we set the general 

direction; we provide the funding. And we expect the local 

community health boards to make decisions in the context of 

that that are responsible and that will improve health care for 

the people of Saskatchewan and their districts. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Madam Minister, it is precisely because of 

the directions in fact that your government has given that there 

will be a closing of 14 out of 22 patient-testing locations 

throughout the city today. Seventeen staff members will also 

lose their jobs. 

 

Madam Minister, surely you looked at this situation. Will you 

table in this House copies of all recent studies that outline the 

specific costs and savings associated with moving laboratory 

testing to the public sector. Specifically, I think it's necessary 

and incumbent upon you to show the taxpayers what evaluation 

has been done to determine if adequate equipment, such as the 

lab computer system, exists in the public lab system and that 

this equipment was factored in to the overall health care 

expenditures. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, we've had a number of 

studies done on this, and the member opposite is aware of them 

or at least should be. They were made public. They were 

discussed by the private labs. They were discussed by the 

public labs. They were discussed by all of the stakeholders 

involved in the area, and we had a great deal of press 

surrounding that. 

 

The fact of the situation is, is the matter has been reviewed in 

some detail. The government has taken the position that we 

will de-insure lab services. In other words, we're getting rid of 

fee for service. 

 

There is a large sum of money being taken out of the lab 

system in the vein of attempting to keep costs under control 

because I know the member opposite I'm sure hears from 

people throughout her constituency that lab costs have got out 

of control, have escalated, and that there's a lot that can be done 

to make it more rational and to save money for taxpayers and 

still provide a high-quality lab service. So the job loss that may 

be occurring is as a result of rationalizing lab services and 

reducing the cost to taxpayers in the province. That is not 

inconsistent with . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Madam Minister, you just indicated that 

what is being proposed is going to save the cost to the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan. I will ask again, will you please 

table in this House, copies of all 

of the recent studies done by your department that outline the 

specific costs and savings associated with moving laboratory 

testing to the public sector? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — We can certainly table the reports; there 

are a number of them. And I want to indicate also that there are 

a proliferation of patient-testing locations throughout our cities, 

and it is felt by people in the lab sector and people who have 

studied the area, that we do have a proliferation of these testing 

stations that are unnecessary. They can be located in fewer 

places at a substantial cost saving to the taxpayer and still 

provide very high-quality health care services. 

 

Cottage Taxes in Provincial Parks 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, although I feel it's 

my duty to inform the House that I am on a different topic, and 

I would ask the Minister of Natural Resources a question. 

 

Mr. Minister, our office has received a call from a woman who 

lives in La Ronge but has a cottage in Lac La Ronge, and she 

along with others are expressing anger over your government's 

recent tax bill that they are getting. Mr. Minister, this woman 

has called her local MLA from Cumberland who has refused to 

personally answer that call. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, on behalf of the member from Cumberland, 

on behalf of his constituents, I ask you this question: why has 

the government increased taxes for this provincial park by 

almost 200 per cent? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, I'm sure the member from 

Cumberland would happily respond to his constituent, as would 

our office. But the question with respect to increases in charges 

has to do with equalizing the charges within parks and 

externally to parks and in order to provide a fair basis for the 

funding for the park services that all of us value as recreation 

spots. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that answer. 

Now I understand that you are trying to equalize taxes for 

provincial parks. This woman was told by a park official in 

Prince Albert that this tax increase was for services provided in 

that provincial park. Mr. Minister, Lac La Ronge has no roads, 

has no power, has no gas; they build their own docks. How can 

you justify this increase? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — People within parks live and pay fees on 

the property they occupy, and people externally to parks also 

pay the fees but have to pay taxes to other municipalities. In 

order to equalize the costs to people living internally within 

parks and outside of parks, these increases were made within 

parks so there is some fairness. 



April 30, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1359 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — That's exactly the question that this woman is 

posing to us, where's the fairness in this? That's all she's simply 

asking, Mr. Minister. 

 

I have a quote from another correspondence from another 

cottage owner, who simply says this: pretty soon it can be only 

NDP cabinet ministers that can afford to have cottages. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you please provide for me a breakdown of 

services that Lac La Ronge receives in comparison to a park 

such as Greenwater Park for example. And I want you to please 

include also the amount of taxes that that cottage owner would 

then pay. Would you do that for me, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, I think that information can 

be provided. But on the earlier question that the member asked 

with respect to affordability, in spite of the increases that have 

been made at this point it is still more costly for members to 

live outside of parks than internally within them. And I think in 

fairness to all of us who pay our expenses for our recreation, 

it's reasonable to assume that there shouldn't be special 

privilege for people who live within parks. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Crop Insurance Firing 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the minister responsible for Crop Insurance. Mr. 

Speaker, I rise to bring to this Assembly an issue which is of 

great concern to many of my constituents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I received many calls and letters regarding the 

hiring and firing practices of the NDP government. Politics and 

patronage are the underlying theme in nearly every instance. 

 

But in this case, Mr. Speaker, there seems to be no rhyme or 

reason. Joanne Bredy was fired after 12 years of dedicated 

service to the province as the Kindersley customer services 

office manager of the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 

Corporation. One letter from a constituent points out that the 

termination can't be related to financial cut-backs because the 

cost of her severance package and retraining considerations 

would more than outweigh any savings after a replacement was 

hired. 

 

Mr. Minister, on behalf of this constituent and many other 

constituents, I ask the minister responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance, why was Joanne Bredy fired; and also, who 

replaced Joanne Bredy as the area officer manager? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, I do not know the 

individual that the member refers to. There has been a major 

restructuring in Crop Insurance in the 

past two years. I think we have made some major savings by 

reorganization. We've made major improvements to this 

corporation. I'm proud of the fact that the improvements that 

have been to this corporation . . .  

 

And one thing, Mr. Speaker, that I demand of civil servants is a 

professional civil service. And I think in return to them, I think 

it's incumbent upon me to act in a professional manner. And a 

professional manner, I believe, does not involve a minister of 

the Crown in public making comments about individuals' work 

records or their employment. 

 

So if there are questions about specific individuals and who has 

replaced them, then I think those are properly addressed in 

estimates and can be done there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, the 

people who wrote to me and called me specifically asked that I 

raise the question in question period and address the situation 

of the firing of Joanne Bredy. She was very well respected, Mr. 

Minister. Worked 12 years, hired originally by an NDP 

administration, so it can't be political. 

 

What is the reason why she was fired? She was extremely well 

thought of by the community and her clientele. 

 

I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if you might have made a 

mistake, if you would consider looking at this once again. 

Would you consider reviewing the reasons and the rationale 

behind the firing, and report your findings to the legislature? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, we would certainly 

review any case that the member brings forward. 

 

Again I'm glad that he has admitted that it's not political and it 

has to do with restructuring and reorganization and efficiency 

of the corporation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 57 — An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain 

sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal Year 

ending on March 31, 1994 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that The Appropriation Act (No. 2) be now introduced 

and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 



1360 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1993 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 39 — An Act to amend The Education Act 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, the purpose of Bill No. 

39 is to put in place a francophone component for 

Saskatchewan's kindergarten to grade 12 school system. It will 

enable Saskatchewan francophones to manage and control their 

own schools, something they're entitled to under section 23 of 

the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 

 

Members will recall that this Bill was introduced in August of 

last year but not passed due to a heavy legislative agenda at 

that time. Bill No. 39 is unchanged from Bill 92 that was 

before the Assembly last August. For this reason I do not 

propose to speak to Bill No. 39 in great detail. There will be 

ample opportunity for further discussion, both here during 

debate and in committee review. 

 

I believe it would be sufficient for now to simply summarize 

the key features of the Bill. Briefly, these are as follows. 

Section 23 of Canada's Charter of Rights and Freedoms gives 

linguistic minorities in any province the right to have their 

children educated in either of Canada's official languages. One 

of the key words here is "either". The intent of section 23 is to 

protect the rights of both French- and English-speaking 

Canadians. It is not a special privilege available only to 

French-speaking Canadians. 

 

Along with the right to minority-language education, section 23 

confers the right to have that education provided in publicly 

funded schools. This is to be done under the management and 

control of the linguistic minority where there is a large enough 

minority population to justify it. 

 

In Saskatchewan section 23 gives francophone parents the right 

to have their children educated in French. It also confers the 

right to francophone schools under the jurisdiction of a 

francophone education authority. These rights have been 

affirmed by the courts. I know members are familiar with the 

1988 Wimmer decision and its implications for Saskatchewan. 

 

Again I don't want to to review all of the details leading up to 

this Bill. Suffice it to say that the Wimmer decision set in 

motion an extensive process of public consultation on 

francophone governance. The Bill now before the Assembly is 

the end result of this process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this particular piece of legislation is long overdue. 

Its passage will mean we are fulfilling our legal obligations 

under section 23. Its passage will mean we are also fulfilling 

our broader constitutional obligations. Moreover, passage of 

the Bill will give the Government of Saskatchewan access to 

federal funding for implementation of francophone governance. 

These are funds that would not otherwise be available to us. 

As I said at the outset, Bill no. 39 is unchanged from Bill 92 of 

last year. The key features of the Bill remain the same. The 

legislation allows establishment of francophone education 

areas roughly equivalent to school divisions. Each area will 

contain a francophone school under the management and 

control of an elected francophone board of education, a conseil 

scolaire. I expect that over time there might eventually be eight 

to ten such boards in Saskatchewan. 

 

Along with the local boards there will be a provincial 

coordinating body known as the conseil général. The council 

will be made up of representatives from the local boards. It will 

review all proposals for establishment of boards and determine 

if in fact they are warranted. The council will also arrange for 

specialized services on a shared basis. Lastly it will coordinate 

services for francophone students in areas where a board has 

not yet been established and areas where establishment is 

simply not practical. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to emphasize that, like its predecessor, Bill 

39 is enabling legislation. It allows individual communities to 

take the initiative, decide if they are interested in establishing a 

board, and then follow a clearly defined path towards 

implementation. If there is no significant interest among 

members of the community, the existing arrangements simply 

remain in place. Nothing changes until people at the local level 

indicate a desire for change. 

 

I'd like now to speak briefly to the financial implications. 

Implementation of francophone schools will not mean an 

additional drain on the provincial treasury. This is the case 

because the start-up costs will be fully borne by the federal 

government. The 1988 Canada-Saskatchewan agreement 

promises $13.4 million over five years for implementation of 

francophone schools. This will be used to meet the school's 

initial operating and capital costs. 

 

The provincial government will fund the local boards through 

the foundation-grant formula already in place. This is already 

being done. However, the francophone boards will not have the 

authority to levy taxes. Instead, their needs will be met through 

federal funds. 

 

In summary, Mr. Speaker, the key features of Bill 39 are as 

follows. It allows Saskatchewan francophones to manage and 

control their own schools. It defines a clear path to follow 

should residents of a given area choose to proceed with 

implementation. It formally recognizes that the power of choice 

resides at the local level. The Bill is there to help people who 

want to use it where there is consensus at the local level that 

this should be done. It brings Saskatchewan into line with the 

requirements of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. It brings 

to fruition several years of consultation with major education 

stakeholders on how this matter could best be resolved. It 

enables Saskatchewan to meet its legal and constitutional 

obligations without impact in terms of cost. 



April 30, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1361 

Mr. Speaker, these are six good reasons why I hope all 

members might lend their support to this Bill. I am therefore 

pleased, Mr. Speaker, to move that Bill No. 39, An Act to 

amend The Education Act, be now read a second time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I've been 

listening with interest to the comments made by the Minister of 

Education in proposing the Bill. And as I was listening and 

certainly following the debate that has taken place in the 

province over the last period of years, specifically probably the 

last four or five years regarding French school governance, 

you're aware and I see the Assembly is aware, many of the 

residents of the province are aware of the ongoing debate and 

the discussion that has followed, and the fact that I guess one of 

the major impacts that this may have on the province, one of 

the areas that most people are worried about and as the minister 

has indicated, certainly at the present time, the federal 

government will be significantly involved by putting up the 

funds to implement French school boards across this province 

and carrying the cost of that. 

 

But when it comes to French school governance and the 

opportunity of the francophone community to have or to 

implement their own school boards, Mr. Speaker, certainly the 

opposition is not opposed to that fact, realizing the 

requirements of the charter and our constitutional rights and 

freedoms. 

 

One of the major concerns though that does arise, and even 

though the financial implications won't be directly attributed to 

the province, although certainly third-party funding will be 

involved and the province is going to have to fund the different 

schools and the educational process, it's a fact that in a time of 

financial difficulty, and we have been told over the past little 

while of . . . raised the significance of the provincial debt has 

. . . continues to be raised, and I'm aware of . . . just on one of 

my recent papers, one of the local school boards had to look at 

significant reductions to services at their own level. 

 

And I'm just going to bring out a couple points of the type of 

reductions that many of the school boards across this province 

are looking at — provincial funding for the Moosomin school 

division will be reduced by 216,000 this year, and will be 

reduced by a further 400,000 in 1994. That reduction is the 

equivalent of 10.5 mills at the local taxation level if they were 

to try and maintain the curriculum, the positions, the jobs in 

their school. 

 

In fact the article goes on to indicate that there will be 6.3 

positions reduced in the school, and support staff will be 

reduced by 2.5, which is a total of 8.8 positions — working 

positions — in the Moosomin school division. And at the same 

time they're going to be reducing courses to high school 

students. And as was indicated, a lot of the reductions are 

coming strictly from downloading that is being put on local 

school boards by the provincial government. And as the 

director said . . . or not the director, the chairman of the board 

said, we had to decide whether we pass on the downloading to 

the taxpayers or whether we adjust programs. 

 

And a lot of school boards across this province are facing some 

difficult times because of the funding. And for the minister to 

indicate that in the long term there isn't going to be a major 

impact on the province and on our educational program in this 

province by adding a third school board, I don't believe is 

exactly true. Because in the not-too-distant future . . . the 

federal funding right now bridges, I believe, a five-year period 

of the implementation of the program. One has to ask 

themselves: in difficult times is it the appropriate time to move 

ahead with the funding and the allowance for third school 

boards to spring up across the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

I guess an area of discussion that we'll get into in estimates and 

some of my other colleagues will be raising, certainly the area 

that we'll be looking at is: what will the long-term impacts be? 

How many third school boards will be funded across the 

province of Saskatchewan? And I'm not sure if the province is 

aware of it. 

 

I know when we were discussing it, there are probably half a 

dozen key areas in the province of Saskatchewan where 

individuals feel quite strongly that they would like to have the 

option of implementing a third school board. But time will tell 

exactly how many of these boards . . . how many of these 

communities will actually opt for the third school board 

recognition. 

 

And I think when we look at a lot of our school districts right 

now and look at what school districts are facing in the costs 

and in trying to provide adequate education to the students that 

are involved, it would seem to me that now may not have been 

the appropriate time to move ahead with third school board 

funding. Although I can appreciate where the minister is 

coming from and where the government is coming from 

because I believe the federal government as well has indicated 

that they would like to see the province moving on it and 

possibly their funding is contingent upon the province moving 

sooner rather than later. 

 

(1045) 

 

I just want to add that in my area, and I have significant 

French-speaking populous base or sector right just north of 

where I live, and in talking to individuals in that 

French-speaking community, they have felt over the years that 

they have been treated more than adequately. In fact they are 

not all that concerned about forming a third . . . or being part of 

the French school governance or this third school district. 

 

Now of course, as the minister indicated, that's their choice. 

And I think it's appropriate that at the end of the day that we 

give communities, we give school districts, the opportunity or 

the ability to decide whether they want to become involved in 

this third 



1362 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1993 

school program. 

 

And those are some of the areas, Mr. Speaker, that we would 

like to address, we'd like to bring to the attention of the 

minister and of the government. And I think as we get into 

further discussion, there are other areas that may be raised. And 

certainly I'm aware of the fact that there will be people out in 

the rural and urban Saskatchewan who want to have us speak 

and get some more answers to maybe some of their questions. 

And to allow for that debate to take place, Mr. Speaker, I move 

that adjournment take place on this Bill at the time. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 1 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 1 — An Act 

respecting the Conduct of Members of the Legislative 

Assembly and Members of the Executive Council, 

respecting Conflicts of Interest and to enact Consequential 

Amendments resulting from the enactment of this Act be now 

read a second time. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As the 

opposition, we have taken a fairly close look at this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker. And I know it's of some significance as far as the 

public is concerned and certainly as members of this 

Legislative Assembly are concerned as well. 

 

And there is no doubt about it that there are far-reaching 

implications and that there are many technicalities in the Bill, 

Mr. Speaker, that quite frankly we are not quite sure of in terms 

of what the implications are and the intricacies of those. 

 

And it is with cooperation from the minister himself that we 

have arranged for what might be termed a technical briefing 

with the minister's officials sitting down with our caucus so 

that we can see a little bit more clearly the implications of the 

Bill. 

 

And it is because of that, Mr. Speaker, that I would ask that 

further debate on this Bill now be adjourned. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 46 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cunningham that Bill No. 46 — An 

Act to amend and repeal The Farm Purchase Program Act 

be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This Bill does not 

give us any particular problems and I think to expedite matters 

we'll simply let this Bill go to committee. 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 47 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cunningham that Bill No. 47 — An 

Act to amend The Farm Financial Stability Act be now read 

a second time. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I went through a 

number of the observations that were made by the minister, and 

some of the items have been raised through meetings that the 

Department of Agriculture had in the various feeder 

associations across the province, and I am significantly 

interested in that discussion and am going to allow this to go to 

committee, knowing that I'm going to ask some very serious 

questions about the accountability and the various areas that the 

minister addressed. And I believe that there's 11 specific areas 

that he addressed, and I'm going to be asking him questions to 

enlarge on those items, and therefore I'm just going to allow 

this to go to committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 50 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cunningham that Bill No. 50 — An 

Act to amend The Provincial Lands Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Again on this Bill, Mr. Speaker, I am going 

to be asking technical questions as it relates to some of the 

items in this Bill, and I therefore am going to allow it to go to 

committee as well. And the minister has raised some 

interesting observations about the way The Provincial Lands 

Act is going to be used, and I'm going to be asking questions in 

relation to that. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 27 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Teichrob that Bill No. 27 — An Act to 

amend The Association of School Business Officials of 

Saskatchewan Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have no 

problems with this Bill. We're looking forward to getting it into 

the committee stage, and then we will have some specific 

questions for the minister. But at this time I would just move 

that we go into committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next  



April 30, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1363 

sitting. 

 

Bill No. 48 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 48 — An Act to 

amend The Police Act, 1990 be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And for 

the same reasons as I cited before, we'll allow Bill 48, The 

Police Amendment Act, to go to committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 49 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 49 — An Act 

respecting Correctional Services be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

colleague, the member from Souris-Cannington, raised a 

number of concerns and issues the other day regarding the Bill, 

a number of areas that I think we want to review a little further. 

 

Certainly we want to commend the government for the fact that 

they're bringing forward this Bill to make some corrections in 

view of the fact that it hasn't been looked at since 1973, and we 

believe that's appropriate. 

 

We're also quite well aware of the fact that we should take the 

time to review the total process of correction and correctional 

facilities, how we utilize them, how we treat offenders — 

young offenders, inmates, especially for minor crimes — not 

only within our province but maybe we need to take a broad 

look right across the dominion. 

 

It's been a feeling of mine over a period of years that it's not 

fair to incarcerate every individual that ends up in the courts 

and is sentenced to some time. In a lot of cases maybe it's four 

months, five months, maybe it's a year or two years. A lot of 

these offences, Mr. Speaker, become very minor offences 

where people are sent to or incarcerated behind bars or 

correctional facilities for very minor offences. 

 

And I don't believe it really enhances that person's ability to 

observe the mistakes that they've made and make corrections in 

their life, especially if they are put into situations where they 

are involved in part of a greater school of individuals 

incarcerated who are put into correctional or prison facilities 

for much major crimes. 

 

And at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, I think what we do is 

we send a young person specifically into a very strenuous and 

difficult situation where they're put together with long-time 

offenders, hardened offenders, hardened 

criminals, who have been through the system. And after a 

while it seems to be a process that just enables a person who 

was just a minor offence that they were incarcerated for, gives 

them the opportunity to just learn, if you will, greater tricks of 

the trade, and when they come out they really haven't been 

rehabilitated. 

 

And it would appear to me, Mr. Speaker, that we should look at 

a greater emphasis on giving people an opportunity to really 

acknowledge their responsibility for their actions. And as we 

give them, or place the responsibility on individuals of 

repayment to the community at large, in a lot of instances, Mr. 

Speaker, it may just be community services. It may be an 

opportunity to be involved in the community, work off their 

penalty through community services, or work off repayment of 

the loss incurred by the victim by providing a service to the 

community or to business or through business opportunities. 

 

And so it certainly in the long term is appropriate that we take a 

serious look at the correctional services across our province 

and look at ways in which we can enhance the livelihood and 

well-being of individuals who through no fault of their own — 

maybe it's just their upbringing, or it could be the community 

they're living in or it could be the circumstances of low income, 

family relationships, or just not an opportunity to really 

develop in their lives or to get a chance to find that job; or just 

the group of people they've associated with — that they may 

have been involved in a crime or criminal offence which, 

because there's no other way of addressing it, puts them behind 

bars rather than gives them the ability to work off their time 

and probably enhance their lives, looking at the fact that in the 

future if we have given proper education, proper training, and 

proper opportunities, rather than ending up back in the court 

system, they would become progressive citizens of our 

province. 

 

And so with that in mind, Mr. Speaker, we certainly have a 

number of areas that we want to commend the government on, 

but we also feel that we should take a bit more time to review 

the Bill. Therefore I move adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 40 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Penner that Bill No. 40 — An Act to 

amend The Municipal Employees' Superannuation Act be 

now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

(1100) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 6 — An Act to amend The Prairie and Forest Fires 

Act, 1982 



1364 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1993 

Clause 1 

 

The Chair: — I'll ask the Minister of Environment and 

Resource Management to introduce his official. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, I'd like to introduce Bob 

Blackwell, who is the assistant deputy minister of the 

Department of Environment and Resource Management, who's 

with me on my right. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And I 

say good morning to the minister. And I also say good morning 

to Bob Blackwell. Our paths have crossed before, Mr. 

Chairman. When I was minister of Social Services, Bob was 

doing a good job for me in that department, so welcome here as 

well. 

 

Mr. Minister, the Act as I see it, reads An Act to amend The 

Prairie and Forest Fires Act. And I'm just . . . I have a few 

technical questions I guess that I'd like to have some answers 

for, so I can understand more fully what we're talking about. 

 

Your main concern, I assume, on this Act would be the forest 

fires Act, but I notice that it also says, The Prairie and Forest 

Fires Act. I'm just wondering what role your department would 

be engaged in, in so far as the prairie fire control is concerned. 

Do you . . . what's the relationship between the prairie aspect of 

it and the forest aspect of it, in terms of perhaps cost, in terms 

of personnel, in terms of your concern, I guess. Could you 

perhaps explain that situation for me? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, thank you for the 

question. Our major concern is in the forest fire area and the 

prairie area in an area four and one-half kilometres around the 

forest, unless otherwise designated for a very special purpose. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Yes, Mr. Chairman . . . 

 

The Chair: — Just a moment, hon. member. Another official 

has joined us, and I'll ask the minister to introduce him to the 

members of the committee before we proceed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. The other official 

that's joined me is David Beckwermert. He's the director of 

legislative services within the new Department of Environment 

and Resource Management. Thank you very much for that 

opportunity. Welcome, David. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — I thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And I 

welcome your other official. Does this mean now I can ask 

twice as many questions, or make them twice as hard? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Both. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Both. Okay, thank you very much. Yes, the 

four and one-half kilometres, I think I understand that. My 

question simply was this: does this Act pertain to any Crown 

land other than that range within the forest and 4.5 kilometres 

beyond? 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, thank you again for the 

opportunity again to clarify that question. What the Act enables 

is that normally that burning-permit area is the area within that 

four and a half kilometre range, but that it would enable in a 

special circumstance for the minister to require a burning 

permit in other areas of the province where a specific hazard 

was anticipated. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Well thank you for that answer. Actually my 

question had larger parameters than that. In my constituency, in 

fact in my home RM (rural municipality) of 403 of Rosthern, 

the South Saskatchewan River travels along that for 10, 15 

miles and there's a lot of Crown land . . . because it's marginal 

land, there's a lot of Crown land in that area. And I'm just 

wondering, fires that originate on that Crown land, what is the 

relationship between this Act, your department, and let's say 

the RM of Rosthern who would be doing normal forest 

fighting, fire fighting in that area? What is that relationship? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Thank you again. It's the judgement of 

my officials that that would remain a responsibility with the 

municipalities and no specific responsibility within our 

department, other than again the permitting in the event of a 

hazard existing. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — So what is the criterion or criteria that will 

determine that it will be the province of Saskatchewan's paid 

forest fighters . . . or fire-fighters that go to a scene of a fire on 

Crown land? Like okay, let's project that beyond my 

constituency and go closer to Prince Albert where we have a lot 

of Crown land. And I'm assuming it's the province of 

Saskatchewan that foots the bill for fighting those fires, but yet 

you're telling me that if a fire breaks out on Crown land outside 

of a . . . outside of what zone, I mean what are the criteria that 

determine who pays for what under those circumstances? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, the officials who are here 

are not familiar with the technical detail. Those people are 

resident in Prince Albert and they will give you a written 

response on that question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Okay. I guess I'm surprised that . . . It's a 

question that's been on my mind a lot of times and for a long 

period of time, particularly since I was a fire-fighter in my own 

area and we did have to go out there and fight brush fires and 

these kinds of things, that I thought this would be an 

opportunity for me to get that straightened away in my own 

mind. But I'll look forward to the answer, if that's your 

commitment, Mr. Minister. Thank you. 

 

Since we're talking about mainly forest fires now then, as 

opposed to prairie . . . But maybe I'll give you an opportunity to 

answer that then. Why is this Act then called The Prairie and 

Forest Fires Act if there doesn't seem to be any kind of 

restrictions other than when you get into the forest belt and four 

and a half kilometres away from that? Could you expound on 

that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, the best advice of 



April 30, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1365 

my officials is that the Bill is principally directed at forest fire 

fighting. But because the prairie is intermingled with the forest 

in the northern half of our province, that it's important to have 

the facility to control burning in prairie areas as well as the 

forest in the circumstance where a high fire risk exists. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — So, Mr. Minister, the last few years have 

been fairly good because we've had a fair amount of moisture, 

but I understand that you've taken a lot of extra money out of 

appropriation at this time to foot the potential forest fighting 

that's up in the north area. So I'm assuming from that, and 

maybe we can get to that in a future question, but I'm assuming 

you're expecting a dry year. That's why you need more money 

to fight the potential, higher potential risk for forest fighters. 

 

How does that relate then — what you just answered — how 

does that relate to an area where I'd spend a lot of time in fall 

and go hunting in zones 9 and 10, which is The Great Sand 

Hills area? Now I understand that part of that . . . well all of 

that area is under provincial jurisdiction; it's not a federal park, 

so it's under provincial jurisdiction. And there exists there 

potential for forest fires as well. 

 

Now what is the role of the provincial government in that Great 

Sand Hills area west of Swift Current and close to where you 

are in terms of the provincial government's responsibility in 

preventing prairie fires. And once they start, what's your role if 

a fire should break out, of any magnitude? 

 

(1115) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, I'd like to take the 

opportunity to introduce two more officials while they are 

discussing the question that's being put. Immediately behind 

me is Gordon Burrows, the assistant manager of the regional 

fisheries; and Erica Fletcher, on his right, the assistant 

legislation officer. Welcome. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we again commit to . . . (inaudible) . . . for the 

detail at another time, but I think the answer which hopefully 

gets the broad perspective, is that we would be fighting fires 

within provincial parks. We would provide assistance to 

municipalities in terms of advice and management in areas 

adjacent to provincial parks if there was an adjacent fire. 

 

And with respect to national parks, that's a federal 

responsibility that we would only take over when it burned out 

of a national park into our area. So that in general terms, our 

fire-fighting responsibility for which we take direct 

responsibility is within the provincial parks, but our control 

areas can extend beyond the forested areas in order to allow for 

prevention. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — All right, Mr. Minister, I'll accept that answer 

for now, and I'll be looking forward to a fleshed-out, written 

response at some future date then. Thank you. 

Yesterday during the Appropriation Bill for interim supply, it 

was brought to the minister's attention that Environment and 

Resource Management is not only getting funded to the tune of 

two-twelfths, which is what the Appropriation Bill is asking 

for, but rather $3.366 million extra. 

 

And the indication to us at that time was that this was largely 

due to an anticipated higher risk in the forest area. And I 

understand also though that it's very difficult. I can appreciate 

trying to determine what the risk is at any one given time, but 

is it . . . would you say that this is something that is 

traditionally done all the time? Because I know we had three, 

four, five inches of snow even last week — even this week — 

in that area which would have dampened the need for it. 

 

So on what basis so you make that determination? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, the fire rate in the spring 

was extremely high based on an internationally accepted fire 

moisture code called the Duff code. I know from an earlier 

discussion that where that rating might normally be 50 coming 

out of a winter at this time, this year it was in excess of 300. It 

was an all-time high, never so high in Saskatchewan as it was 

this year. Thankfully that code has been reduced, or the risk has 

been reduced somewhat by the precipitation of last week, but it 

is still in an extreme position. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Minister. Don't get me 

wrong, I'm not criticizing you for that because I know it's a 

difficult thing to try to determine. And I know also that over 

the past number of years I think the situation has been on the 

verge of being critical. All we have to do is take a look at our 

lake levels and so on, and we find out that precipitation has not 

been normal. So I can appreciate that. 

 

Would you give me some statistics now in terms of 

fire-fighters. How many fire-fighters does the department have, 

perhaps I could say that are full time? How many part time? 

We'll get into the conscription aspect of it later, but just for 

now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, and for the member from 

Rosthern, there are 180 full-time conservation officers and 60 

part time, and about 300 seasonal that are provided for an 

average season. That can be responded to additionally if there 

are special circumstances. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, the 100 

full-time conservation officers, are they officers that do the 

normal responsibility of conservation officers, and with no 

particular expertise in forest fighting? Are they called up? Are 

they considered part of the crew? What is their role in this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — The conservation officers are the key 

managers of the four strategies, the fighting strategies. The 300 

seasonal workers are also trained teams of people who have 



1366 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1993 

worked there before and are central and critical to the 

confidence we have in the fire-fighting exercise. Those are 

people who have been trained and have worked in other 

seasons and work in small teams to address specific fire sites as 

they're identified. So there's expertise in each of those areas. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Well that's a good answer, Mr. Minister, 

because I want to talk about the training of these . . . 

particularly the 300 seasonal. Are they indigenous peoples to 

the North, these 300? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — My officials indicate that about 85 per 

cent of them are, and we attempt to work with the northern 

communities in identifying and training these people. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Yes. I have a little knowledge of that, Mr. 

Minister, because . . . and I know your official, Mr. Blackwell, 

does as well, being involved in some of the training programs 

through Sask Works, through New Careers, and so on, that we 

had with many of the communities that I'm familiar with — La 

Loche, Ile-a-la-Crosse, and areas like this. 

 

How are these currently — since I'm out of date a couple of 

years by now — how are these indigenous people then trained? 

On what basis do they get training? Who trains them? And . . . 

well answer those first, then I'll have some more. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, the training program has a 

couple of major components. One is training where 

fire-fighters are brought into Prince Albert, where specific 

work with tools and equipment is provided and fire simulations 

are done. And then there's also a community-based training 

program which is taken into the northern communities to 

actually provide training on site within communities, which is 

normally more a summer-based program. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Which department is specifically responsible 

for that training, or is it in conjunction with other departments 

as well? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, the forest protection 

branch engages in the . . . or is responsible for the training 

programs. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Does New Careers or does the modern-day 

version of Sask Works have anything to do with it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, the officials inform me 

that there is a northern works program which is a joint program 

of the department and New Careers and the northern 

communities that is involved in the training of these people. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Yes, that's what I was getting at. I was 

hoping that we would get to that point where we would 

acknowledge that that is taking place. And what I want to do at 

this point, Mr. Minister, is encourage you to keep that up. I 

think that is a very, very good program; I think it's an integral 

part of keeping our forests up north safe and as abundant as 

they are. 

But also the impact that those kinds of programs have for the 

communities themselves and the citizens of the North where 

they do have a meaningful job; they have meaningful training. 

And that translates to other areas of their lives. And I have seen 

the evidence of that in some of those northern communities. It's 

not just a simple matter of forest fighting, but rather what it 

does to the self-worth of the individual and the community 

spirit that is evident in some of those communities. 

 

So those are some of the offshoots or the by-products of that 

program as well, and I think that should be recognized. So I 

would encourage you, Mr. Minister, to keep that up. 

 

I have a few questions here that relate to some statistics and the 

logistics of your department in forest fire fighting. How many 

airplanes? What type of airplanes do you have for forest 

fighting? Where are they stationed? How many of them are 

owned by the provincial government? And in a normal year, 

and I can see where this might vary, how many helicopters and 

how many planes would be on a leased basis? And could you 

also provide information in terms of how do you go about 

determining that we're going to get this helicopter coming in 

from Alberta and B.C. (British Columbia), this helicopter 

company, and these are the planes that we're going to be 

leasing, your tendering process for that as well. 

 

And I don't expect you, Mr. Minister, to have that information 

necessarily here. I would seek a commitment from you that you 

can provide that to me at a near date in the future. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Thank you very much. I will make that 

commitment. And in response to your earlier comments with 

respect to the nature of the involvement of the people in the 

community and the establishment of some sound economic 

activity, in the short time I've had the responsibility for this 

department I have been impressed with the quality of the 

leadership shown by northern communities in energy and 

economic development, in looking for partnerships with others 

and in trying to work cooperatively with governments, both 

provincial and federal. 

 

And I'm excited by the opportunities there and I think we all 

need to challenge ourselves to commit ourselves to cooperation 

with that spirit that's there for us on development of a northern 

community that is more soundly based than it is now in some 

communities. 

 

(1130) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I certainly would 

concur with your comments on that. 

 

I guess what I want to turn to now is one of the major 

intentions, I would assume, of the Bill, and that is the deletion 

or the changing or the amending of some of the aspects of it. 



April 30, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1367 

I notice for example in one section — I know we're not going 

clause by clause right now — but it does say that "Every 

person who is employed or directed to assist in fire fighting 

. . ." What is your interpretation of the intent of the word 

"directed" to assist in forest fighting? What was the 

department's interpretation of that? Section 7, if it'll help you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, the officials inform me 

that this is essentially a move from a conscription to a 

voluntary conscription interpreted not as being able to direct 

anybody to work against their will, but in fact to direct people 

who have already identified that they are ready to work, to go 

to work in the task of fighting forest fires. 

 

So because it has not been the practice to absolutely conscript 

for probably 30 years, the Act now reflects the practice which 

is to identify when a task needs to be done, to pull those people 

who are volunteers into the action. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — It says an officer may require any 

able-bodied adult to assist in fire fighting. And I know that that 

has been a kind of a joke with many people who head north for 

the spring fishing season and all that, that I couldn't come to 

work on Monday because I was fighting forest fires up there. 

 

So what you're telling me, Mr. Minister, is that that in fact has 

not been the practice over the last number of years, that there 

has been nobody forcibly conscripted to that. And I would 

assume then that also, that is part of the reason that you're 

doing that, is that there could be legal challenges even with the 

statute as it sits, simply because it's not within the charter of 

rights? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Yes. I would suggest that anybody, 

including MLAs, that have used that for the reason for not 

coming to work will have to find a new reason. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Well yes, I can appreciate that, so we'll work 

on that. 

 

Mr. Chairman, other than that, I think the minister and his 

officials have been very helpful in answering some of the 

questions. And the questions that they were not able to answer 

at this time, I will be looking forward to your response. And I 

just wish you well in the upcoming year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, I would also like to thank 

the members opposite for their understanding of our inability to 

ask a few specific questions. We make the commitment to do 

that. We appreciate the quality of your questions and the 

cooperation. And I also want to thank our officials for their 

cooperation. Thank you very much. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

Bill No. 22 — An Act respecting the Manufacture, Sale, 

Use, Consumption, Collection, Storage, Recycling and 

Disposal of Ozone-depleting Substances and Products 

 

The Chair: — It is the same minister, and there are some new 

officials who have joined the minister, and I will ask the 

minister to introduce the officials who have joined the 

committee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, I thank you for the 

invitation. I want to welcome two new officials: Mr. Larry 

Lechner, on the right seat behind me, the director of air and 

land protection branch; and directly behind me, Earl Craig, the 

manager of the air quality section in our department. Thank 

you. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I wonder if 

the minister would mind explaining just the purpose of this Bill 

and who he consulted with in designing this legislation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, just want to respond to the 

overall purpose. The overall purpose is to control substances 

which are threatening to our ozone layer. The Bill this year 

however is simply cleaning up a bit of a technicality that did 

not allow us to control as many substances as are needed in 

order to provide that protection. 

 

So the consultations that were done on this Bill were done last 

year and they were done with a wide range of organizations, 

including SaskEnergy; the city of Regina; SaskTel; Association 

of International Automobile Manufactures of Canada; national 

association of fire equipment distributors; University of 

Saskatchewan; Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Contractors 

of Saskatchewan; Saskatchewan Environmental Society; 

Society of the Plastics Industry of Canada; Saskatchewan 

dehydrators association; SaskPower; Sears; Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation; and the Heating, 

Refrigerating and Air Conditioning Institute of Canada. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. We 

appreciate this Bill and what it is trying to do. But we also see a 

number of areas where there are some concerns that need to be 

brought forward, such as the use of Halons in fire-fighting 

equipment. What kind of provisions do you foresee coming 

forward to replace Halons, particularly in the item of aircraft 

fire-fighting equipment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, there are a couple of 

exemptions under this Act, and Halons for fire-fighting 

purposes are exempted under the Act. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I'm sure that 

there's a good number of pilots out there that will appreciate 

that fact. 

 

In part of the Bill it says that it's illegal to sell ozone-depleting 

substances and yet in another part of the Act it says it's 

permissible to have them in your possession. There seems to be 

a bit of a contradiction 



1368 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1993 

here, Mr. Minister. I wonder if you'd mind explaining that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, what will be illegal to sell 

will be new product after the deadline. However, reclaimed 

product — and this is a major purpose again in this Bill, to 

assure that we do not lose CFCs (chlorofluorocarbon) to the 

atmosphere — reclaimed product will continue to be able to be 

sold, although no new product can be manufactured or sold 

after that date. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. What controls 

are you putting in place to prevent the importation of new 

product, new CFCs? Cross-border shopping, shopping from 

Manitoba or Alberta or any importation, what kind of measures 

are in place there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, there are a couple of 

matters on which there is international agreement because they 

are of such universal consequence. And this is one of those 

matters with respect to which there is an international treaty, 

both in terms of the manner in which other countries are 

establishing their own controls, but then also in order to ensure 

that there is no difficulty for individual nations than the border 

controls that are put in place. And that is a responsibility of the 

federal government who are the signatories to an agreement 

with the United States. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman, will this 

legislation be moving in lock step with the jurisdictions around 

us, with Manitoba, Alberta, and the U.S. (United States) and 

across Canada? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, thankfully on 

environmental themes we have probably the best level of 

cooperation that we have in any intergovernmental relations 

both within Canada and internationally. So there is a working 

group within Canada whereby all the provinces are moving 

together at the same pace to achieve the same objectives. 

 

With respect to the harmonization with the United States, their 

target dates for ceasing manufacture and sale are also in 

harmony with ours. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — So the Manitoba legislation and the 

Alberta legislation across western Canada in particular, will be 

in place at approximately the same time as what this legislation 

will be. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Right. And the coordination happens 

through the Canadian Environmental Protection Act. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Minister, you're setting up a 

certification program for the use of CFCs for the people who 

do refrigeration and air-conditioning. What kind of criteria are 

going to be in place for those kind of certifications? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, the training that is in place 

is already in place. There are 3,000 individuals who have 

already received the training. 

 And that training is continuing through the department until 

about June, at which point SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Science and Technology) will be taking over that 

responsibility and offering an ongoing training program. 

 

The training focuses on recovery and recycling of the product 

in order to prevent its loss to the atmosphere, is the central core 

thesis in the training. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. When this 

product is reclaimed, what process do we have in place in 

Saskatchewan to recycle the CFCs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, the process of recovery 

and reuse is one that most individual stations where they have 

certificated operators, will have the equipment to do. It's 

equipment that collects and stores and allows the product to be 

recycled internally. 

 

If it were contaminated, there is provision for them to send it 

back to manufacturers for remanufacturing to clean it up in 

order that it can be reused. So there is provision for the 

recycling of the product so that we do not lose it from use, and 

that can be done on site in most cases. But if there's 

contamination, it could be sent away for cleaning up. 

 

(1145) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Do we have any locations in 

Saskatchewan to do that clean-up service that's a potential 

benefit that Saskatchewan could gain from the economic side 

of this? If we're losing some possible economic sides from this 

Bill, I think we should . . . it's incumbent on us to try and pick 

up those where we can. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, there are a few companies 

— three or four, I'm told — in the province that are in a 

position to do that. But they're not only doing that, they're also 

engaged in their own business of actually recovering from 

equipment which is being abandoned like refrigerators and 

cooling units of those sorts, and cars, products. 

 

So they are providing an additional service which is economic 

to them in terms of reclaiming a product which will not be 

manufactured any more, but also providing a service to all of 

us in terms of not allowing that product to eventually escape to 

the atmosphere. And they are in a position, these three or four 

companies in the province, where they can clean it up for reuse. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I'm glad to 

know that there is somebody in Saskatchewan that could 

perform those duties. 

 

And you led into my next question. What methods are used to 

recover CFCs from equipment which is being abandoned such 

as automobile air-conditioners, refrigerators, etc.? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, there's a special 



April 30, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1369 

piece of equipment that particularly auto salvaging companies 

are using and required to have in order to reclaim the product. 

So there are several of these in the province. And this 

equipment then draws the CFCs from the cooling units in 

vehicles but also other domestic appliances. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. When they 

draw the CFCs from the system, if you are developing a total 

vacuum within that system, I think it's very difficult to get all 

of the CFCs out. Do they replace the CFCs with some other 

agent? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, both for purposes of repair 

and recovery in the event of abandonment of equipment, this 

equipment is able to withdraw from the system without 

allowing any other substance into the system . . . all of the 

CFCs within the system. 

 

And so the contractor or the business person who is repairing 

the air conditioning unit on your car will withdraw all of the 

CFCs from the unit, will repair your unit, and then replace the 

CFCs that they have recovered back into your system. So there 

is a full recovery. The equipment that's available now allows 

for full recovery, full evacuation of the CFCs from the cooling 

units. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. How much 

CFCs are present in Saskatchewan today? Do we have any 

idea? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, the federal government is 

presently engaged in establishing an inventory of product both 

in equipment and in storage so that we can have that detailed 

information as we approach the production deadline and so we 

can very carefully control the use of the product. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Do you have 

any idea how much CFC product is recycled and reclaimed in a 

year in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, while we don't have 

specific information on how much is being done, in the last 

year since people have become certified and have begun to 

purchase equipment, they are quite aggressive in recovering 

material. And as soon as we have good information, hopefully 

we can again discuss it and identify those quantities. But the 

industry is responding positively as they have become certified 

and bought the equipment to do it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. It talks in the 

Bill about maintaining records. I'm just wondering what kind of 

records you're talking about. How extensive are you 

envisioning this record-keeping being? Does an owner of a 

vehicle or a fridge have to maintain his records as to whether or 

not there was any leak in the system, whether he had it 

repaired? Or what kind of records are you discussing here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, the responsibility lies with 

the service industry for keeping the records, not with the 

individual consumer. But in the process 

of again your vehicle or your fridge being serviced, the 

industry would supply you with a bill identifying the product 

they've used and the quantity of the product. And that becomes 

a record that the . . . it becomes the responsibility of the service 

industry to maintain those records for provincial purposes. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — What kinds of information, Mr. 

Minister, do you envision being kept on these records — name, 

phone number, etc., social security? Just how much 

information are you looking for? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, there is no special 

requirement with respect to identifying information for the 

consumer. The service industry is required to list their own 

certification and the nature of the repair done in the transaction 

and the quantity of product used. But that's it. It's a service. The 

information that needs to be transmitted is transmitted — 

recorded and transmitted from the service industry, and there is 

no information that is particular to the person for whom they 

provided a service. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Well am I to understand then, Mr. 

Minister, that the service industry will provide the government 

with a record of how much product they have used or recycled 

or whatever they have done with it, but that you will not be 

receiving information on individual consumers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Yes, that's right. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, because a lot 

of people have a concern about Big Brother government 

watching them and seeing what's happening and how many 

fridges they own, etc. 

 

One of the other sections of the Bill deals with the individual 

use and control orders. In what sense is the minister bringing 

this forward? What do you mean by control orders, and how 

will they be implemented? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, the control orders are 

provided for in order that if someone is working in the service 

industry without the proper equipment, so that there is the risk 

of the product being lost to the atmosphere, that then an order 

could be sent requiring that person to stop working until they 

were properly equipped, certified, or changed their practices to 

meet the requirements. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — So these control orders would not be 

directed at your basic consumer of a fridge, but rather at 

industry or at the service industry who would be utilizing CFCs 

on a daily basis? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Yes, that's correct. They're directed at 

making sure that the people certified and owning the equipment 

and being involved in the industry are dealing with this product 

with the sensitivity that it requires for all of our safety. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In the Bill it 

gives the Lieutenant Governor in Council the ability to identify 

ozone-depleting substances and to make regulations to 

determine whether or not a 



1370 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1993 

substance is ozone depleting. I'm just wondering what scientific 

proofs are you going to be using to make those determinations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — The basis for determining, Mr. Chairman, 

the basis for determining substances that will be identified 

under regulation that would be subject to this control would be 

based on national and international regulation. The reason it is 

in regulation rather than in the Act is that when we find new 

substances we don't want to be restricted by time frames often 

necessary in revisiting an Act which can take up to two years. 

 

So that there's just a need to be able to respond according to 

changing knowledge and that it will be based on the security of 

knowing that it's national and international regulations, not 

someone's whim. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Minister, you will be taking 

national standards or national determinations that a substance is 

actually ozone depleting? You'll be accepting their scientific 

proofs. Is that the case? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Yes, that's the case. Both national and 

international work in that regard. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — And what organization or association 

makes that determination? 

 

(1200) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, the standards which have 

been set were begun by a meeting organized through the 

United Nations' sustainable environment group that met in 

Montreal in 1988 and established the Montreal Protocol. That 

group of nations has been meeting annually since. They've just 

recently met in Vancouver to upgrade their information and 

their understandings. And it is this process that is establishing 

the basis for decisions within Canada and within that group of 

countries that are participating. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Minister, the federal government 

recognizes this organization and accept their determinations for 

Canada, do they? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Yes. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you. The Bill also describes the 

collection and storage and storage facilities needed to hold 

CFCs. When this matter is collected, who pays for that storage, 

the new storage facilities and collections which will be 

implemented? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — This is a condition we place on the way in 

which these products are handled, and they become the 

responsibility of the people engaging in the service industry to 

purchase and reflect in their cost structures. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, if you look around 

this province there are a number of locations where there are 

abandoned automobiles. There are, you see, fridges, 

air-conditioners left in garbage 

disposals. What happens with those substances? Who collects 

it, and who pays for it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, once these regulations are 

in place, it will be mandatory that those cooling systems be 

evacuated before the appliance or the vehicle is abandoned. 

 

The question I think you're asking as well is the question of 

what happens with all the collection of sins before this. And I 

think the understanding I have from the officials is that because 

the CFCs are worth money and as we approach the 

non-manufacturing date they will become worth more money, 

that it is actually a business opportunity to go out and evacuate 

abandoned vehicles and appliances, and that it's expected that 

those CFCs that are contained in those systems will be 

collected because it makes sense for somebody to do it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, I hope that is 

indeed the case and somebody will go out there and do that. 

But what happens in the case where it doesn't happen? Who has 

the responsibilities and who looks after the situation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, as you're probably aware 

from your own vehicles and appliances, because this is a very 

volatile product for pieces of equipment that have been 

abandoned for some period of time, the loss has in all 

likelihood occurred for many of them, and the damage to the 

atmosphere has already occurred. But if there were an 

identified problem and opportunity for collection that was there 

in order to save further damage to the atmosphere, certainly our 

department would take responsibility to examine that, on 

advice from people knowing that it was there. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, are you saying then 

that the department would go out and collect the substances at 

the government's cost? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — No. I'm simply saying that if there were 

an identified problem not being addressed through the . . . what 

we expect the market-place will do, that then the department 

would examine a strategy to ensure that it was addressed. The 

expectation is that that will not be necessary. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Well perhaps it's your expectation, Mr. 

Minister, but what will you do in the circumstances where that 

does not occur? Where the substances are there, nobody is 

volunteering to go out and pick it up, what happens? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — We will, as we have committed ourselves 

to do in every other area with respect to environmental 

management, resource management, establish a . . . work 

within a cooperative arrangement with municipalities and 

businesses who make us aware. 

 

Environmental management is not something that is 

accomplished by government establishing regulations. 

Environmental management is occurring 



April 30, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1371 

and moving forward today at a very fast pace because society 

believes that they want a safer environment for their children 

and a more sustainable future with respect to our air and our 

water and our land, so that the food we eat is sound and safe; so 

that the air we breathe is sound and safe; so the water we drink 

is sound and safe. And it is really this collective effort of 

society that has brought us this far. 

 

And in fact when they ask us to deal with issues like air 

management, air quality management, as we're doing in this 

case, and it is in that same fashion that the identification of the 

problem that you're predicting and the solution to it would be 

addressed. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. It seems to be 

very difficult though to get you to say that the government 

would provide the solution for this problem. We went through 

the committee hearings of the environmental rights and 

responsibilities. One of the recommendations of that all-party 

committee — the major grouping on that committee is your 

own government back-benchers — the recommendation that 

came down was that society, the taxpayer, has to bear some 

responsibilities in some situations. Will the government accept 

the responsibility of those orphan situations where no one is 

responsible — there's somebody responsible but we're not able 

to identify who that person is — will the government accept the 

responsibility and the costs to solve the . . . to provide the 

solution in that case? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, I think we're making a 

question . . . a large debate about a principle on a matter about 

which we do not likely disagree, but on the fact of your 

anticipation that there is a problem, in my official's conclusion, 

that there is a virtual certainty that there is not a problem with 

respect to this particular product. 

 

There are many products with respect to past contamination, 

past practices we have had, which we now as a society have to 

deal with, when we engaged in practices that we did not know 

would be in the long term harmful to our environment. This 

happens not to be one of the ones that the officials expect is 

one. And when these do exist, they really are again . . . while 

there are government strategies in place, as you know, with 

respect to contaminated sites on a larger scale, we've engaged 

in a strategy as a government to identify them and work with 

people who are owners or who are presently being affected by 

these contaminated sites, to work cooperatively to solutions. 

We as a government cannot and have not ever taken on the 

financial responsibility to do those things. 

 

One of the big themes in environmental management today is 

the question of environmental liability and how one brings the 

resources together to in effect share in the unfairness of paying 

for past sins. That's a major theme in Saskatchewan and in 

Canada. And there are no simple solutions. It is only through 

the cooperative efforts of all of us, where we can identify a 

problem and work together towards solving it, that we in fact 

are able to deal with those past concerns and 

assure today, through proper cooperative regulation and 

through convictions about practice, that we don't create any of 

those similar kinds of sins for our children to clean up. 

 

Now when you refer to the public response to the charter, 

you're right — the public did say a number of things about 

responsibility. But one of the things they clearly said as well 

was that they were unhappy both at the business level and at 

the environmentalist and the consumer level with such abrupt 

action that would require a conflict — that almost puts people 

into a conflict position — about resolving environmental 

concerns, where the concern with the environmental charter 

was that in fact immediately when someone identified a 

problem, they were going to be beating on each other in court. 

 

The public contention, I think the contention and the spirit that 

surrounds the environmental sense that people have, is that it 

isn't that kind of an issue. Environmental management is the 

kind of an issue where I as a person want to work with you as 

another person in society — whether you're the businessman 

and I'm the consumer, whatever the relationship is — to first 

identify problems and secondly resolve them cooperatively. 

 

And I think . . . Sorry for going on so long about this, but that's 

essentially the spirit around which management of these kinds 

of problems would occur. My officials are saying it's not likely 

to be a problem; if it were to be a problem, it would be 

addressed from that public consciousness of (a) identifying to 

us that possibly we would have to be facilitators in addressing 

it and then identifying the kinds of actions necessary. The 

officials at this moment are anticipating that that's not going to 

be necessary with respect to residual CFCs in equipment. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I'm glad 

to know that it's not likely going to be a problem. But the 

potential is nevertheless still there. 

 

And while society agrees that there has to be a shared 

responsibility for the recovery of contaminants, in the case that 

I am trying to bring forward to you though, you are dealing 

with an orphan site to which it is difficult if not impossible to 

identify the owner, the person who would be liable. Under 

those circumstances you can develop a cooperative effort if you 

wish, but there's going to be costs in the recovery. 

 

If it's not economical for the private sector to recover that 

service, that product, who would be responsible for the 

recovery of that? You are skirting around the issue of trying to 

abstain from saying yes, the government would be responsible 

and would recover the product. But somebody has to do it. 

 

Now as the government I suppose you could point the finger at 

somebody and say: you will do it and you'll pay for it and clean 

it up. But that person may or may not have been involved in 

any way, sense, or form with that product and that site. So 

somebody has to bear the responsibility for it eventually. Is 



1372 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1993 

government, as the representative of society as the whole, 

prepared to accept that responsibility? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — If I thought a brief yes would end the 

discussion, I would simply say yes. And I don't know why 

you're insisting I make these long explanatory speeches, 

because in priorizing a product like this, if it had the scale of 

problem that, for example, used oil creates for us as consumers 

or the scale of a problem that used tires create for us as 

consumers or the kinds of problems that sulphurous and nitrous 

oxides create for us in emissions from stacks — you know the 

list goes on of things that negatively affect us — or the seepage 

from landfills into aquifers or the seepage from leaking 

underground storage tanks into water pipes. 

 

I mean, if it were at the top of that list, I assure you the 

government would immediately address it. The officials are 

simply saying that they don't think it's likely to be there real 

quick. And in a society where we're trying to address things in 

a priorized fashion, it is . . . I've established a special 

committee to work with my department in identifying priorities 

so that we in fact spend our scarce resources, our tax and our 

business resources, on those issues creating the biggest risk to 

our environment. And if this product were to be at the top of 

the list, I assure you the government would give it full address 

in whatever fashion necessary. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, you managed to 

duck the yes again. Since I don't seem to be able to get that 

three-letter word out of you, I will move on to something else. 

Perhaps I can get it some place else. 

 

You talk of prescribing fees and requiring payments in the 

respect of CFCs in the regulations. What do you foresee these 

fees being for, and what amount and what will the fees be 

utilized for, the fee monies collected? 

 

(1215) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, the officials inform me 

that that is there as a just-in-case in the event that all of the 

things I just said were not true, that it would allow you to 

engage in a strategy by which funds could be collected in order 

to deal with that situation should this question in fact end up at 

the top of the priority list in terms of the best use of public 

resources for environmental management. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Would the minister and the government 

be prepared to use any fees collected dealing with 

ozone-depleting substances for the recovery of those 

substances in the case of orphan sites? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, if that circumstance that I 

described were to be identified, that would be the purpose for 

which that would be collected and then it would be the purpose 

for which they would be used, yes. 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I finally 

got a yes there. I'm wondering, these fees that may be 

collected, what relationship will they have with the use of 

CFCs? Will it be on volumes? What kind of fee schedules are 

you contemplating? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — The opinion of our officials is that the 

market-place will deal with these products so none are 

presently contemplated. And if it were decided that a new 

strategy was needed, then it would be determined in 

cooperation with industry and consumers to identify the proper 

level of fee that would address the problem. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Is the minister prepared to make a 

commitment that those kind of consultations will take place 

with industry and the consumers prior to the implementation of 

such fees? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Absolutely. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. One of the 

portions of the Bill I think has some serious implications on 

industry throughout this province, and that's the imposition of a 

fine of not more than a million dollars. I think this is a very 

large amount of money. Now ozone-depleting substances and 

our ozone are a very serious matter, and yet this fine is much 

larger than in a lot of cases that we foresee, that we see 

operating in the public currently. I'm just wondering why such 

a large fee. In what kind of a circumstance would you foresee 

this kind of a fine being utilized? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, this again is part of the 

joint guidance that our officials have engaged in nationally. 

 

And these numbers are not dissimilar from international 

numbers either and I think contemplate a circumstance where a 

manufacturer may be delinquent, careless in their procedures, 

so that there are circumstances where this is contemplated. And 

it is clearly designated as a maximum and clearly would not be 

applied in anywhere near that maximum for the average 

circumstance. 

 

But it could be that if an industry were to develop in 

Saskatchewan that that kind of number might be appropriate 

for a certain large enterprise. Certainly would not be 

contemplated for the scale of enterprise we have here now. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, I believe it was in 

Nova Scotia where a fish plant allowed . . . or it happened at a 

fish plant anyways that a number of tonnes of CFCs were 

released to the atmosphere. In that particular case it was under 

federal jurisdiction, I believe, and the fine was $50,000. In 

what kind of a circumstance in Saskatchewan could you see a 

million dollar fine being imposed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, as I was saying, this is 

part of the national cooperative structure that has been 

established in setting the standards and setting the penalties, 

and it would be in the case of 



April 30, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1373 

obviously a very serious offence, a very serious disregard for 

the public good nationally and internationally. Because when 

we do damage to the ozone layer, it's not just to you and I 

living here where we exercise carelessness, if we do, but to 

people far distant from us. 

 

And so it is contemplated as a . . . it's been an agreed-to penalty 

that would obviously only be applied in an extreme situation. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Minister, in quickly looking 

through the Bill, I was looking for a particular date as to which 

the total effects of this Bill would be implemented. Do you 

foresee that the total of this Bill would be implemented or 

would come into force on the day of assent, or is there some 

time period in which these procedures are going to be brought 

forward? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Yes. Mr. Chairman, the expectation 

should be that when this Bill is passed, it's ready to come into 

force and the industry's ready for it. Many of these provisions 

the industry has been aware of for a year and the only 

limitation to the Bill as it was was the list of substances, and so 

industry has been working and in fact complying with this Act 

for a year already. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Are there any 

other substances that you are currently contemplating adding to 

the list of banned substances? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — As the member for Souris-Cannington is 

aware, I think this Act actually adds seven or eight substances 

in itself, but there are none others contemplated at the moment 

even though there is work going on nationally and 

internationally in continuing to monitor substances, and then 

those would have the capacity to be added to the list by 

regulation at that time. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. One of the 

items in public use that have contained CFCs in the past when 

most have been eliminated, but aerosol cans. What provisions 

will be in place for the recovery of CFCs from aerosol cans? 

 

One of the items that is being used currently are inhalers or 

nebulizers for medical purposes. Are there any methods to 

recover the CFCs in those? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, the CFCs have not been 

used in household applications probably for 10 or 15 years 

now, but they may be used in medical applications. And in 

those cases they're exempt and they can be used, and that's 

accepted loss to the atmosphere. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Is the government prepared to become 

involved in any programs or processes which would replace the 

CFCs in nebulizers or inhalers for medical purposes? That's an 

area in which we could perhaps develop some value to the 

economy if we were prepared to get involved in that. 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, industry has already 

responded to the opportunity to be more environmentally 

sensitive and they have already looked at alternatives. And 

there are alternatives in some products where even the squeeze 

aspirators are used as opposed to a propellant at all. So there 

are good things going on at the moment with respect to seeking 

alternatives that are consistent with our hope for the future. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Is the government involved in 

encouraging any research into new methods into refrigeration, 

new methods for the use of aerosols in inhalers, or new 

research into fire-fighting equipment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, the public involvement in 

that at the moment is through the national working groups, 

where areas of research are identified that either industry will 

undertake from their participation in the kind of cooperative 

exercise of managing our environment or through which 

possibly funding to an institution like a university or a science 

council might happen through the National Research Council 

or some other agency as basic research. 

 

But our involvement as a government is at this point only 

through the working groups that are working nationally and 

would be identifying areas for research such as the ones you're 

suggesting that could advance our environmental sensitivity in 

the way we use these substances. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would 

encourage the government to encourage research in 

Saskatchewan to develop some of these facilities. Thank you. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 17 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like 

to thank the minister and his officials for coming in today and 

for answering all our questions. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, I would also like to 

express my appreciation to the member from 

Souris-Cannington and his colleagues for the breadth of their 

interest, for the work they've put into this issue. I know they are 

as concerned with this issue as they have been cooperative on 

other environmental issues. We need that kind of spirit of 

working together to address these issues and I thank you for 

that in the general term and specifically with respect to your 

cooperation on this Bill. Thank you very much. 

 

(1230) 

 

Bill No. 28 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation Act 



1374 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1993 

The Chair: — I would ask the minister to please introduce the 

officials who are with him here today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Chairman. I'd like to introduce Brian Kaukinen, the president 

of . . . or, I'm sorry, Brian Woodcock, the president of 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation. I'm in the 

wrong corporation today, so I'll correct that. But I'd like to 

introduce Mr. Woodcock. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I 

wonder if the minister might take the time to just review the 

Bill for us and outline the reasons for bringing it forward. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Yes I would. With respect to the 

Bill, basically what it is doing is correcting an oversight in the 

existing Act. The Act enables SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation) to provide the facilities and services 

which are defined under the regulations. And because there are 

no regulations we would want to make the amendments so that 

we could do the business of the corporation without defining in 

regulation all of the duties of the Property Management 

Corporation. 

 

As you will know, the number of issues and things that the 

corporation deals with are varied and many, and by making 

these amendments, that would basically refer it to the common 

law definition of services and facilities that would prevail in 

interpreting the Act. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, what I'd like to know of the 

minister, what will the specific role of Property Management 

then be once this Bill comes into force? Does this take away a 

significant role or responsibility of the corporation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — No, it really doesn't change at all 

the operation of the corporation. The duties and the things that 

it will do will remain the same. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Well I understand the Property Management 

oversees facilities and services for the government, like 

manages and operates buildings. I believe all the buildings that 

the government's involved in, it operates. Does it operate the 

lease of vehicles, Mr. Minister? And in light of that I realize 

this is a very short, short Bill just basically bringing in an 

amendment. But I just want to reiterate the fact that was it 

necessary to really bring a Bill forward, and its impact on the 

relationship of property management. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Yes, actually it was necessary to 

bring forth the amendments. And I would be a little more 

specific in terms of why we've brought these amendments 

forth. 

 

Because of the fact that there were no regulations, the Canadian 

Association of Fire Bomber Pilots in a submission to the 

Canadian Labour Relations Board argued that SPMC has no 

authority to operate the northern air service which is the water 

bomber 

operation that we use during forest fire suppression season. The 

action was discontinued after Northern Air's transfer to Parks 

and Renewable Resources. But it did bring to our attention the 

need to change these, and to make these amendments. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I didn't quite catch what you're 

saying. What was the specific reason that the fire bombers were 

. . . or the pilots were talking of regarding this legislation, that 

would have drawn your attention to the lack of proper, I guess, 

regulations in the legislation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I want to point out that there 

are no regulations. If we did not bring forth these amendments, 

we would have to itemize, in regulation, every particular duty 

and every specific duty that Property Management Corporation 

does as part of its mandate. 

 

Rather than to go through the red tape and the drafting of all of 

these regulations, it was felt that these amendments would be in 

order and would allow the corporation to function and do the 

duties that it does without drafting all of the specific 

regulations that would be required. 

 

And as you will be aware, the legislation is complicated in 

some cases and becomes more and more complicated, and the 

attempt here is to try and simplify the Act rather than drafting 

all of the regulations. It does nothing at all in terms of the 

mandate of the corporation. It does nothing in terms of 

allowing expanded powers. It just allows the corporation to do 

its duty, do its job without articulating in regulation all of the 

different aspects of the role of the corporation. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you. It all sounds very well and 

reasonable to me, Mr. Minister, and we thank your official for 

coming in today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I would just like to 

thank the members of the opposition for their questions and I'd 

like to thank my official for his assistance. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 6 — An Act to amend The Prairie and Forest Fires 

Act, 1982 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be now read 

the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 22 — An Act respecting the Manufacture, Sale, 

Use, Consumption, Collection, Storage, 



April 30, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1375 

Recycling and Disposal of Ozone-depleting Substances and 

Products 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 28 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move that item no. 

5, Bill No. 28, be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Environment and Resource Management 

Vote 26 

 

The Chair: — I would ask the minister at this time to please 

introduce his staff. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, thank you for that 

opportunity. I'm accompanied by Les Cooke, on my right, who 

is the associate deputy minister of the Department of 

Environment and Resource Management. Directly behind Les 

is Mr. Bill Marr, the director of finance and administration. 

And directly behind me is Bob Blackwell, the assistant deputy 

minister of Environment and Resource Management. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I wonder if 

the minister would please give us a list of the staff in his office 

and what their purposes are. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Just to clarify the question, are you 

asking for a written response sometime in the future, now? 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — If the minister has it available, he can 

give now, or he can give us the commitment to supply us with 

the names, what their positions are, and what their salary status 

is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I clearly know who 

they are. But just so that you get it right and get all the right 

titles and all those things, I'll provide it in writing. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, we would 

hope that you would get your staff right at least. 

 

I'm just wondering, Mr. Minister, if you would mind giving us 

the information as to who your deputy ministers are and 

associate deputy ministers, and what their functions are. Are 

they with the Environment? Are they with Natural Resource? 

That type of thing. 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, as you're aware, our 

department has recently undergone a very major reorganization 

to create within government a focus for sustainable 

development when we integrated the Department of 

Environment and Public Safety, passing off some of the public 

safety functions to Labour, and the Department of Natural 

Resources at the time of the budget. 

 

In that transition the structure of the two departments were 

integrated and so there is a virtually completely new structure 

through which the new Department of Environment and 

Resource Management functions. 

 

(1245) 

 

The deputy minister of our new department is Michael Shaw. 

The associate deputy minister in charge of policy and program 

development is Les Cooke, the former deputy of the 

Department of Environment. Bob Blackwell, who I just 

introduced, is the assistant deputy minister in charge of 

management services. Ross MacLennan is the assistant deputy 

minister in charge of operations. And Randy Sentis is the 

assistant deputy minister in charge of environmental protection. 

So those are the four senior positions reporting to the deputy 

minister. 

 

And in terms of function, those are the specific functions they 

are responsible for. But clearly, as a department, the purpose of 

the restructuring was in fact to remove some of the artificial 

separations between our resource development and 

management functions so that we do them in an integrated 

fashion, in a sustainable fashion, where the concerns of the 

environment and the concerns of the economy around those 

resources are integrated into one planning structure. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — I wonder if the minister would mind 

sending us a list with that breakdown on it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Yes, I'd be pleased to send you that, plus 

the rest of the organizational structure. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, because with 

the reorganization it's important that we also know where 

everybody fits into the picture. Has the minister hired any 

contract employees with his staff within the last . . . or with this 

estimates that we're providing for? Are there any contract staff? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — It's my understanding from speaking to 

the officials that there are neither any new ones nor are there 

any old people within the reorganized department who are on 

contract, on a contractual arrangement. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — You say there's no new ones. Were 

there ones that were there before? There are no contract 

employees with the department at all, either Parks or 

Environment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — That's correct, yes. 



1376 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1993 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. You've 

come out with a new program of contaminated sites. I'm just 

wondering, what kind of research have you done? What kind of 

studies have you done dealing with that particular issue? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chairman, I 

move the committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to 

sit again. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 12:50 p.m. 

 


