




















































Hansard: March 29, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 659 

 March 29, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that 

I shall on Wednesday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

 Regarding SaskPower Corporation's decision to purchase 25 

megawatts of electricity from non-utility sources: (1) has 

SaskPower demanded a deposit from any of the firms 

competing to supply SPC (Saskatchewan Power Corporation) 

with this co-generated power; (2) if a deposit were required, 

what was the value of the deposit; (3) why did SaskPower not 

lay out the criteria that will be used for choosing the 

successful supplier before opening the competition, which 

could cost potential bidders up to $100,000 each just to 

complete an application? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to take 

this opportunity to introduce to you and through you to the 

House a woman who, while residing in Regina, keeps close ties 

with our constituency, Ms. Amy Manz, who's up in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to ask the House to welcome her 

here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Purchase of VLTs 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, last week the minister 

responsible for the Gaming Commission refused to table the 

deal reached between his government and the two American 

firms which had contracts for over $20 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you will also recall that the minister refused to 

table any review or investigation conducted or any other 

documentation or correspondence connected with this contract.  

And, Mr. Minister, for a government that has promised to be 

open and accountable, that seems far too much to be secretive 

and closed. 

 

Mr. Minister, to help the public pry into this can of worms, my 

question today is to the minister responsible for the Gaming 

Commission.  Mr. Minister, last week we uncovered the 

checkered past of one of the firms, Video Lottery Technologies 

Inc., which you awarded a multimillion dollar contract to.  Mr. 

Minister, were you aware that the other American firm, 

GTECH of Rhode Island, is reported to have hired the most 

prominent, highest paid, and best connected representatives in 

nearly every jurisdiction 

to lobby on their behalf.  Were you aware of that?  And were 

you aware, for instance, that in California a federal grand jury 

is examining relationships between the computer company, 

state legislature, and lobbyists.  Were you aware of this 

information when you awarded them the contract? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, first of all let 

me correct the member from Morse with respect to the wording 

of the contract.  As he will be aware, we are in negotiations 

right now to determine arrangements that may be reached with 

GTECH and the other company that he's aware of.  And I 

would want to say with respect to GTECH, Mr. Speaker, that 

the company has been checked by Mr. Egan, who is a former 

superintendent in charge of criminal investigations in this 

province with the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police).  

He has indicated that there is no problem in terms of dealing 

with this. 

 

And I want to just, if I could, Mr. Speaker, share a little 

background.  GTECH has been dealing with the Western 

Canada Lottery Corporation, with the Government of Alberta, 

and with the Government of Manitoba.  They have been 

working with the Western Canada Lottery since 1982.  I have 

on my desk a letter of reference from the Western Canadian 

Lottery Corporation, who indicates that they found them to be 

above-board and a very reputable company in terms of the 

dealings they've had with them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, if you're just 

in the process of making arrangements with these two 

companies, why would you put out a news release on March 19 

saying that you had already concluded and the contracts were 

let to have Video Lottery Consultants of Bozeman, Montana 

will supply the commission with 1,000 machines.  Is that 

arrangements being negotiated, Mr. Minister?  That says "will".  

I didn't write that; you did.  Now which is it?  Are you making 

arrangements, or have you made arrangements with these 

people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, as the member will be 

aware and I've indicated to the press the day this line of 

questioning started that the government has chosen, out of a 

short-list of four, two companies to sit down to negotiate the 

details of what we hope will be a contract to supply the VLTs 

(video lottery terminal) to the Gaming Commission.  Those 

negotiations, with respect to the finalization of contract 

arrangements, are being done and we are hopeful that it will 

come to a successful resolve in the near future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, that is 

exactly what this opposition is concerned about 



660 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1993 

and the public of Saskatchewan are concerned about -- what 

those negotiations will be like and where they will be 

terminated and what kind of people will be involved.  And I 

will go on, Mr. Minister.  Were you aware that GTECH made 

campaign contributions exceeding half a million dollars after 

the California legislature got involved in setting guidelines for 

lottery contract? 

 

And were you aware that a former state senator, Allan Robbins, 

admitted taking an illegal campaign contribution from GTECH 

lobbyists?  Mr. Minister, the senator said he accepted $13,500 

in exchange for his vote against a Bill the company opposed.  

Were you aware of this information when you awarded this 

contract to GTECH? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I am aware of this, 

that the Gaming Commission has had these companies 

checked.  And I have a copy of a letter before me from Doug 

Egan, the director of security for the Saskatchewan Gaming 

Commission, former employee in charge of criminal 

investigations with the RCMP. 

 

And I'll quote his recommendation: 

 

 I have reviewed the detailed security report on the shortlisted 

vendors and I have concluded there are no substantive issues 

which would cause me to recommend against the Gaming 

Commission doing business with any of the short listed firms. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think it's fair to say that the Gaming 

Commission will make their decision.  It is in agreement to 

purchase VLTs on behalf of the Gaming Commission to supply 

to the province of Saskatchewan, and given the 

recommendation from this gentleman, I believe we are safe in 

assuming that the right decision has been made by the Gaming 

Commission. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, were you 

aware of the reports, that for a Maryland contract GTECH 

hired former governor Marvin Mandell to lobby for them?  

Were you aware that the company and its lobbyists succeeded 

in moving the lottery contract forward to a process that was not 

the usual procurement channel? 

 

And were you aware that GTECH lobbyists bought $7,500 

tickets worth of tickets to a Democratic Governors' Association 

fund-raiser shortly before the contract was awarded?  And on 

top of that, Mr. Minister, were you aware that $22,500 worth of 

tickets GTECH bought on their own?  Mr. Minister, did Mr. 

Egan tell you all of those details as well? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I am aware of 

this, that the Gaming Commission has done an in-depth study 

with respect to the dealings that they intend to embark upon 

with this company.  I am aware that the Government of Alberta 

has been dealing with this company to have computer hardware 

supplied and Lotto 6/49 machines.  I am aware that the western 

Canadian lottery foundation has been dealing with this 

company since 1982. 

 

I am saying, Mr. Speaker, that the Government of 

Saskatchewan, after checking this company, feels secure in 

buying these machines to supply the Canadian market; and I 

guess I have a question to the member.  Is it your allegation 

that there has been some wrongdoing by people with respect to 

the Gaming Commission in Saskatchewan or by government 

members? And if he is, I would like him to make that 

information available to the people of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and, Mr. Minister, you said Mr. 

Egan had done all of the investigation required.  Will you table 

all of the assessments that Mr. Egan did in relation to those 

documents that I have presented here today, and will you table 

them for this Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan to see? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, in answer to the 

member's questions, I will say this, that the Gaming 

Commission is in the process of negotiating the deals of a 

contract with each of these two companies.  I will say this, that 

the director of security for the Saskatchewan Gaming 

Commission, Mr. Egan, is comfortable that the arrangements 

that the Government of Saskatchewan has embarked upon 

through the Gaming Commission has been scrutinized quite 

clearly and feels that there is no problem.  And I would assume 

that the Gaming Commission will continue to complete these 

negotiations on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and, Mr. Minister, newspaper 

accounts say that after GTECH won a contract in Missouri, 

they awarded the former aid of the governor of Missouri a 

ten-year consulting contract worth $800,000.  Were you aware 

of these reports, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I'm aware of this, to the member for 

Morse, that the Gaming Commission in Saskatchewan is, I 

believe, a group of men and women who will represent the 

interests of this province fairly.  I believe that Mr. Egan has 

done due diligence with respect to the security of these 

companies and is comfortable with the business arrangement 

that the Gaming Commission has made with these two 

companies. 

 

And again, I say to the member, if he has any 



March 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 661 

knowledge of wrongdoing by any members of the Gaming 

Commission or any other elements connected with this 

government, that I would ask him to table those. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and, Mr. Minister, surely you 

admit that these reports would make people begin to wonder.  

Is there something wrong with the companies involved in doing 

all of these things all over the United States and in Australia?  

Would you be prepared, Mr. Minister, to file the report that Mr. 

MacKay did on behalf of the Minister of Justice?  Would you 

be prepared to file that report for us today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I would, Mr. Speaker, want to 

comment with respect to the report from Mr. MacKay to the 

former minister.  And the points that were raised were dealing 

with the number of VLTs that he felt would be appropriate for 

the province of Saskatchewan, the background with respect to 

some of the suppliers, and he reports . . . in his report he asks 

for aboriginal involvement and that Indian representation be on 

the Gaming Commission.  And that, sir, there is. 

 

With respect to the number of VLTs, he recommends 6,000 

that would be usable in this province.  We have elected to go 

with 4,000.  And in terms, Mr. Speaker, of the report, clearly 

the member must have access to it.  He's referring to it as a 

leaked report, and if he has access to it I'm sure he can glean 

the information that he requires from within that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, we want to have 

Mr. Egan's report on the serious criminal nature involved in 

dealings with the United States and states in the United States, 

with governors, with the legislatures, with lobbyists, all 

through the context of that.  We would like to have Mr. Egan's 

report put on this table for the people of Saskatchewan to see.  

You're supposed to be open and honest; why don't you table 

that here for us today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I have clearly 

indicated to the member opposite that the summary of the 

mandate of Mr. Egan was clear.  I have read to him the 

recommendation of Mr. Egan.  I have before me, as a matter of 

fact, the list of people who were contacted by the director of 

security on behalf of the Saskatchewan Gaming Commission 

and I would say through that, Mr. Speaker, I am comfortable 

that due diligence was done in this investigation.  And I say to 

the member from Morse: instead of allegations, if he has 

evidence of wrongdoing, would he table his information for the 

legislature today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, it is your 

responsibility to look after the Gaming Commission.  It is your 

responsibility to make public so that the people of the province 

of Saskatchewan have a good idea of what you're doing.  

They're suspicious of that, Mr. Minister -- very suspicious. 

 

We were leaked a document over the weekend dealing with 

Mr. MacKay's report.  And in it it says the important areas to 

consider in the province of Saskatchewan are not so much 

ensuring that this form of gambling would be profitable, but 

rather ensuring that the integrity of the new form of gambling 

and the government are maintained. 

 

That, Mr. Minister, is what we're asking you about today.  And 

will you today give us Mr. Egan's report which should have -- 

which should have -- lists of the people involved, government 

officials, company officials, lobbyists, including all the 

correspondence?  Could you table that for us today so that the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan can see whether you 

made the right deal or not for $20 million? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, let me say this 

to the member:  the process that was used by the Gaming 

Commission was a similar process that was used by the 

Government of Alberta, by the Manitoba government, and I 

would assume by the Western Canada Lottery Corporation, 

who as well does business with these people. 

 

Now I would say, Mr. Speaker, and to the member opposite, 

that rather than innuendo and allegation and half-truths, if the 

member has any information and if he has any knowledge of 

any wrongdoing by any people within the Gaming Commission 

or surrounded that arm of this government, would he table that 

information or otherwise would he indicate where there was 

some wrongdoing; because I would say to the member I haven't 

seen it; and if he has it, would he table it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and, Mr. Minister, I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, that this is the fourth minister responsible for the 

Gaming Commission.  You've laid off and fired and replaced 

numerous chief executive officers, chairmen of the Gaming 

Commission come and go and, Mr. Minister, there has to be a 

reason for that.  And the people across this province, the 

charities and the bingos and the lotteries and the casinos want 

to know, start to know, some of the answers to those questions, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

This weekend two meetings on health care that dealt with very, 

very specific concerns in Leader and in Prince Albert, and you 

spend $20 million in the province of Saskatchewan on gaming 

and you don't have the courage to put those kinds of items into 

this Assembly.  Mr. Minister, that's a shame.  We're asking you 

to put those kinds of things into this Assembly, the 



662 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1993 

documents that show that you are correct in your assessments 

of it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, let me say to the 

member opposite that the Western Canada Lottery Corporation 

has been dealing with GTECH since 1982.  The Government of 

Alberta had the central computer system provided for in 1991 

and indicated that they were suitable equipment and that they 

felt comfortable in dealing with this corporation. 

 

And I say to the member opposite that his government, as part 

of the western Canada lottery foundation -- the Government of 

Saskatchewan being involved -- since 1982 as I have indicated, 

GTECH was the supplier. 

 

Now I say to you again, sir, if you have any indication of 

wrongdoing, would you please table that information. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, it is your 

responsibility to provide the information to this Assembly for 

the people of Saskatchewan.  It was your Premier who said this 

was going to be an open and honest and straightforward 

government. 

 

Mr. Minister, we want you to be accountable to the people of 

Saskatchewan and that is our responsibility to do that.  People 

in the province of Saskatchewan are bringing forward material 

time after time to us in relation to the Gaming Commission, 

and all you do is tell us to table it.  Well they are tabling it, Mr. 

Minister, day after day.  We want you to table the information 

that Mr. Egan provided to you. 

 

Would you table that today so that we can all see where the real 

rub is on this one? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well I guess, Mr. Speaker, what I'll 

do is read into the record again the recommendation of Mr. 

Egan.  And it's not a secret.  Mr. Speaker, he indicates that 

there is no problem with respect to a security report and that 

the companies were short-listed would be adequate to deal 

with. 

 

And I want to say to the member opposite that instead of a 

witch-hunt then innuendo, that he seems to embark upon and 

comfortable to be embarked upon, I want to say this:  that the 

gaming in Saskatchewan is going to be controlled in a fair way 

and in an honest way by the Gaming Commission of 

Saskatchewan.  We will be introducing casinos in this province 

that will be well run and that will be well controlled so that we 

don't have unsavoury characters involved in gaming in this 

province. 

 

And I want to say to him as well that the deal that we've 

embarked upon with respect to the purchase of 

the VLTs is a straight purchase arrangement.  It is not a 

long-term agreement.  It is an arrangement to have the 

purchases done through these two corporations.  They will be 

put in age-controlled venues throughout this province, and the 

gaming operation will be run in a fair and an open fashion in 

this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, I will be 

asking you to table that immediately after question period.  

However, I want to ask you this question. 

 

If you are so certain that no wrongdoing is being done, then 

why don't you table the whole report that Mr. Egan provided to 

you, if in fact he did?  Or did some front-row people in this 

Assembly from the government opposite make that decision 

without investigation?  Is that where the problem is, Mr. 

Minister, and you are the one that's covering up for all of those 

ministers sitting in the front row?  Is that what's happening to 

you today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Let me say to the member opposite 

this, that I'm comfortable with the process that had been done 

with respect to the investigation of the four companies that 

were short-listed. 

 

And I want to say that I believe the Gaming Commission, in 

their choice to choose the two that they have chosen, have used 

a wide range of criteria and that I believe they have spent 

enough time to be able to do a proper analysis and a proper 

assessment.  I believe that true value and a good value will be 

had for the people of this province.  And I say to you just one 

more time, I believe that Mr. Egan, a man with a very good 

character and a very good reputation in this province, has done 

the right job. 

 

And I say to you, I say to you this, Mr. Member from Morse, if 

you have any evidence of wrongdoing on behalf of anyone 

connected with this, would you please table it instead of the 

smear campaign that you're embarked upon right now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Changes to Liquor Franchises 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is directed to the 

minister in charge of the Liquor Board.  Mr. Minister, your 

department recently made a decision to prohibit some liquor 

vendors from processing and delivering liquor orders to 

licensed outlets outside of their communities, and this service 

was considered convenient; saved bar, hotel, and restaurant 

owners considerable time. 

 

Rural people who operated these liquor franchises in places 

like Asquith, Langham, Sonningdale, to just name a few, 

earned a lot of extra income for their businesses that they 

otherwise never would have received, and that extra income 

often meant the difference between success and failure in those 

rural 



March 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 663 

businesses. 

 

Can the minister explain why the government has taken away 

this opportunity for rural businesses to earn this extra income. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker.  In answer to the 

question of the member from Greystone, I would like to just 

take her back through a little history in terms of the original 

intent and the purposes of franchises. 

 

The franchises were introduced to rural Saskatchewan to 

supplement small businesses in communities where there was 

no service provided by the Liquor Board . . . and by the 

Saskatchewan Liquor Board. 

 

I want to say that in the 1980s as the former administration 

changed the regulations to allow for these franchise areas to . . . 

basically the boundaries to come down, it became quite clear 

that there was a duplication of service in that some of the 

franchise operators were supplying into areas where there was 

an existing liquor outlet. 

 

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I would want to say that the 

changes to revert to the former intent of the franchises I believe 

is done in the best interest of the marketing of that commodity 

through the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, did you offer 

any of these vendors a chance to take a lower commission and 

still maintain their service, or did you just not consult with 

them at all? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well to the member from 

Greystone, the answer with respect to consultation is there was 

a lot of consultation that had gone on over a period of a year.  

And I would want to say that I personally met with a number of 

vendors throughout this province and indicated that we were 

intending to have another look at this. 

 

But I want to say to the member opposite that it's a matter of 

revenue that those franchises were taking in to the 

neighbourhood of about $475,000.  It's not our intention to put 

any of these franchises out of business.  The intention that the 

franchises were put in place is still there.  They still have the 

ability to serve their markets, which many of them . . . the rules 

under which many of them operated when they were given the 

franchises. 

 

I think what we have done is we have put in place service 

throughout Saskatchewan to service rural and to service urban 

communities.  And I believe although it has changed the way 

some of the franchisees will be retailing their product, I believe 

they still have the opportunity to serve the function which they 

were initially intended, and that was to serve community in 

some small rural areas where there was no service. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

before making this change, licensed outlets such as bars and 

hotels ordered their liquor from one of four different places:  

any liquor store, including small-town vendors like those I've 

mentioned; special licensees' outlets; the Friends of the Riders 

outlet; and the main licensee supply depot in Saskatoon or 

Regina. 

 

Now with your recent decision to take away the first three 

options, I might add, what kind of service do you think that 

owners of bars and hotels and restaurants can, especially on 

weekends and holidays, expect when extra supplies are limited 

and businesses frequently run short?  I mean are they going to 

simply stand in line like every ordinary member of the public? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well to the member from 

Greystone, I think it's fair to say that the people involved in the 

hospitality industry can and will plan the way they purchase 

their supplies, as they've done over a number of years in the 

past.  And I want to say to the member opposite that the Liquor 

Board will continue to supply service to the retailers in the 

province, as has gone on for decades. 

 

But just one further comment, I would want to say to the 

member.  With respect to the sale through the franchises and 

the way we retail, if she is comfortable with the duplication, 

who then does she choose?  Does she choose the franchises 

who are selling and duplicating in some areas, or does she 

choose the Liquor Board employees who are employed and 

who stand the risk of being laid off as sales drop in some area?  

Which side is she on?  Who does she choose?  Or does she 

want a fair and a rationalized service in this province? 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Before orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, I'd like 

to rise on a point of order. 

 

The Speaker: -- What's your point of order? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, during question period it became 

obvious to everyone here that the minister of gaming was 

quoting from a letter from Mr. Egan to support his argument.  

Mr. Speaker, we full well know that ministerial briefing notes, 

department briefing notes, personal notes, are not required to 

be tabled.  But when he makes a direct quote from a document 

such as that, Mr. Speaker, it is demanded that the minister then 

table that report for everyone to read. 

 

(1430) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I want to refer all members to 

Beauchesne's 6th Edition, paragraph 495: 

 

 (7) When a letter, even though it may have been written 

originally as a private letter, becomes part of a record of a 

department, it becomes a public document, and if quoted by a 

Minister in 



664 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1993 

debate, must be tabled on request. 

 

So if the member was reading from a letter, then the minister 

must table that letter. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm not sure if I 

referred directly to portions of the letter or if I was 

paraphrasing, but in the spirit of openness and the spirit of 

honesty, I will indicate to the opposition that I'd be pleased to 

table the document. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I'd like 

leave to introduce some guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you to members of the Assembly, I'd like to 

introduce a constituent from actually Red Jacket, just a little 

centre just outside of Moosomin, a Mr. Philip Wolfe.  He's in 

your gallery, Mr. Speaker, accompanied by a number of other 

Saskatchewan residents who are here observing proceedings.  

These residents also have concerns regarding Bill No. 38, and 

I'd like members to welcome them to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 3 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Simard that Bill No. 3 -- An Act 

respecting Health Districts be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As I was 

saying on Friday, Mr. Speaker, when we were interrupted by 

the clock, that the members opposite, while in opposition, were 

talking very loud and long about the need for the government 

of the day to spend more money on health care.  Their demands 

were consistently that more money be spent in every portion of 

health care, in fact every portion of social services in whatever 

manner. 

 

And now all of a sudden, Mr. Speaker, when they have become 

the government, they have forgot all the things that they have 

said while in opposition, and I'm sure that they would wish that 

those quotes were not even available in Hansard or within 

newspaper clippings because what they said, Mr. Speaker, to 

get elected, and prior to the election 

 is not what they are doing today.  They said one thing prior to 

the election just to get elected, and are doing something 

entirely different. 

 

And it's not just the Minister of Health who is guilty of that, 

Mr. Speaker, it is most of the members opposite who were 

sitting in this House prior to the election in '91.  They were all 

guilty of it. 

 

The Minister of Health, Mr. Speaker, the fiend with the scalpel 

that's being taken to the Health budget, was saying that we 

needed more Health money for hospitals; we needed more 

Health money for nurses; more money for doctors; more 

money for drugs. 

 

That with drugs going to $125 deductible, the member from 

Saskatoon Broadway said that the people of Saskatchewan, the 

seniors, were going to have to decide between groceries and 

drugs.  I wonder how she squares that away with the Minister 

of Health when the drug plan has all of a sudden gone to over 

$1,700 deductible.  What's the quote now going to be -- that the 

people of Saskatchewan have to choose between food and 

shelter and drugs? 

 

That's the kind of rhetoric that the member from Saskatoon 

Broadway was spouting while she was in opposition, and all of 

a sudden that does not seem to be the case when she becomes 

the government.  All of a sudden it doesn't matter whether or 

not there is cuts to health care and social services.  What 

matters is whether or not you win the election, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the Minister of Health stands up and says 

that we're cutting funding, we're going to have our wellness 

model in place, as my colleague said, she is acting as a Dr. 

Kevorkian of the health care system, because she is helping 

communities to commit suicide.  She's helping those 

communities to destroy their own hospital systems. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, they're not doing so voluntarily.  They're 

doing so under the gun from the Minister of Health.  She says, 

either you make the decisions on what's going to be in place for 

district health boards, or by August 17, 1993 I will make the 

decision.  The Minister of Health will make that decision.  She 

will appoint what hospitals will be going into what health care 

districts.  And it doesn't matter what the people in the local 

areas think about it, Mr. Speaker.  She will have her way; she 

will have her will. 

 

The members opposite were guilty of demanding that more 

money be spent.  And the Minister of Health while in 

opposition, Mr. Speaker, thought of herself perhaps as the 

Jeanne d'Arc of the health care system, that she was going to 

defend the health care system with life and limb.  But it seems 

that once she became the Minister of Health, she forgot all the 

good words that she said, all her principles. 

 

Well Jeanne d'Arc stood up and fought for what she said and 

for her principles, but that is not what the Minister of Health is 

doing today.  In actual fact, Mr. Speaker, rather than being the 

Jeanne d'Arc of the health care system, this Minister of Heath 

is acting more like Lucretia Borgia and trying to poison the 



March 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 665 

health care system. 

 

Under the Minister of Health program or wellness model, what 

we will see is a downloading of costs, an offloading of costs 

onto the health care system onto local governments. 

 

And I have a letter from SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association) -- actually, it's not a letter; it's a 

news release, Mr. Speaker -- that I'd like to quote from.  And 

this news release is from March 4, 1993.  And the title of it is 

"Health Care Funding Through the Property Tax Base Must 

End."  And I think that's fairly plain in itself. 

 

Right now the union hospitals levy a tax . . . not a tax, Mr. 

Speaker, they put a levy onto the municipal tax base.  They 

request funds from the urban and rural municipalities.  And 

because those municipalities have agreed to join a regional 

health board, a union hospital board, they voluntarily pay this 

money forward. 

 

But under the Minister of Health's scheme, the union health 

boards will be abolished.  Therefore there will be no 

requisitions from funds coming down from the health boards to 

the municipalities.  But their alternative is, is to use the hospital 

revenue tax Act to collect those funds. 

 

And SUMA, in this letter, is opposed to that, Mr. Speaker.  

And this news release comes from Ted Cholod, the president of 

SUMA.  And it says in here, and I quote: 

 

 SUMA is pleased that the new health district boards will not 

be funded out of the property tax base, an assurance we 

received from the Premier at our recent convention. 

 

And he goes on to say, and I quote: 

 

 However, the new Act does not address the existing hospital 

revenue tax Act which amounts to a 2 mill levy. 

 

And that is indeed the case, Mr. Speaker.  Currently it is at 2 

mills.  But that mill rate can be changed by order in council.  

And that is what the great fear is of all property taxpayers in 

this province, that once The Union Hospital Act is abolished, 

it's gone, the new, super health care districts are imposed -- 

imposed by the Minister of Health -- that they will use the 

hospital revenue tax Act to indeed jack up what the mill rate is. 

 

It will no longer be 2 mills, because the government has 

already stated that they're looking to collect $23 million from 

the tax base at the present time -- $23 million. 

 

But the $23 million will only cover a portion of what is being 

cut out of the health care budgets.  That $23 million is already 

being used within the health care system and it does not take 

into account all the cuts that the minister has done in this 

current budget at 3 per cent, and the cuts that will come to 

follow.  So 

there will be a significant increase in the property tax base if 

hospitals are to be maintained in this province. 

 

This news release goes on to say, and again it's a quote from 

Mr. Cholod: 

 

 Premier Romanow made a commitment to remove health 

care funding from the top property tax base.  That being the 

case, SUMA is calling on the province to announce a date for 

the repeal of The Hospital Revenue Act, which will result in 

the removal of hospital levies from the property tax base. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my colleague, the member from Rosthern, 

introduced just such a Bill, a Bill to repeal the hospital revenue 

tax Act.  We've have first reading of that Bill, but unfortunately 

we have not been able to progress beyond that point. 

 

On a number of occasions we have made motions to this House 

to do that very thing, to move on to discuss Bill 10 -- An Act to 

repeal the hospital revenue tax Act.  But the government 

members, Mr. Speaker, using their massive majority, have 

completely denied that opportunity.  They have denied the 

people of Saskatchewan the right to hear the arguments both 

for and against such a move to repeal that Act. 

 

Perhaps the government can come forward with some good 

ideas as to why that should be retained in place.  But they're not 

even prepared to discuss it yet, Mr. Speaker, and I doubt very 

much that they will be prepared to discuss that particular Act at 

all in this session of the legislature. 

 

This is one of those Acts, Mr. Speaker, that die on the order 

paper because the government members are not prepared to 

stand up and say why this particular Bill should be carried on.  

Because, Mr. Speaker, their arguments would be very weak 

when it came to trying to defend that particular Bill considering 

the actions of the Minister of Health. 

 

Again I quote from Mr. Cholod: 

 

 How much input will urban councils have into the formation 

of the districts and what is the dispute settlement mechanism 

if local parties cannot agree on contiguous boundaries? 

 

Well that's a very important question, Mr. Speaker, because 

indeed, not everybody in an area is going to agree as to where 

their boundaries should be drawn and my own area in 

south-eastern Saskatchewan is a prime example of that.  The 

people of the area have held their steering committee meetings.  

Every community has participated in it.  They have an idea of 

what they would like to see happen; but as it turns out, the 

government seems to have a different idea.  They don't seem to 

be real keen on the idea of the hospital districts in my area 

forming a group of the 12,000 people.  The minister has said 

that as a guideline she's using, 12,000 people are needed to 

form a health care district. 



666 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1993 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they're prepared to come up with the 12,000 

people.  They've talked it amongst themselves and they have 

their boundaries outlined in their own mind and they're 

prepared to put that on paper for the minister and in fact I'm 

sure that they already have.  But when they discuss it with the 

department, all of a sudden the department has other ideas.  

The department seems to want something different from what 

the people in the area want, and the department and the 

minister seem to be prepared to push through their own ideas 

over top of that of the people of the area. 

 

So what we need to know from the minister, Mr. Speaker, is 

whether or not if a group of citizens come forward, 

communities come forward, with the 12,000 people population 

base needed for one of these regional health care districts, will 

the minister accept those boundaries?  Or will she try and 

impose something of her own? 

 

(1445) 

 

Because what my constituents are finding in the area is that 

when they come forward with ideas, all of a sudden the 

department has a different idea.  They want them to go and talk 

to somebody else.  They're trying to push them a different 

direction. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the people in my area know what they 

want, but the department isn't prepared to give them that.  It 

seems like they're getting the run-around.  And I would 

suspect, Mr. Speaker, that the minister and the department will 

give them the run-around until August 17 when the minister, 

under this legislation, under her regulation, will have the power 

then to impose on them what the boundaries will be. 

 

And that's wrong, Mr. Speaker.  We supposedly have a 

democratic country where people are allowed to express their 

ideas, hold a vote, and make their own determinations.  And I 

suspect that in this particular case if those determinations do 

not follow the dictates of the Minister of Health, they will not 

be allowed. 

 

Mr. Cholod goes on to say: 

 

 The Minister of Health has indicated that the government will 

provide ample time for consultation before this important 

legislation is passed. 

 

Now that sounds very good.  I gather that the Minister of 

Health feels that from the time this Bill was introduced till 

August 17 is an ample amount of time. 

 

Well the people in my area, the people in Leader, and it seems 

that the people in Prince Albert don't feel that they have been 

given a proper amount of time or a proper amount of 

consultation, that they haven't been talked to.  The people in 

Prince Albert said the move should not go ahead until the board 

is elected.  Right now they're operating up there with 12 people 

appointed by the Minister of Health, not from the community, 

not chosen by the community, but appointed by the Minister of 

Health.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is not democratic.  And putting such a short time line 

on such a major change to Saskatchewan's institutions, Mr. 

Speaker, I would suggest is not an ample amount of time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier is the same person that once said he 

didn't believe health care costs were increasing in the province, 

or that the province is handing those costs off.  I'd like to quote.  

The Premier, the member from Riversdale, said: 

 

 . . . he doesn't believe health care costs in this province are 

skyrocketing.  (And) "The Cost of medicare is well within the 

budget". 

 

And this was stated in the Prince Albert Times-Herald on 

Thursday, January 31, 1991 -- prior to the election, Mr. 

Speaker.  The Premier today felt that at that time that health 

care costs were not sky-rocketing and that medicare was well 

within the budget. 

 

Other places he said that there was enough money for health 

care.  Well, Mr. Speaker, why today does it seem like the 

Minister of Health does not feel that there is enough money 

available from the Minister of Finance to supply the health care 

system. Therefore she has to cut, cut the heart out of the health 

care system, cut the heart out of rural Saskatchewan. 

 

When you look at it, 80 per cent of the monies that are spent on 

hospitals are spent on the base hospitals -- Regina and 

Saskatoon -- 80 per cent.  And 20 per cent is spent in rural 

Saskatchewan.  Well under the Minister of Health's proposal, 

90 per cent of the hurt will be felt in rural Saskatchewan and 10 

per cent will be felt in the major urban centres.  And that's not 

fair, Mr. Speaker.  Two-thirds of the population still live 

outside of Regina and Saskatoon.  One-third live within those 

two cities.  Why should the pain be felt in the other two-thirds. 

 

Another quote from the Premier.  He said: 

 

 When the legislative session begins, we are going to demand 

the health care system be restored to good health. 

 

Well that's a very good quote.  But it makes you wonder just 

what he means by good health. 

 

And he goes on to say: 

 

 And we're going to work for a health system which will once 

again be the finest in Canada for the 1990s. 

 

 The member from Riversdale said the only way to turn things 

around was by electing an NDP government. 

 

Moose Jaw Times-Herald, February 27, 1989. 

 

Well I guess he has turned the health care system around.  He's 

turned it up on its ear, Mr. Speaker.  And there are a good 

many people out in the public who don't appreciate it. 



March 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 667 

The people in Leader the other night certainly had a lot to say 

about it.  One gentleman got up and said, if you close this 

hospital, I'd like to give you an example of what would happen. 

 

He said, I had a heart attack about six months ago.  I was 

brought into the hospital at Leader where I was stabilized, and 

then I was moved on to Medicine Hat.  Without this hospital 

here, I would have been dead.  And he said, if you don't believe 

me, ask my doctor, who was in the crowd.  And the doctor 

stood up and said, yes, he would have been dead. 

 

And that's the kind of things we're talking about, Mr. Speaker.  

That's the kind of hardship that the Minister of Health wishes to 

place on the citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

It's my suspicion, Mr. Speaker, that once the Minister of Health 

has her way with the system, that in southern Saskatchewan 

south of No. 1 Highway there will be a hospital in Estevan, 

there will be a hospital in Weyburn, there will be a hospital in 

Assiniboia, and a hospital in Swift Current.  And everybody 

else had better be praying that they don't need a hospital any 

closer than that because they will not be available, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

To quote from the Premier again, from the Leader-Post of 

November 2, 1989: 

 

 The member from Riversdale said an NDP government 

would be more caring and compassionate. 

 

 Romanow made an impassioned campaign speech hinting an 

NDP government would increase the level of support to 

programs and build a brand-new health care system. 

 

Well I can see that he's building a brand-new health care 

system here -- one without facilities.  But I don't see in his 

statement where the increased level of support for programs 

comes in, because there is no increased level of support.  The 

funding is not there, Mr. Speaker.  The member from Regina 

Hillsdale cut the heart out of it.  There is no additional funding. 

 

I guess that the member from Saskatoon Riversdale, the 

Premier of this NDP (New Democratic Party) government, 

feels that users like cancer patients is caring . . . user fees for 

cancer patients is caring and compassionate -- caring and 

compassionate to charge them for their medications and for 

staying at the hospital.  That's what's happening, Mr. Speaker.  

That is what the Minister of Health is doing to the people of 

this province. 

 

I guess, Mr. Speaker, that tripling the deductible for 

prescription drugs from $125 to 380 was a compassionate 

move by the Minister of Health.  This is how she demonstrates 

her compassion for the people of the province, by removing 

diabetic supplies from the drug plan.  That was a noble move.  

That was a caring thing to do. 

Charging patients for the very air that they breathe, the oxygen 

that they need to survive -- now there's a Minister of Health 

and a Premier that have a heart.  Mr. Speaker, even the man in 

the Wizard of Oz, the tin man had more compassion and more 

heart than the Minister of Health and the Premier.  At least he 

had the sense to go out and look for it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they're freezing all of the health care budgets, all 

of the capital cost projects, and why not?  They may have been 

scheduled for rural Saskatchewan, and rural Saskatchewan is 

on the NDP's hit list, and it has been since the first day after 

this election. 

 

What about the bad budgetary decisions imposed by the NDP 

government that are affecting this province's seniors.  The 

health of those seniors, Mr. Speaker, is at risk.  Decisions like 

the one which will terminate all level 1 and 2 care special home 

fundings over the next two years -- that's going to be caring and 

compassionate.  The people who are in the level 1 and 2 care 

homes, according to the Minister of Health last year, should be 

maintained in their homes. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that's well and good providing those seniors 

have homes, but a good many of them no longer have houses to 

go back to.  They're in these facilities for a very good reason, 

because they were unable to care for themselves in a lot of 

cases.  They needed medication, they needed some supervision. 

 

In a lot of these cases, while they don't need supervision 24 

hours a day, they do need some level of supervision.  They 

need to be able to count on someone to make sure that they get 

their medications every day, that they receive their food every 

day, that their homes are clean.  Now home care can provide 

some of that.  Home care is providing some of that.  And in 

those cases where seniors are still within their own homes, that 

is the place for home care, and home care needs to be funded 

more. 

 

We were increasing funding to home care and to the previous 

administration . . . and the minister has indeed increased 

funding to home care, but she has not increased funding to 

home care to such a level as to make up for the decrease in 

fundings to level 1 and 2 care.  Home care cannot pick up the 

load that is being dumped on them by the elimination of level 1 

and 2 care facilities.  Home care is stretched to the limit 

already, and the small amount of monies that the Minister of 

Health has allocated for further projects within that program 

will not cover the load that they will have to carry.  I have 

people calling me, Mr. Speaker, and writing letters with great 

concern about their local level 1 and 2 care homes, such as the 

Creighton Lodge in Estevan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, decisions like the elimination of the senior 

citizens heritage program, a budget decision which literally 

took monies away from the seniors, money seniors could have 

used to pay for their drugs, or their trips to the chiropractor, 

their trips to the optometrist, Mr. Speaker, to have their 

glaucoma 



668 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1993 

conditions checked. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the official opposition does not take this lightly; 

neither do the seniors of this province take this lightly.  The 

seniors of this province are being hit directly by the decisions 

made by the Minister of Health and they do not take it lightly. 

 

I've been approached by a number of seniors right here in 

Regina, Mr. Speaker, who are very concerned as to what this 

Minister of Health is doing to them, to their lifestyle, and to 

their standard of living.  They have a great deal of concern 

being expressed about exactly what the member from 

Saskatoon Broadway was speaking of while she was in 

opposition, that at $1,700 deductible for their drug plan, how 

are they to afford their groceries and how are they to afford 

their clothing. 

 

I had one senior tell me she was out shopping the other day and 

when she saw what the E&H (education and health) tax was, 

the provincial sales tax on clothing, that she was not going to 

be going out buying clothing any longer because she could not 

afford to pay the tax and because she could not afford to pay 

for the drugs that she needs.  And this woman is a diabetic, Mr. 

Speaker, and her health costs are high and she has to pay that 

herself.  There is no government program out there that helps 

her to deal with this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like to quote from a paper that came through 

my office one day, and it's entitled, Union Matters, March 

1993.  Now I never expected to be standing up here quoting 

from a union newspaper, Mr. Speaker, but it does make some 

good sense, what they have to say in this particular case.  And 

the headline on it is "Taxing the sick not the answer" -- because 

that's what the Minister of Health is doing -- and I quote: 

 

 The government should abandon a plan to tackle the debt by 

taxing the sick, says Nancy O'Donnel of the Saskatchewan 

Health Coalition. 

 

She later goes on to say: "Last year the NDP raised the annual 

drug plan deductible for families from 125 to $380." 

 

Well that was a significant change and it's even more 

significant -- I think the minister simply works in exponential 

numbers; that she tripled it one year and then she tripled it 

again, only this time it was six times greater than what it was 

last year -- because the deductible has now gone up to $1,720 

per year per individual.  Plus, overtop of that, they have to pay 

for 35 per cent of their further drug purchases. 

 

This is a significant increase, Mr. Speaker, and not many 

seniors can afford to pay those kind of increases.  I have a letter 

here, Mr. Speaker, that I'll like to quote from also.  It comes 

from the Kincaid Union Hospital and Kincaid is down in the 

south-west part of the province, farming and ranching 

community.  They have a great deal of concern about the 

minister's wellness model and how it's going to affect their 

communities in their area. 

 

(1500) 

 

They're talking about the health care reform plans that they 

received in their community and they discussed it at a meeting 

of July 13, 1992, and this letter is a result of that.  And I'll 

quote from it: 

 

 The board members feel that this new direction in health care 

will greatly reduce health services in rural Saskatchewan and 

destroy one of the best health care systems in the world. 

 

They feel that the minister's wellness model will destroy one of 

the best health care systems in the world.  And I quoted 

previously from the Premier who said that he was going to 

build one of the best health care systems in the world. 

 

Well it seems that the people from Kincaid feel they already 

have that and they feel what the Minister of Health is doing is 

going to destroy what they already have.  Quote further: 

 

 This is a farming community and it is a known fact that 

serious accidents can occur on the farms.  Without a hospital 

and a physician in the community, some of these accidents 

could result in fatalities.  Coronary care is important to 

everyone and without a hospital in our community it is felt 

that death could result from lack of immediate medical care 

by a physician.  We have an ageing population in our 

community who are not able to travel long distances for 

health services and we feel that if our hospital were to close 

these senior citizens would be denied proper health care 

which they deserve. 

 

And I have to agree with them.  And this letter was sent both to 

the minister, yes the Minister of Health, the member from 

Shaunavon, and to our health critic.  All the problems that the 

citizens of Kincaid pointed out in here are very real, Mr. 

Speaker. Farm accidents do happen and unfortunately they 

happen on too regular a basis.  Coronary care, as outlined by 

the person from Leader who spoke at the meeting the other 

night, with the heart attack, is of great concern to our citizens.  

And we do have an ageing population that are not able to travel 

the long distances. 

 

In a lot of cases, our seniors move into a community because 

there is a hospital available.  They don't move to those centres 

that don't have the hospitals.  They move to those centres 

which do have the hospitals, which have the doctors in them, 

and which have the other businesses within the area that can 

service them.  They need to be able to walk down to the 

grocery store and they need to be able to walk to the hospital 

and to the doctor's office. 

 

What the Minister of Health is proposing will not allow them to 

do that.  What they may actually end up having to do is use 

ambulance services whenever they want to go to the doctor.  

And the seniors can't afford 



March 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 669 

that because the Minister of Health raised the prices up on that 

too. 

 

Then the minister . . . the community of Kincaid also sent 

another letter to them -- the first one was dated July 17 -- sent 

another letter to the Minister of Health and this was dated July 

20, so it's only three days later, Mr. Speaker, and I'd like to 

read the letter to you.  It says: 

 

 Dear Minister of Health: In regards to your wellness 

approach to health care, the idea of promoting a healthier 

lifestyle, reducing stress, reducing depression and suicides in 

order to reduce our health care needs may sound like a good 

idea but here in the real world, in our small community, 

people still get into car accidents, farming accidents, have 

heart attacks, strokes, and just simply get sick and die 

regardless of their lifestyle. 

 

And that will continue to be the case.  The Minister of Health 

may suggest that we should all live a healthier lifestyle, and 

perhaps we should, but there's one thing for certain, Mr. 

Speaker, no matter the lifestyle that you do live, healthy or 

unhealthy, your time will come at the end and you will die.  

And no matter whether you've lived a healthy lifestyle that the 

Minister of Health wants or not, you will die.  While some of 

the members opposite seem to think that they're immortal, I 

would suspect that that is not the case, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To quote further: 

 

 You cannot legislate people into being healthy in a free 

country.  It is a personal choice.  Money that is now being 

spent on hospitals, jobs, doctors, and medication, will now be 

spent (under your wellness approach) on promoting a 

healthier lifestyle to people who will ultimately make up their 

own minds anyway.  In the end, you will be purchasing 

nothing.  This province has the most hospital beds per capita 

in the world. 

 

This was a quote: 

 

 This province has the most hospital beds per capital in the 

world. 

 

And the question was: 

 

 Is this a bad thing?  If this is a problem, it is because we have 

too few people, not too many beds. 

 

And I think that's very accurate.  The problem is we have too 

few people in Saskatchewan, not too many hospital beds.  And, 

Mr. Speaker, since August 21, 1991, the population of 

Saskatchewan has continued to decrease.  It has not grown.  

The buses haven't turned around in this province and come 

rushing back in.  No, the out-migration continues, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I carry on with the letter: 

Look at this problem from the aspect of your wellness 

approach and treat the problem, not the symptom.  Expend 

the amount of money and time going into reconstructing the 

health care system on getting the province working, 

attracting businesses and promoting trade.  I'm sure that in 

the end you will find we can afford our system. 

 

The people of Kincaid are suggesting, Mr. Speaker, that the 

government opposite promote Saskatchewan, that we build our 

economic base, that we encourage businesses to relocate in 

Saskatchewan and we create an environment by which they 

will come here and by which they will prosper. 

 

That we need to increase our tax base rather than destroying 

what we have, rather than imposing health care taxes on the 

property tax base which discourages people from coming into 

this province and setting up businesses, which discourage 

people in this province from even buying homes. 

 

I talked earlier about the seniors that will be taking their money 

and leaving this province.  That doesn't promote our economic 

tax base. That promotes Alberta's economic tax base, or 

Victoria's economic tax base, but it does not help 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I'll carry on with the letter: 

 

 Closing our hospital would be a fatal blow to our community.  

The jobs and population loss would only compound the 

problems that you are trying to solve. 

 

 Our system of health boards as it stands is an efficient way to 

see that each community's needs are met in regards to health 

care.  Dismissing our current health boards and replacing 

them with regional representation with the powers of taxation 

would result in taxation without representation. 

 

And I seem to remember that statement coming up some other 

point in history, perhaps in Boston. 

 

 In conclusion, I would like to encourage you to please 

address the real problems of this province and not the 

symptoms. 

 

And this was signed by the mayor of the village of Kincaid. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people at Kincaid expressed it very well for 

all the rural communities in Saskatchewan.  Some of the larger 

communities in Saskatchewan thought that perhaps under the 

minister's wellness model they would somehow escape the 

knife, but not with this minister, Mr. Speaker.  While some of 

those communities may indeed retain a hospital, that hospital 

will not be as they currently know it.  It will be nowheres near 

the size of what they currently have. 



670 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1993 

Even if, in the south-east corner of the province, Estevan was 

to gain the southern half of my constituency into their hospital 

district, there would still not be enough people within the area 

to maintain the number of beds in the new hospital that was 

built in Estevan.  Those beds would have to decrease by at least 

half if the minister's statements of 1.25 to 1.5 beds per thousand 

are to take place. 

 

And every hospital in this province other than those in Regina 

and Saskatoon will face exactly the same position.  They don't 

have enough population in most of the communities to 

maintain the hospital beds that are there.  Regardless of 

whether or not you have a hospital left there, you will lose 

beds, you will lose staff, you will lose people from your 

communities. 

 

I have a newspaper clipping here, Mr. Speaker.  The title of it 

is, "Rural hospitals feel fiscal squeeze", because that is exactly 

what the minister is doing to rural Saskatchewan.  That is what 

the entire government is doing to rural Saskatchewan.  It's just 

not in the health care system; it's in education and municipal 

governments.  It's right across the board. 

 

Agriculture -- the government bragged about how they were 

putting $12 million into agricultural research this year, when 

they cut it from 17.5 million.  Quite a thing to brag about. 

 

A quote from this clipping of February 18, 1993, the Leader-

Post: 

 

 And one speculated that the move was designed to start 

squeezing the fiscal life out of rural hospitals. 

 

 "I have a feeling we're being tested to see how long we can 

manage with less funding and more expenses," said Madonna 

Unterreiner, the chief executive officer and director of 

nursing at Bengough Union Hospital. 

 

Bengough Union Hospital.  Doesn't sound like they're real 

keen, Mr. Speaker, on the Minister of Health's proposals.  That 

they are trying to cut the heart out of rural Saskatchewan's 

health care system.  That they're being squeezed until they 

surrender.  That's what they're doing, Mr. Speaker.  The 

minister is squeezing them until they'll surrender and go into 

whatever form of district she wishes. 

 

I wonder what the response was from the member from 

Bengough-Milestone to her hospital boards in that area. Is she 

encouraging them to participate with the minister so that they 

can lose their hospitals?  Because once they go into the larger 

areas, there isn't enough beds to go around, Mr. Speaker, to 

maintain the hospitals in her area. 

 

The hospital for the people of that area -- for Bengough, 

Pangman, Radville -- will be either Estevan or Weyburn, or 

perhaps if they live far enough west in the area, Assiniboia, but 

there will be no hospitals in that constituency. 

Quote further on the clipping: 

 

 A very low-key announcement was made last week by the 

province's five regional hospitals about the end of the support 

services program. 

 

This program, Mr. Speaker, dealt with the services that the base 

hospitals provide to rural Saskatchewan.  They provide such 

things as dietary advice, drugs . . . They order drugs through 

the regional hospitals.  Perhaps 30, 35 hospitals will 

amalgamate and get one of the larger hospitals, the community 

. . . excuse me, not the community-based, the regional-based 

hospitals such as in my case it was the Plains hospital that was 

providing this service. 

 

They would provide these services out into rural Saskatchewan. 

Because of mass buying power, it was quite efficient.  They 

were able to save a lot of money.  They had staff on hand at the 

regional hospital, the Plains hospital, that would go out into the 

rural areas and visit each hospital and give them advice on 

nursing, on dietary care, on prescription drugs. 

 

So what did the Minister of Health do?  All of a sudden, bang, 

it's gone.  These hospitals had to turn around and try and 

scramble and find their own services.  One administrator told 

me that for certain drugs, without going through the purchasing 

power of a larger unit, was going to cost him three to five times 

as much money . . . cost the hospital three to five times as 

much money to provide the services that they were being 

supplied through the regional health services. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this is a severe blow to those hospitals.  

Their budgets were cut, they had no other place to gain access 

to funds, the taxpayers couldn't support them any longer and 

yet the minister is cutting those kind of services out of the 

budgets for them.  This is devastating. 

 

I'll quote Ms. Unterreiner.  She said, "We were never 

consulted". 

 

 "If wellness is one of the driving forces behind health reform, 

then this has been done backwards," said Len Harasen, 

administrator of Wynyard Union Hospital. 

 

 For example, consulting dietitians will be one of the services 

that will be lost from the various regional hospitals. 

 

And for what purpose?  I'm sure that the Minister of Finance 

appreciated the cost savings.  I just wonder how the member 

who represents Wynyard, what his remarks were to his hospital 

when these services were cut out of there.  Did he go to the 

Minister of Health and complain?  I never heard anything about 

it if he did.  Hopefully they did, Mr. Speaker.  Because these 

were services that were needed, that were essential to those 

communities.  With the Minister of Health cutting funds to 

those communities, where were they to find replacement 

money when the costs increase from three to five times . . . 300 

to 500 per cent increases overnight. 



March 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 671 

The director of the Bengough Union Hospital felt that, "Our 

diabetics will be forced to go elsewhere." 

 

(1515) 

 

And perhaps that's the key to it, Mr. Speaker.  People will be 

forced to go elsewhere for their health care.  They will be 

forced to go into the major centres or perhaps they will even be 

forced to go out of the province.  Because if they're forced to 

go into the major centres, then all of a sudden the minister can 

stand up and say: well look, nobody's using the hospital out at 

Bengough, so why do we need it; let's cut it, close it down.  

Because that's what the Minister of Health does indeed want to 

do.  She wants to close down most of the hospitals across 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I'd like to quote: 

 

 (a) Mr. Dick Chinn -- administrator of the Plains Health 

Centre, one of the regional hospitals -- (and the hospital that 

supplied regional health services to my communities) said a 

meeting will be held on March 2 with the 30 to 35 hospitals 

his institution served to see what could be salvaged from the 

situation. 

 

 Attempts were made to reach either Health Minister Louise 

Simard or Associate Health Minister Lorne Calvert for 

comment, but a cabinet press spokesman said they were 

unavailable for comment. 

 

Well that seems to be typical of the minister . . . with this 

government.  Whenever there is a meeting to be held out in 

rural Saskatchewan, they generally don't show up. 

 

In my case, as far as I know, two ministers have gone out, and 

that was just lately, in dealing with the Bear Claw Casino.  In 

my constituency the Minister of Health or the Associate 

Minister of Health have not showed up for one meeting.  

They've sent their bureaucratic flunkies out or their 

bureaucratic hatchet men, but the minister has never come out 

to speak to the people in the area, to explain what she's 

attempting to do and the reasons behind it.  No, no, Mr. 

Speaker, she hides in her marble tower, hides up in her office 

behind her oak doors, in case the public should ever find out 

what the real reason she's doing this. 

 

I have a letter that was printed in the paper, Leader-Post, 

December 23, 1992, from a Frank Plawucki -- and I apologize 

to him for mispronouncing his name. 

 

 The political philosophy that brought in medicare will 

dismantle it if elected to a second term. 

 

This is what he says: 

 

 The political philosophy that brought in medicare will 

dismantle it if elected to a second 

term. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I would almost think that they're going to 

have it mostly dismantled in their first term because they only 

will get one term.  I quote further: 

 

 Tax increases will continue at high rates despite the fact the 

government says we're "all taxed out". 

 

And we are, Mr. Speaker, and the people have said that in 

spades.  And I quote: 

 

 While the NDP did "open the books" of the previous 

government, we already knew the province's finances were in 

a serious mess.  The solution?  Huge tax increases in 1992. 

 

Well I wonder how this citizen likes the new tax increases in 

1993.  Provincial sales tax went up again by, what, 11, 12 per 

cent from 8 to 9 per cent.  Another quote: 

 

 The new NDP provincial executive had better get this group 

pointed in the correct direction.  Otherwise, political buffs 

will have a new trivia question: which two premiers led 

one-term governments?  The answer: J.T.M. Anderson and 

Roy Romanow. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that that will indeed be the case.  We 

have some new trivia that will be in place here after the next 

election for all the political pundits to quote. 

 

 D Leader-Post, August 10, 1992.  Headline: Hospital closures 

portend uproar. And this is written by Kevin O'Connor: 

 

 The mayor of Climax, population 268, doesn't mince words 

when he talks about what would happen if the government 

ever decided to close Climax Border Union Hospital. "It 

would be a disaster for us," Mayor Dick Enstrom says 

simply. 

 

And it would be, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what has the member from Shaunavon done to see to it 

that the Climax hospital remains open?  Will he stand up in this 

House and defend his communities and demand that the 

Minister of Health reconsider her decisions that 1.25 to 1.5 

beds per thousand be the directive for across this province?  

Will the member from Shaunavon talk to the Minister of 

Health and ask her to reconsider? 

 

Again I quote: 

 

 After all, the primary benefit of Saskatchewan's 

small-hospital system is obvious to anyone who's ever found 

themselves in need of medical attention in places like 

Theodore, Nokomis, Leoville, or Fillmore. 

 

And indeed we need these hospitals across this 



672 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1993 

province, Mr. Speaker.  The people of rural Saskatchewan need 

to know that their health care system, that their health, their 

children's health, is being protected.  And under the minister's 

proposals that is not the case. 

 

This clipping goes on to say: 

 

 The Conservatives for their part make no apologies for the 

pace of capital construction maintained during their 

administration.  "We continued to build nursing homes while 

you were buying potash mines." 

 

And this is from my colleague, the critic for Health, the 

member from Rosthern:  Many of these replacement hospitals 

that were built, and I quote, many were replacements for 

hospitals that dated back to the 1940s and the 1950s. 

 

And indeed, Mr. Speaker, I was born in one of those hospitals 

that was old at that time, in the 1950s.  I'm not going to tell you 

when in the 1950s, but in the 1950s.  And that hospital is still 

there today and it is in need of some renovations.  And the 

people of that community of Redvers would like to be able to 

go ahead and plan their future and do that construction.  They 

have their money in place and they're just waiting for the 

approval from the government opposite.  And I would suggest 

that they will wait in vain for this government to ever approve 

another hospital construction in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And I quote: 

 

 And for them, the prospect of having their local hospitals 

taken away is the final kick in the head from government and 

the beginning of more economic woes. 

 

Because that will indeed be the case, Mr. Speaker.  As the 

hospitals close, people will no longer have a reason to go and 

live in those communities.  They will no longer have as great a 

reason to go and visit those communities.  And so the 

economics of rural Saskatchewan will continue to decline, 

brought on by the Minister of Health and the government 

opposite, just as the inflation rate in this province is brought on 

by the government opposite. 

 

Newspaper clipping of August 18, 1992 from the Star-Phoenix.  

Headline: "Rural Areas Concerned over Health Care Changes".  

And this goes across the province, Mr. Speaker, not just in 

isolated communities, but every community.  And I quote from 

this article: 

 

 Kyle Mayor Ansgar Tynning worked 15 years to bring a 

modern hospital to his town. 

 

And he goes on to say: 

 

 Eliminating acute care beds would be the beginning of the 

end.  It's going to be tough to attract a doctor without those 

beds.  We have 34 senior citizens' housing units in town. 

These 

people need assurances a doctor will be there. 

 

The doctor the other night at the meeting in Leader stated that 

if the hospital in that community is cut down to the projected 

1.25, 1.5 beds per thousand, which would amount to between 

two and three beds in that hospital, that he will not be 

providing medical services within that community. That for 

him there was no point in being in that community with those 

few beds; that he needed more access to better medical 

facilities than what a two-bed hospital would provide.  And I'm 

sure that will be the case across this province.  That doctors 

will not continue to reside in the rural areas if they don't have 

access to acute care beds. 

 

We have a few doctors in my constituency that live in a 

community that do not have acute care beds, but they have 

access down the road, 10 miles perhaps, to a facility with acute 

care beds.  But if they had to travel 50, 60, 70 miles, 100 miles 

to get into a community with acute care beds, they will not be 

doing so.  The patients, the people who are sick in this 

province, will be travelling that 50 to 100 miles to find a 

doctor, not the other way around. 

 

Doctors in the cities don't even make house calls.  Doctors in 

rural Saskatchewan can't afford to make house calls, so the 

patients will be the ones that have to do the travelling.  So the 

economic burdens will be placed on patients, on the people of 

rural Saskatchewan, and not on the health care system. 

 

So that's just another method of offloading -- indirect taxation 

of the people of this province.  Hidden taxes.  And that's what 

this government is all about -- hidden taxes on the health care 

system, hidden taxes on education, hidden taxes on municipal 

governments.  And at the end, each and every one of us who's a 

property owner will be paying for the decisions made by the 

members opposite. 

 

I just wonder how the members opposite, when they return to 

their constituencies, explain that to their people.  Do they 

explain why next year when you receive your municipal tax 

levy, there is going to be a major increase. 

 

All you have to do is take a look at what your hospital is 

costing today, what your education system within your 

community is costing.  The education divisional board that I 

live within was looking prior to the budget at a possible cut of 

half a million dollars out of their education budget.  How are 

they going to make that up?  They're going to have to do one of 

two things. They're going to cut programs or they're going to 

tax you more.  And this government is doing that right across 

the board, and it's going to be tax more in every case. 

 

Ansgar Tynning goes on to say in this clipping, he said: 

 

 . . . that hospitals in Beechy, Dinsmore, Lucky Lake, Elrose, 

and Kyle likely will be closed by a health district board. 



March 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 673 

And I agree with him on that. 

 

 At Beechy, a fund-raising campaign to build a new hospital 

seems to be academic now.  Mayor Keith Andrews has a 

sense the town is on the hit list. 

 

There's a number of communities across this province that have 

money in place, that have been actively working to try and 

support their hospitals.  I attended a function two weekends ago 

in my constituency, that was to support the Oxbow Union 

Hospital.  And that's just in one community. 

 

Every community across this province has been doing 

functions like that to help to build their communities, and this 

government is cutting the heart out of that idea.  It's cutting the 

heart out of volunteerism in this province, because people need 

something to work for, and the destruction of their health 

system is not something that they are prepared to work for. 

 

A quote from the Star-Phoenix of August 19, 1992:  Don't fund 

health plan through property taxes -- SARM. 

 

I read from a letter sent by SUMA to the minister . . . or a news 

release by SUMA asking that very same thing: don't tax the 

property taxpayers to pay for health.  And I quote from it: 

 

 "The government will find rural municipalities adamantly 

opposed to any consideration of funding new health facilities 

through property taxes," says Bernard Kirwan, president of 

the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities. 

 

And this message, Mr. Deputy Speaker, comes not just from 

the president but from every rural municipality, from the reeves 

and councillors and indeed the taxpayers.  All you have to do is 

attend a few municipal meetings around the areas and you'll 

find that the taxpayers are complaining vehemently about the 

property taxes they are being forced to pay. 

 

I had a fellow come up to me just the other day and said: for 

education, property taxes in urban centres amounts to $12 per 

capita; in rural areas, in farming communities, it amounts to 

better than $2,000 per capita. 

 

The farmers of this province feel that they're already carrying a 

disproportionate burden of support for education.  And now the 

government opposite is proposing to download onto them the 

costs of the health care system. 

 

Kirwan says: 

 

 "SARM will argue strongly for elected boards that should in 

no circumstances be given authority to tax.  We just cannot 

continue on this insidious idea of taxing property for every 

conceivable social program that comes along.  It's killing 

initiative and it's driving businesses 

out of the province," Kirwan said. 

 

(1530) 

 

Well we agree with Mr. Kirwan when he demands that the 

boards be elected.  They should be totally elected, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, not some elected and some appointed.  Totally 

elected. 

 

The people in the districts, when they are formed . . . because 

the government will push this thing through unless the people 

rise up and demand otherwise.  These boards will have to be 

elected, Mr. Speaker, if the people of the communities are to 

feel any comfort at all.  It has to be their representatives that sit 

on those boards and make those decisions. 

 

It has to . . . and the government has to listen.  It has to be 

prepared to listen.  Not dictate, listen to what these boards have 

to say.  Because the Minister of Health up till now has not 

listened.  She has not listened at all.  In fact she hasn't even 

gone out to talk to the people, so they haven't had a chance to 

communicate with her. 

 

The government has to listen to what these boards say.  They 

have to be able to make their own funding decisions.  And that 

may very well mean, Mr. Speaker, that they want more funding 

than what the Minister of Health is presently proposing for 

them. 

 

It does not serve the purpose, Mr. Speaker, of having anybody 

elected to a board if you're simply going to tell them, well 

here's a little bit of money you're going to get and you make 

your own decisions after that.  They have budgets today and 

those budgets should be maintained, and let the people in the 

areas make the decisions as to what they want to do with that 

money.  It may very well be that they will rationalize, cut their 

system themselves, but I doubt it.  But they need to be given 

the opportunities to make their own choices, not have their 

choices imposed on them by the government. 

 

And as Mr. Kirwan says, taxes on property base, it's killing 

initiative and driving businesses out of this province.  And 

that's what this government has done since being elected in 

1991.  All their tax increases are doing exactly that.  They're 

killing initiative and driving the people out of this province, 

driving businesses away from this province.  The hotel chain 

that was coming to Melfort is gone.  Why?  Because of the 

minister's statements and because of the taxes that are being 

done in this province. 

 

Another quote from the Leader-Post of August 19, 1992, and I 

quote: "Simard rejects public hearings".  That's the headline, 

written by Mark Wyatt.  I'd like to quote it.  Dr. Hal Baldwin, 

the President of the Saskatchewan Medical Association is 

quoted in here and it says: 

 

 But Baldwin said he hopes that money spent on lifestyles, 

preventive medicine and wellness programs will not be taken 

out of the amounts available for traditional acute-care 

medical treatment. 



674 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1993 

That's right.  He's hoping that money being spent on wellness 

programs will not be taken out of the acute-care medical 

treatment areas.  Well that's what's being cut, Mr. Speaker.  

When you close down hospitals, when you move hospitals to a 

1.25 to 1.5 beds per thousand, that's what you're doing.  You're 

cutting it out of the acute-care medical treatment area. 

 

 Baldwin, who is attending the Canadian Medical 

Associations' annual meeting in St. John's, Nfld., said he is 

also concerned the creation of 20 to 30 health districts could 

create a situation where various districts are competing 

against each other for the best available facilities. 

 

And that is happening.  Communities are being pitted against 

community to try and salvage their hospital at the expense of 

somebody else.  Or as in the case of the south-east, where the 

communities have got together and have made a decision as to 

what the outline to their boundary they would like to have in 

place, they are getting a great amount of pressure from the 

department to go some place else.  Because it's the 

department's feeling, I believe, that they have a facility in mind 

that they want to see be the central location for the regional 

health district and the other hospitals in the area will be closed 

because they don't . . . Under 1.25 to 1.5 you cannot maintain 

the number of hospital beds.  You can't even maintain those 

many hospital beds in Estevan, let alone bring in the 

surrounding communities. 

 

In my own area, under present circumstances, we have about 

80 hospital beds.  You move that to 12,000 people-base for the 

district hospitals, and you're at 15 to 18 beds.  So what do you 

do with the rest?  You have one facility for all the area.  Well 

it's a long ways across.  People can be driving 60, 80 miles to 

find a hospital, and that's not right, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Prior to the budget last year there was a pamphlet put out at a 

meeting in the Rosetown constituency, and it says, defend 

medicare; medicare is under attack.  And indeed by the 

Minister of Health from this very province, that's who health 

care is under attack by.  And it goes on to point out in this 

pamphlet about the increase in the drug plan to $380.  And now 

it's 1,720. 

 

At this particular time the people of the province were worried 

about health care premiums being imposed on them.  That was 

not the case, as it turned out.  But there were a significant 

amount of cuts. 

 

And what's really interesting about this, is that this pamphlet 

was being distributed in front of a meeting of the New 

Democratic Party in the Rosetown constituency, the Minister 

for the Environment's home seat.  And it asked that people 

contact him to get the government to change their directions. 

 

I'll read one piece here: Urge the Rosetown-Elrose NDP 

constituency executive to take a stand in defence of universal 

health care and to contact executive members. 

Well perhaps since the members of the Rosetown-Elrose 

constituency did manage to protect the health care system from 

user fees . . . not user fees, hospitalization fees, in this 

particular case, they should contact the Minister of Health 

again because they failed in protecting the citizens of this 

province from user fees, because that's exactly what we have 

now, dealing with chiropractic care, optometrists, dealing with 

diabetics.  We have user fees.  Perhaps they need to go back 

out again and contact people, contact their executive to get the 

Minister of Health to turn around. 

 

A quote from The Western Producer of March 16, 1989: 

 

 NDP opposition leader Roy Romanow said there is no doubt 

Saskatchewan needs a preventative health program that gives 

the same quality of care to everyone, but he doesn't like the 

sound of proposals to consolidate health care in rural 

communities. 

 

 "Consolidation very often is the catchword for closing down 

or something of that nature," he said. 

 

Well indeed, is that not somewhat prophetic of him?  Because 

that's exactly what his hand-picked, hand-chosen, the 

handmaiden of Health in this province, the member from 

Regina Hillsdale, is doing.  Her consolidation is indeed closing 

down hospitals in this province. 

 

And the now Premier says he doesn't like the sound of 

proposals to consolidate health care regions in rural 

communities.  Well he must be shaking in his boots now, Mr. 

Speaker, because that's exactly what his health care minister is 

doing. 

 

I wonder: how does he defend those kind of words?  Was he 

telling the truth here when he said he didn't like the sound of it, 

that consolidation is often the catchword for closing down?  

That's what he said.  Now what is the real story here?  Who 

was he trying to fool when he said that, or what is he doing 

now? 

 

Well I think what the case was, Mr. Speaker, was that: say 

anything you want as long as you get elected.  That seems to be 

the modus operandi of the members opposite. 

 

The NDP Minister of Health continually says that people will 

be protected, that if they do not have enough money they will 

be taken care of.  Is it true?  Or does this only apply to those on 

social assistance? 

 

What happens when social assistance rolls increase to a level 

where the government cannot afford to sustain them?  What 

happens to the people who are borderline, who do not receive 

any social assistance but do not have any spare cash in their 

pockets when they have to pay out their $1,720 plus their 35 

per cent?  What happens in those cases?  Do they get to claim 

social assistance? 



March 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 675 

What happens when Bill 3 forces even more people to social 

assistance?  I guess we'll have to ask the member from 

Saskatoon Broadway what she proposes in that kind of a 

circumstance. 

 

I'd like to read a few NDP health promises, and this is a quote 

from the Premier of October 3, 1993 on the Harasen line during 

the election campaign: We will not charge premiums or 

deterrent fees or utilization fees, as they are called, for a 

number of reasons.  Basically the fundamental is they are not a 

fair way to finance the health care program. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we haven't seen premiums, but we have 

seen deterrent fees and utilization fees.  As I mentioned a few 

minutes ago, we saw that with diabetics.  We see that with 

oxygen, that people now have to pay a large amount of money 

to receive oxygen.  We see it with chiropractic care and 

optometric care. 

 

These are indeed deterrent fees or utilization fees.  If you use it, 

you pay -- that's what this is saying.  And that's what the 

Minister of Health is doing with our health care system. 

 

Another quote from the Star-Phoenix of November 9, 1987. 

 

 While it's still three years away, the new leader, Roy 

Romanow, has begun building the platform for the next 

election.  He is starting with health care and promises . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Harper: -- To ask leave for the introduction of a guest, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Harper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to introduce to you and through you to all the members of 

the House a long-time friend of mine who is seated in your 

west gallery, Mr. Jim Feeley. 

 

Mr. Feeley, a former resident of Canora constituency who has 

for some time now been living here in Regina, has taken some 

time out of his busy schedule to be down here today and take 

into account some of the proceedings of the House here.  So I 

just ask all the members to give him a warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 3 (continued) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As I 

was quoting from the Star-Phoenix of November 9, 1987: 

 

 While it's still three years away, the new leader, Roy 

Romanow, has begun building the platform for the next 

election.  He is starting with health care and promises to 

restore the prescription drug plan and the children's 

school-based dental program, changed or dismantled by the 

PC government.  If the NDP forms the next government, 

health care will be its number one priority. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if health is the number one priority of this 

government, the rest of the departments are in very serious 

trouble.  In fact it makes one wonder, if health is the number 

one priority of this government, why do we have 18 ministers 

of the Crown?  Because the way the cuts are being . . . are 

happening in health care, there's no need for the other 

departments, because if they're lower on the list of priorities 

with this government, they're in very, very, serious trouble.  

And everyone had better be watching their back pockets when 

the ministers get around to visiting with them, if they ever do. 

 

Another quote from the Leader-Post, of April 19, 1991 from 

the Minister of Health: 

 

 "Why should the sick and elderly carry the burden of your 

incompetence?" 

 

I think that quote could be directed at her directly, totally, Mr. 

Speaker, because what she is doing with this health care system 

is and does demonstrate incompetence.  When the seniors of 

this province have to shoulder the tax burdens, when the sick of 

this province have to shoulder the tax burdens that she's 

offloading onto them, that is incompetent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another quote from the Leader-Post of March 26, 1991 and I 

quote: 

 

 NDP health critic Louise Simard immediately accused the 

government of eroding the health (care) system by starving it 

of money. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we increased funding to health care under 

the previous administration.  My colleagues that were here at 

the time looked after the people of Saskatchewan's health 

needs.  They built the system.  They built the nursing homes, 

Mr. Speaker, that had had a moratorium put on them from 1975 

to 1982 -- no new nursing homes within this province; no new 

nursing home beds within this province. 

 

What were the seniors supposed to do, not get older?  It would 

be nice if we could do that, Mr. Speaker.  And I'm sure some of 

the members opposite wish they could do that, but none of us 

can stop the ageing process.  We will all get older, Mr. 

Speaker, and there comes a time when we do need a place to 

retire to.  Hopefully we can retire to our own homes for a good 

many years, Mr. Speaker, but at some point in time for some 

people, there comes a need of some services 



676 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1993 

and nursing homes are one of those services which they need. 

 

And the government opposite, the Premier opposite, when he 

was in government in the Blakeney years, did not help.  They 

did not build any new nursing homes, any new nursing home 

beds from 1975 to 1982 when this province had money, Mr. 

Speaker, when they were buying holes in the ground, when 

they were paying sixteen and two-thirds per cent interest to 

borrow $450 million to build Saskatchewan Mining 

Development Corporation, they provided no nursing home 

increases for the people of this province. 

 

(1545) 

 

A quote from the Minister of Health, Leader-Post, April 27, 

1991: 

 

 the Devine years meant cutbacks, hospital bed closures and 

fired health care workers. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, those can be the exact quotes that will be 

used with the Minister of Health's name on there, rather than 

the member from Estevan.  Because that is exactly what her 

program means -- cut-backs, hospital bed closures, and fired 

health care workers. 

 

The member opposite is having a reign of terror across this 

province with the hospitals and the people who work in them.  

And there are words that can describe the effect that her 

wellness model will have, such as calamity, cataclysm, and 

catastrophe.  That is the effect that this Minister of Health is 

going to have on health care in the smaller urban centres and in 

rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

A quote from the member from Saskatoon Broadway, 

Hansard, November 4, 1987: 

 

 The health situation in this province is out of control . . . We 

have a drug plan where people are making decisions between 

groceries and prescription drugs.  Too little too late. 

 

Well now, Mr. Speaker, it's none at all.  If you are not on social 

assistance or can't prove that you're a senior with very high 

drug costs, you will pay $1,720 a year plus 35 per cent.  And 

this is the compassion and caring as demonstrated by both the 

Minister of Health and the Minister of Social Services. 

 

What's the Minister of Social Services, whose quote I just read, 

doing about this?  What's she doing to protect the people that 

she represents?  Not just those people on social service but the 

people of Saskatoon Broadway, the seniors that live in that 

area, the families with children that are ill that live in that area 

-- what's she doing about it?  We haven't heard "boo" from her 

when it comes to trying to slow down what the Minister of 

Health is doing. 

 

A quote from the Premier, Moose Jaw Times-Herald, February 

27, 1989, and I quote: 

 

 "Romanow said the Devine government has 

caused considerable harm to "the finest health care system in 

Canada" by "destroying" the prescription drug plan and the 

dental care program and not providing hospitals with 

adequate funds." 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of Kincaid agree with most of 

that statement.  The only thing is they would flip the names 

around.  Instead of it being the previous premier, it's now the 

current Premier who is not providing adequate funds, who is 

destroying the prescription drug plan.  And the people across 

this province are waking up to that fact, Mr. Speaker.  They're 

becoming very aware exactly what the people opposite are 

doing.  The Minister of Health can hide in this building but she 

will not be able to escape the wrath of the people of this 

province when it hits their communities. 

 

Another quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 "Health care and education have been underfunded and 

serious cuts have been made in these and other important 

services.  There has been increasing tax pressure on the 

business community, the home owner, and the farmer 

because of underfunding to municipal governments and 

school boards. 

 

And I agree totally with that, Mr. Speaker.  And I'm sure that 

when that was written, the members opposite agreed with it 

totally also.  Because that's a quote from The Commonwealth 

of December 1989.  The Commonwealth -- the NDP Party's 

own press organ. 

 

I have a few other quotes, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to read into the 

record.  And this comes from a document that we received in 

1992.  And it was the NDP wellness model for health care in 

Saskatchewan and it talks about decentralization.  And the 

quote from page 1 of this document is: 

 

 Services must be decentralized, coordinated, amalgamated, 

and changed to reflect economic reality in Saskatchewan in 

1992. 

 

In another quote dealing directly with decentralization . . . As 

the member from Saskatoon agrees with the first quote, I 

wonder if she'll also agree with the second one: 

 

  . . . health care costs . . . (are) spiralling out of control, and 

that's a phrase that we've heard a lot these last (few days) few 

years.  Yes, we've heard it many times, and it's all part of the 

PC rhetoric to try and get people to believe that medicare 

cannot be properly financed and cannot be publicly funded 

without cut-backs, without cut-backs or some form of 

rationalization or without privatization of health care 

services.  That's all part of the PC rhetoric to attempt to 

convince people that in the province of Saskatchewan we 

cannot afford medicare as we know it . . . we have to make 

changes. 



March 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 677 

And this is a quote from the member from Regina Hillsdale, 

the current Minister of Health, from Hansard, June 5, 1990, 

page 1810.  Well this document, this wellness model, this quote 

from decentralization comes from the document from the 

minister's department, from the one that she used in designing 

the wellness plan.  And in one place it says, decentralization is 

good.  And her quote from Hansard says it's bad.  Well which 

one is it, Mr. Speaker? 

 

We now see that she's encouraging privatization of the health 

care system.  Because with her cut-backs it has increased the 

privatized fees . . . the services provided by the private 

corporations to health care such as Blue Cross, MSI (Medical 

Services Inc.), and Group Medical insurance. 

 

They're filling in the gap, Mr. Speaker, left by the Minister of 

Health.  But not everybody in this province can afford to have 

the additional health coverages.  But the Minister of Health 

doesn't seem to be too concerned about that.  The Minister of 

Health is encouraging privatization which she condemned in 

Hansard in 1990.  But now she's encouraging it. 

 

Another quote from the wellness model, dealing with 

advertising.  From page 2, I quote: The wellness project heard 

about the need to devote more time and money to health 

promotion. 

 

I'll read another quote from the Minister of Health also from 

June 5, 1990, in Hansard: 

 

 For example, I referred to the advertising and promotion 

campaign that this government is undertaking.  And I believe 

that although there is some room for health promotion, 

advertising of health promotion, that this government has 

gone overboard . . . 

 

Her own words, Mr. Speaker, is that she condemns health 

promotion advertising and yet in her wellness project she's 

advocating it.  Again it's a total flip-flop, Mr. Speaker, a total 

flip-flop. 

 

In 1990 it was said to get elected.  In 1992 it's what she's doing 

once she's elected.  And there were changes even from 1992. 

The advertising that the minister is putting out in supporting 

her current program, Mr. Speaker, is just a snow job.  She's 

trying to fool the people into believing that what is being done 

is in their best interests.  Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of this 

province are seeing through that.  It may be a snow job to blind 

people but the people are seeing it, even those that have 

difficulty, Mr. Speaker, because they have to pay now for their 

optometric services, understand what the Minister of Health is 

doing to them. 

 

Again from the wellness model dealing with health boards:  

The new health districts will be governed by interim boards 

appointed by the Minister of Health.  These boards will assume 

all responsibilities and powers now held by the districts.  From 

page 8 of that document. 

I quote again from the Minister of Health from Hansard of 

June 5, 1990: I would like to know, Mr. Minister, how there 

will be more community input by removing boards from rural 

Saskatchewan in small communities and replacing it.  That's 

what she said in 1990. 

 

Again from Hansard: And the small communities are very 

concerned, Mr. Minister, because they believe that the regional 

board will put the emphasis on the regional hospital as opposed 

to their small hospital. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that's exactly what we're seeing happening 

today.  That's why in my area the steering committees have 

formed what they consider to be the proper boundaries.  

They've got together with everybody in the area, they've got 

their 12,000 people, they have their boundaries as they see 

them.  And then all of a sudden they get a phone call from a 

Rus Duncombe from the department and says no, we want you 

to come to a meeting on Tuesday night in Lampman to meet 

with Estevan steering committee. 

 

What's the reason for this?  The people representing the health 

districts, the steering committees in my area, had what they 

considered to be the proper boundaries.  Why is it all of a 

sudden that they have to come to a meeting to talk with the 

Estevan district?  They have the district that they want, Mr. 

Speaker, but it's not good enough for the Minister of Health 

because it doesn't give her what she wants.  And she wants the 

hospital in Estevan to be the district hospital in that area so she 

can eliminate the rest of the hospitals. 

 

If the people in the area get the district as they've outlined it, 

they will continue to have some hospitals in their area.  But 

under the Minister of Health's designs, they will not have that. 

 

Again I quote from the Minister of Health in Hansard from 

June 5, 1990: And if it means eliminating large numbers of 

community boards, then it is reducing community input, which 

is one of the things that is so important in our health care 

system. 

 

I agree with that.  It is very important that the communities 

have the opportunity to have some direct input into what is 

going to happen in their communities.  But the minister hasn't 

been out to hear what the people have to say.  The bureaucrats 

have been out, not to listen, but to pass information on.  But 

when they get there, they have no information to pass on to 

anybody.  Their answer is, well I don't know; it hasn't been 

decided yet.  Sorry, we can't tell you that. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, until the minister is prepared to go out there 

and be part of the process and listen to what the people have to 

say, there will be no community input. 

 

A final quote from the minister, of June 5, 1990: The 

decentralization will result in disparities across the province. 

 

And that is indeed the case, because the hospital 



678 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1993 

districts will have the power to ask municipalities -- not 

requisition, but to ask that the municipalities in their 

jurisdiction voluntarily put some money into the health care 

systems. 

 

Also through the government, they will have the power to use 

the hospital revenue tax Act to tax the property base.  Nobody 

knows yet how that money is going to be distributed, Mr. 

Speaker.  Will it come into central funding into the 

Consolidated Fund to be dispersed around the province, or will 

it come into the regional health districts?  We haven't had any 

answers.  The government members won't discuss the hospital 

revenue tax Act. 

 

So when the district boards request money, request that the 

municipalities volunteer some funds for the health districts to 

maintain their hospital, some communities have the financial 

capabilities to do so.  Others do not, Mr. Speaker.  And those 

communities which do not have the capabilities to provide 

additional funding to their regional health districts will have 

second class health care in this province. 

 

Some communities -- take the potash mines -- they have a good 

tax base.  The oilfields, pulp mills, they have the tax base to tax 

that can provide some monies.  Those areas that just are farm 

communities, Mr. Speaker,  do not have the capabilities to pay 

additional taxes to support a health care system.  So in those 

areas where there is not the capability to pay an additional tax, 

the health care system will deteriorate, and we will have the 

two-tiered health care system that everybody fears in this 

province. 

 

Again from the minister's health care wellness model 

discussing hospital closures, and I quote from page 11 of the 

document:  A total of 66 small facilities in Saskatchewan 

having less than 10 acute care beds, these small hospitals must 

change to meet our new realties.  Ultimately some existing 

facilities may close. 

 

The quote from the Minister of Health, June 5, Hansard, 1990: 

 

 Now the Murray report does not say that rural hospitals 

would be closed.  It says hospitals with an acute daily census 

of less than 10 would be transferred into community health 

centres.  But let me tell you, Mr. Minister, people in rural 

Saskatchewan are interpreting that as leading to the eventual 

closure of their hospital.  And I want to know, Mr. Minister, 

whether you support that proposal and what you intend to do 

to make sure these hospitals remain viable . . . 

 

(1600) 

 

Well now that person who said that is now the Minister of 

Health, and what is she going to do to ensure that these 

hospitals remain viable?  Well, Mr. Speaker, I think we have 

seen what she is going to do.  She's going to close them, and 

that's exactly what she was complaining about. 

Ultimately some existing facilities may close, is what she says 

in her wellness model. A direct contradiction to what she said 

in Hansard on June 5, 1990, a direct contradiction, Mr. 

Speaker.  And how does the Minister of Health stand up and 

defend her changes.  I just don't understand how she can do 

that. 

 

I quote again from the wellness model concerning taxation:  

District boards will have revenue raising ability to support 

enhanced services or capital projects.  However the exact 

means for this will be decided as part of the consultation 

process.  Page 8. 

 

I just wonder, what consultation process?  The minister has not 

gone out into the rural areas of this province to consult with 

anybody.  She may well have consulted somewhat with SUMA 

and SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities).  That I don't know.  I haven't seen any 

evidence of it.  But from what we have from quotes from 

Bernard Kirwan, president of SARM, what we have from Ted 

Cholod, the president of SUMA, it doesn't seem like they're 

real keen on this idea of how taxes are going to be applied to 

the property tax base.  Because that's where it's going to have 

to come from.  Revenue-sharing abilities -- that's what she says 

-- revenue-sharing, revenue-raising abilities. 

 

Well the only place you can raise monies in this province is on 

the tax base or income tax, resource taxes.  Well they're already 

talking of raising $23 million on the tax base, the property tax 

base of this province.  And the people who are paying those 

property taxes can ill afford it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

A quote from the Leader-Post of May 3, 1990: Granting 

regional health districts authority to levy taxes could lead to 

inferior levels of health care in poorer parts of this province, 

claims the NDP. 

 

Well that's exactly what I was talking about, Mr. Speaker.  That 

we will end up with a two-tiered health care system in this 

province.  And that's what the NDP were saying in 1990.  All 

of sudden the tune has changed. 

 

Another quote from the Leader-Post of May 3, 1990, and I 

quote, talking about the Minister of Health:  She noted the 

government is already passing costs onto municipal 

governments and school boards and wondered whether the 

government will not shift its responsibility for health funding to 

the regional divisions. 

 

Well that's exactly what she's doing, Mr. Speaker, exactly.  

From the same Minister of Health from Hansard of June 5, 

1990: 

 

 The concern that I have and that many others have with 

whom I have spoken with respect to taxing authority is that it 

opens the door for offloading, for the provincial government 

to offload onto municipalities and property taxpayers because 

with this new taxing authority . . . because this new taxing 

authority will have the right to tax property taxpayers. 



March 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 679 

Well that's our whole premise, Mr. Speaker, with the idea of 

bringing up the repeal of the hospital revenue tax act, is to 

eliminate what the minister herself was complaining about, was 

the government's authority to tax property taxes. 

 

The government exercises its authority to tax resources within 

this province.  It exercises the authority to tax consumables in 

this province.  It exercises the authority to tax incomes in this 

province.  But the municipalities, the school boards have the 

power to tax the property tax base, not the provincial 

government.  The provincial government has that authority 

with the hospital revenue tax act and it has been used very 

sparingly up till now. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, once this wellness model passes, that will no 

longer be the case, that will be the rule -- that every property 

taxpayer in this province will be supporting health care directly 

through their property taxes.  If you're not a property tax owner 

that may sound fine to you, but if you rent property, you will be 

paying that tax indirectly through your rent.  The owner of the 

property will be paying the taxes but the renters of this 

province will be paying that as a direct cost. 

 

And fact is, most property taxpayers if they're renting out their 

property, wish to make a small profit on that so that they can 

maintain their facilities or rebuild at a certain time when the 

property becomes deteriorated.  So they make a profit, they 

make a percentage of a profit over and above their expenses.  

When property taxes for education and health increase on that 

property tax base, the renters of this province will be paying 

even a greater percentage than just the increase. 

 

A quote again from the wellness model dealing with 

privatization, and I quote:  In general the assets and liabilities 

of the current health boards will be assumed by the district 

boards. 

 

Well that sounds logical when you stop and think about it a 

little bit.  But when you delve a little deeper below the surface 

of what is being said here as to what are the assets and 

liabilities of the current health boards, you'll find in a lot of 

communities, Mr. Speaker, a lot of rural communities, that the 

people of those communities have voluntarily gone out and 

fund raised and raised money.  They collect bottles, they put on 

dances, they put on plays, all a manner of social functions that 

are held within rural Saskatchewan, are used to provide 

additional funds for their health, for their hospital districts. 

 

This minister is proposing . . . or was proposing to take that 

money from those people, that if they had a half a million 

dollars sitting in the bank for their health care hospital, that this 

Minister of Health would take that money.  Well I know, Mr. 

Speaker, that in a good many communities across this province, 

that the people of those communities are not prepared to give 

that money up.  They are prepared to take that money and turn 

it back to the people who voluntarily gave it to 

them, but they are not prepared to let the government get their 

hands on that money. 

 

A quote from the Minister of Health, June 5, 1990, from 

Hansard: 

 

 . . . the concern has been expressed that giving the power to 

regional boards to own and run all health care facilities in the 

region could result in privatization of some . . . (small) 

hospitals . . . 

 

And we've seen that happen, Mr. Speaker.  Yellow Grass has a 

private facility, not a hospital but a nursing home, and this will 

increase across this province if the Minister of Health goes 

ahead with her proposals. 

 

Again from the wellness model concerning job losses: some 

jobs will change, some jobs will disappear. 

 

Quote from the Minister of Health, April 23, 1991, in Hansard: 

 

 . . . although it's important for the health care system to move 

its emphasis towards health promotion and disease 

prevention, towards the home care and community care 

model, although that's important and we have been urging 

this government to do that over a number of years, they 

should not do it on the backs of the institutions, on the backs 

of the nursing homes, and on the backs of nurses and health 

care professionals working in those institutions. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when a hospital closes in your community, 

who loses their job?  It's the health care worker.  When a 

nursing home closes, when level 1 and 2 care homes close 

around this province, who's going to lose their jobs?  It's the 

health care workers. 

 

And that's exactly who the Minister of Health was talking 

about in 1991, but all of a sudden that seems to be forgotten.  

And perhaps that's why the move was made with the VON 

(Victorian Order of Nurses) in this city, to eliminate them from 

the health care service that they were providing to home care.  

Because if some of these facilities close, there's going to be a 

need for the nurses that were working there, for the health care 

professionals that were working in those institutions to go some 

place. 

 

And all of a sudden we have an opportunity in this city, with 60 

new nurses having been hired by home care, for those nurses 

coming out of the other facilities to be bumped.  It seems to be 

the way the unions work things.  If you've got seniority, you 

get the job; if you're a new person in the system, you're out the 

door.  And this is perhaps why the VON was eliminated, Mr. 

Speaker, in providing health care in this city. 

 

Again from the wellness model, talking of nurses: 

 

 Nurses will increasingly be the primary (care-givers) . . . in 

many communities . . . and (assume) other expanded roles 

where required. 



680 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1993 

Again from the Minister of Health, June 7, 1990, from 

Hansard: 

 

 Obviously there has to be a doctor on staff in an advisory 

capacity . . . 

 

Well again that's a contradiction of terms to what the minister 

was saying earlier or what the minister said in her wellness 

model, that nurses were going to be required to become the 

primary care givers in many communities. 

 

That leaves the doctors out.  The doctors are still needed in 

rural Saskatchewan.  They have been needed there up till now 

and they continue to be needed there.  And when you close 

down the small rural hospitals, when you close the nursing 

homes, there is no longer a facility to accommodate that doctor.  

The need is still there, but the facilities are no longer there to 

accommodate the services that the doctor can provide.  So that 

doctor will move on down the road to the city and provide his 

services from that point, and the citizens of this province are 

going to have to commute into the city to visit the doctor rather 

than having the doctors in their own communities. 

 

And I think what the Minister of Health is doing in making the 

decisions dealing with health and how she expects to get her 

desires fulfilled can be exemplified by this news release that 

we received today from the Minister of Finance.  It's dated 

March 29, 1993.  We received it March 29, 1993, dealing with 

the Saskatchewan Pension Plan.  And I'll read you one line . . . 

write a letter of intent of withdrawal and postmark it by 

midnight, March 29, 1993. 

 

So you put out a news release on the same day as the deadline, 

and that's how the Minister of Health is dealing with this health 

care system.  She's got a deadline in place and she's going to 

hold up the situations until she has the opportunity to make the 

decisions, rather than the people of this province. 

 

I received a letter the other day, dated March 22, from a lady in 

the Bengough-Milestone constituency, a Betty McDonald.  

And she had some concerns about the health care system and 

what was being done in her area.  And I'd like to quote a little 

bit from it: 

 

 Also the medicare putting the prescriptions up that is stupid . 

. . 

 

Mr. Speaker, this senior is not at all impressed with what the 

Minister of Health has done with the prescription drug 

program, and she expresses it quite strongly.  She will not be 

able to access the government's benefit programs because she is 

not on social assistance.  So she will be forced to pay from her 

small income the $1,720 plus the 35 per cent above that to 

supply herself with the necessary drugs that she needs to 

maintain her existence. 

 

She goes on to say, and I quote: 

 

 We need the same medicare and small hospitals as the cities 

are too busy already, 

people are going to be dying before they can get any 

attention. 

 

She's very concerned about that, Mr. Speaker, because she feels 

that if the hospitals close, she will not be able to reach a 

hospital in time to do her any good.  That if she has to travel 

50, 60 miles to reach a hospital . . . and that's about the distance 

it is from Ceylon to Weyburn.  It's even greater than that; it's 

probably close to a hundred miles from Ceylon to Regina.  If 

that's the distance she has to travel, she's very concerned that 

she will not be able to reach a hospital in time to receive the 

attention that she needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a number of questions that I'd like to ask of 

the Minister of Health, and I'm hoping that when she rises to 

speak, that she will address some of these, and that is 

concerning the tax base.  Will she guarantee that there will be 

no additional costs on the tax base of this province? 

 

We've seen the concerns as expressed by Mr. Cholod and Mr. 

Bernard Kirwan.  That same concern is being expressed across 

this province at the various municipal meetings and at the 

steering committee meetings when people come together to 

discuss this plan.  That's one of their major concerns.  And will 

the minister guarantee that there will be no additional costs on 

the property tax base? 

 

Will the minister come forward and make a statement that 

when communities come together and form a health care 

district that they find acceptable, will the Minister of Health 

accept those boundaries?  She's got a guideline set out, of 

12,000 people.  If they meet that guideline, will those 

boundaries be respected and will those people be allowed to 

form the districts that they want? -- not the districts that the 

Minister of Health may want, but rather the districts that the 

people in the area want. 

 

(1615) 

 

It was expressed to me, Mr. Speaker, by some of the people on 

the steering committees that the information they were 

receiving was not timely, that others within the steering 

committee structure around the province were receiving the 

information weeks before they did.  They felt they were being 

excluded from the system.  They felt that some of the 

information they were receiving was not honest, that there was 

false information being provided to them, or that information 

was lacking. 

 

And I would like a commitment from the minister that she will 

provide the information in a timely and accurate manner so that 

the people of the communities can make their decisions based 

on the real information and the real intent of this government. 

 

I'd like to ask the minister, does she already have a set of maps 

drawn up in her office that outline what the district health 

boards will be that she was prepared to impose on the people?  

Because when her bureaucrats come out, oh no, it's going to be 

left up to you, is what 



March 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 681 

they say.  And yet then they turn around and get another phone 

call -- come to this meeting because we want you to discuss 

with another health district how we're going to set up your 

boundaries. 

 

Well there's a contradiction there, Mr. Speaker.  Either the 

people have the right to choose their own boundaries or the 

government's going to impose them.  So which one is it?  The 

minister needs to come clean on that and outline what she plans 

to do. 

 

In our area we've had a fellow by the name of Rus Duncombe 

who's in the department come out.  And he seems to be the 

minister's hatchet man in this particular case.  He came out to a 

steering committee hearing the other day, and when they 

complained about what was going on he said, that's why I get 

paid the big bucks is to come out here and listen to you and tell 

you what you're going to do. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this does not . . . this isn't consultation.  

This does not lead to any spirit of cooperation.  I think the 

minister needs to rethink who she's sending out.  And the fact is 

the minister, Mr. Speaker, needs to go out and meet with the 

people.  Because if the people . . . if the health care steering 

committees are going to be told what the boundaries are going 

to be, why did the minister allow them to waste seven months 

of their time? 

 

And while we're discussing who gets closed and who gets to 

stay open, I think we need to bear in mind, Mr. Speaker, that 80 

per cent of the hospital funding is spent in Regina and 

Saskatoon, the base hospitals, and only 20 per cent is spent in 

rural Saskatchewan.  Well even if you save 50 per cent of the 

money spent on rural hospitals, you've only saved 10 per cent 

of the health budget.  That same amount of dollars could be 

saved by cutting only a few percentage out of that money being 

spent on the base hospitals.  And perhaps the minister should 

redirect her thoughts and redirect where she is planning on 

making her cutting. 

 

One of the things that people in rural Saskatchewan took a 

while to pick up on but are catching on very fast to it now, Mr. 

Speaker, some of the larger centres thought that well we're in a 

good position here because we've got a larger hospital and we 

can draw everybody in from around our area and we'll be safe.  

But, Mr. Speaker, they didn't take into account two parts of the 

minister's program -- the one that says you will only be allowed 

to have 1.25 to 1.5 beds per thousand. 

 

As I mentioned earlier, in my communities, that means 15 to 18 

beds.  So if you split that 15 to 18 beds up between two 

hospitals, and we currently have four, that still only gives you 

seven to nine beds per hospital. 

 

But the Minister of Health has another statement out there, that 

beds with less than 10 acute care daily census will be closed.  

So while you may think your community is going to be safe 

because you have a larger hospital in a larger community, if 

you get down below 10 acute daily census, your hospital is also 

in 

danger of closure, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I have a quote from March 29, 1993 in the Leader-Post, and 

the headline says "Rally opposes health-care changes."  There 

was a meeting, Mr. Speaker, in Prince Albert. About 300 

people attended, and this event was organized by the 

Concerned Citizens for Health Care.  And what they did, Mr. 

Speaker, and I quote from this: 

 

 They oppose Prince Albert Health Board's decision to make 

the Victoria Union Hospital the sole acute-care hospital in 

Prince Albert. 

 

 Speakers called for a freeze on all decisions made by the 

board until a majority of its members are elected.  Presently 

all 12 board members are appointed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the minister came forward with this Bill 

initially, that's what we called for, that the people on these 

regional health boards be elected, that they be elected to 

represent the people in their communities -- not elected to 

represent the Minister of Health, not appointed to the boards to 

represent the Minister of Health, but elected to represent the 

people of those communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health should go out, should put 

in place a set of meetings around this province.  She should 

have public hearings to allow the people of this province to 

express themselves, to express their ideas to her and what they 

see as the future of health care in this province, to outline what 

their needs are and what their wants are. 

 

The Minister of Health should cease to hide in this Legislative 

Building and go out and meet the people and see what they 

have to say.  She may not get the message she wants, Mr. 

Speaker, and that's why she is hiding in here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that the Minister of Health and the 

Premier and the government opposite are simply toying with 

the people with the health care issues.  They're telling them that 

we will allow you to be part of the decision-making process.  

And yet when the people of the areas do make their plans, do 

participate and do plan, then they are sidetracked.  They are 

eliminated from the process so that the Minister of Health will 

be able to make the plans that she wants. 

 

And I say that the government opposite is toying with the 

people, with the residents of this province, because they have 

no plan.  They had no plan when they got elected and they still 

have no plan.  Their only plan for health care, Mr. Speaker, is 

to get well, stay well, or farewell. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to move: 

 

 That we move to Bill 10, the repeal of The Hospital Revenue 

Act. 

 

Seconded by the member from Maple Creek. 



682 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1993 

The division bells rang from 4:23 p.m. until 4:33 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

Boyd Haverstock 

Britton  

-- 7 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Johnson 

Thompson Trew 

Simard Draper 

Tchorzewski Serby 

Koskie Sonntag 

Solomon Flavel 

Atkinson Cline 

Kowalsky Scott 

Carson Wormsbecker 

Mitchell Kujawa 

Penner Crofford 

Hagel Stanger 

Bradley Knezacek 

Koenker Harper 

Lorje Kluz 

Lautermilch Carlson 

Calvert Langford 

Murray  

-- 35 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to say a 

few words about this Bill.  Mr. Speaker, the health district Bill, 

Mr. Speaker, is finally being debated in the House.  The people 

of my constituency are concerned.  Part of my constituency has 

already been notified by government as to how many . . . how 

the government sees where the boundaries should fit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they are quite concerned not only as to where the 

boundaries are, as they're willing to accept the fact that some 

changes should be made and could be made, but they're very, 

very concerned as to how they will be made and what the final 

cut will be when these changes are made. 

 

As a for instance, as my colleague from Kindersley pointed 

out, the hospital in Kindersley alone has 55 beds.  And in the 

border that was set, proposed by the government, in that area 

suggest twenty-two and one-half beds for the whole area.  And 

it's got some of the smaller hospitals really concerned as to who 

and where and what is going to be left in that area, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I've been reading the papers and I've been listening to the 

Assembly here, talking to hospital administrators, the local 

officials, watching and waiting for news for some time 

regarding this issue.  The new boundaries, for instance, will 

recognize twenty-two and a half beds is all.  That's 1.5 beds per 

thousand population.  And that hardly seems fair when you 

look at the town of Kindersley with 55 beds themselves.  That's 

a tremendous cut in beds. 

And I must say that the minister responsible for Health is not 

really telling the whole truth, Mr. Speaker.  The real story is 

that these health districts in many, many communities are 

against them.  They're against this type of health care districts.  

And, Mr. Speaker, what we're afraid of, these districts will give 

the minister the scapegoat that she's been searching for to 

offload not only the costs but offload the responsibility of 

doing her job. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it's no surprise that the NDP are looking to 

close many rural health centres, health facilities, to cut services 

to people.  Their leaked wellness plan documented it last year.  

Mr. Speaker, the original leak clearly outlined the NDP plan to 

close or convert 66 health facilities -- all in rural Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker.  And it also talked about many jobs disappearing. 

 

And when you realize that only 20 per cent of the total health 

budget is spent out in the rural areas, Mr. Speaker, it makes 

these people very, very nervous, and they feel they're being let 

down.  They feel that they're being betrayed, when we consider 

there's only 20 per cent of the total budget goes out to the rural 

people and then they're going to cut that quite dramatically 

again. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the NDP didn't seem to have to implement 

the wellness plan to make jobs disappear.  They didn't have to 

do that if they wanted to make jobs disappear.  There are 

10,000 less jobs already in this province, and that was before 

the members were in charge, Mr. Speaker.  That's how many 

jobs you've lost since they took over. 

 

And what Bill 3 does for the minister, exactly what she needs -- 

someone else to lay the blame on, to light up the blame 

thrower.  It's a predetermined, self-fulfilling prophecy, Mr. 

Speaker.  It seems the NDP like to blame everyone.  They 

blame everyone but themselves, Mr. Speaker, for the 

destructive choices they are making, and Bill 3 allows the 

minister to pass the buck to the health boards. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when the minister was questioned about 

such actions as closing the entire wing that treats severely 

handicapped children at the Wascana Rehabilitation Centre, 

she said, the decision is not mine; it's the Regina Health 

Board's decision and I won't interfere.  Well again light up the 

blame thrower, light it up and blame somebody else. 

 

That's what I'm saying, Mr. Speaker, when this wellness plan 

gives that minister exactly what she wants and that is a way to 

unload the responsibility of making the changes in health that . 

. . Most people will accept there needs to be a change but 

certainly not the changes that has been advocated by that 

minister, Mr. Speaker. 

 

She also pretended not to know that the parents' association of 

about 800 handicapped children had contacted her office on 

many occasions.  She refused to accept that, Mr. Speaker.  

Again I feel she is abrogating her responsibility as Minister of 

Health. 



March 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 683 

Especially, Mr. Speaker, when you look back through our 

records and you find what she had to say when she was in 

opposition. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I can go through many things but I want to 

read into the record, a letter that I received from a taxpayer.  

And I will just read this, Mr. Speaker: A taxpayer phoned me 

this morning, after she was listening to Roy Romanow on a talk 

show with Peter Gzowski.  If I am correct, and he said, that the 

NDP do not believe in user fees for health programs, etc., she 

would like you to ask Roy Romanow if they do not believe in 

user fees, what the fees for optometrist and chiropractic 

services are. 

 

This is a letter, Mr. Speaker, that I received.  This lady wants 

me to ask the Premier, if you don't believe in more taxes, what 

are those fees if they're not a tax on people. 

 

Here's a quote from the Premier.  And this is to do with their 

promises of a few years ago:  We will not charge premiums or 

deterrent fees or utilization fees as they are called for a number 

of reasons.  Basically the fundamental is they are not a fair way 

to finance the health program. 

 

And that was on the Harasen line, October 3, 1991.  And that 

was a quote by Roy Romanow. 

 

And I'll quote you another one from the same person.  And this 

was in The Commonwealth of March 1988: New Democrats 

would continue the fight to restore social programs such as 

medicare, the dental and drug plans to their former place of 

leadership in Saskatchewan. 

 

(1645) 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when you compare what they're saying 

there and what they're doing now, I don't think there's any 

wonder why my people are coming to me and saying, what is 

going on?  What did we get when we put these people in 

power?  The Minister of Health did not answer any phone calls 

from these people, or letters that were written by these 

concerned people, the parents of 800 handicapped children, Mr. 

Speaker -- wouldn't even return their calls. 

 

I say she's abrogating her responsibility.  When you are elected 

to government, you expect to take the tough calls along with 

the good calls.  And in addition, both the Minister of Health 

and Royce Gill, from the minister's hand-picked Regina Health 

Board, Mr. Speaker, were invited to the parents' association 

meeting where the parents were told the children's wing would 

have to be closed.  Neither one of them showed up.  She doesn't 

like to interfere I guess. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that attending a meeting 

where your presence was requested to talk about the closing of 

a children's wing is not interfering.  That is being there and that 

is listening. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I suggest her actions were reprehensible and she 

blamed it again on the Regina Health Board. 

Light up the blame thrower again.  Blame the health board.  

Again, Mr. Speaker, shirking her responsibilities. 

 

Later, Mr. Speaker, when the Minister of Health was on the 

Lorne Harasen show, she said that parents in the gallery on the 

day these questions were asked by the opposition -- and I want 

to quote what she said -- were grandstanding.  Grandstanding, 

Mr. Speaker.  Well that seems to say that the only reason that 

they were there in the gallery, Mr. Speaker, was to grandstand, 

and not for the concern for their children.  That's an astonishing 

remark.  That's an astonishing remark, Mr. Speaker.  How 

unfeeling and callous, how typically socialist.  The end justifies 

the means.  Mr. Speaker, the minister's comments and the 

behaviour of her and her colleagues on that day that those 

questions were put, was not acceptable, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One mother of a handicapped child, sitting in the gallery that 

day, told us she had never been so insulted in her life, never 

been so insulted when she looked down and saw the Premier 

and the Minister of Health laughing, laughing at their concerns.  

Insulted by the very people whose . . . they were elected to help 

these kind of people. 

 

Not only did she say that, Mr. Speaker, she said that if she 

could have gotten a good shot at the Premier, she would have 

thrown her crutch at him, right from the balcony, Mr. Speaker.  

Well can you blame her?  Can you actually blame that mother 

for that kind of concern?  Well I can't, I can't, Mr. Speaker.  My 

children are very dear to me, the same as yours are to you, sir, 

and all of the members here, I would hope.  Now the Premier I 

can't . . . can't comment because I understand he don't have 

children. 

 

But I can understand her anger and I can understand the hurt 

she must have felt to be accused of grandstanding when she 

brought her children here to be looked at, and the very people, 

the Health Minister and the Premier, the Premier of our 

province, laughing at her concern.  Astonishing. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, she along with many other parents are 

facing the closure of a facility vital to the well-being of their 

children.  And the minister and the Premier laughs and says, it's 

not my fault.  Ask the Regina Health Board.  Offloading the 

responsibility again.  Light up the blame thrower and tell other 

people to take the responsibility that they were elected for. 

 

The people of this province believed in their rhetoric.  They 

believed there would be no more taxes.  They believed that 

there would be more money in health care.  They did not 

believe that there would be wings closed, beds closed down, 

and chiropractic treatments not paid for, insulin not paid for. 

 

They believed those people.  And when people come for help, 

sit in the gallery, get laughed at.  I suggest that that will come 

home to roost at some time, Mr. Speaker. 



684 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1993 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if the minister really has nothing to with the 

health boards, then I say that we save the taxpayers about 

$80,000 and just relieve her of her duties.  She's not responsible 

for that; how about just forgetting about her?  And here's the 

place for the Premier to cut his cabinet by one at least.  We 

have a minister that won't take responsibility; then I suggest 

maybe we don't need it. 

 

I want to read to you from a news release called: defend 

medicare.  Mr. Speaker, the reason this is pertinent to Bill 3 is 

because it was just before the last budget.  That was before the 

last budget. 

 

I want you to hear what people were saying then.  And it says: 

defend medicare.  Medicare is under attack.  According to 

news reports, Premier Roy Romanow's government has 

approved measures that undermine the province's medicare 

system.  The media report that a divided NDP legislative 

caucus has approved medicare premiums ranging from 2 to 

$400 per family.  This flat tax premiums, as it's described by 

NDP, Chris Axworthy, would fall disproportionately on low 

and middle income families.  This is by their own people; we're 

saying before the last budget. 

 

Now it says here.  And the reason I want to quote this, Mr. 

Speaker, is because of the letter I read to you from a concerned 

constituent of mine.  In what amounts to increasing taxes on 

the sick, news reports say, the Romanow cabinet is proposing 

that the 125 drug plan deductible charged be as such doubled -- 

doubled.  The heaviest burden of this deterrent fee is felt by the 

elderly, the chronically ill, and young families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, very prophetic -- this here was before the last 

budget.  Now what are we going to hear after this budget? 

 

Well I could go on, and I wanted to pick another quote here, 

Mr. Speaker, which I think is pertinent to the Bill we're talking 

about.  It says:  Now the Romanow government, to the 

applause of medicare's opponents from coast to coast is 

undermining what it took decades for New Democrats to build. 

 

Now these people are talking about the program that they 

helped build.  These are New Democrats that are talking.  And 

they're very opposed to what's going on now by the same New 

Democrats. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many things that I think have to be said 

here.  I want to quote another, and it's from the NDP choices 

for health care.  And it's headlined: implementing wellness 

model.  And here's what happened.  No consultation with 

Saskatchewan medical association.  Forcing local communities 

into health districts. 

 

And the reason I can say that, Mr. Speaker, in reference to Bill 

3 is because I just over the weekend was handed a copy of the 

boundaries that I mentioned when I started speaking.  No 

consultation at all. 

 

And this is another thing they're doing, replacing former health 

boards with new boards appointed by 

the minister, amalgamating rural facilities in closing rural 

hospitals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if this minister is saying she is not going to take 

responsibility, that the districts have full responsibility, fine.  

But how does that square with this, whether you appoint the 

board members?  Mr. Speaker, out in the rural communities we 

have hospital boards resigning.  They're quitting.  They're 

saying, I won't touch this with a 10-foot pole.  And these are 

responsible people. 

 

We are not being told the truth here.  If we're going to have the 

responsibility, then we must have the choice of who we have to 

represent us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what's happened, they've tripled the prescription 

drug plan deductible.  Not doubled, as the NDP members 

thought would happen -- they tripled it.  They have tripled it. 

 

They froze all capital expenditures for health care.  Mr. 

Speaker, we had a hospital; the money was in place; the deal 

was set.  It was signed, sealed, and delivered, in the town of 

Macklin, Saskatchewan.  That hospital was built in 1926.  

Their share of the money was in bank to build a new hospital -- 

with reduced beds; they understand that.  This minister 

cancelled it -- totally cancelled it out.  Now how does that 

square; how does that square with the minister talked, and the 

Premier indeed, talking about what they were going to do in 

health care if they were elected? 

 

Well they removed insulin and medical supplies for diabetics.  

Mr. Speaker, those diabetics did not ask, did not ask to have 

diabetes.  That was something that they got forced on them by 

nature.  We have no money for those people.  But we will, we'll 

fund abortions.  Abortions, as far as I'm concerned, is 

self-inflicted. 

 

Now they've cut funding to hospitals.  Do you know what's 

going to happen?  Well, Mr. Speaker, what's going to happen, 

and I mention what's going on in Kindersley.  Just think about 

this.  If Kindersley alone is cut to twenty-two and a half beds, 

that's more than half.  That means that all the other hospitals 

will have no beds.  Or will they take some of the beds from 

some of the hospitals and then the minister has told us, any 

hospital with less than 10 beds would be closed.  Well the 

writing is on the wall for those small hospitals.  There is no 

way they'll survive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have to discuss this Bill in some length.  We 

have to get the minister to realize the hurt that she's forcing on 

the people in the country. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as I said, if the minister does not want to 

take responsibility for health, then why do we want to have a 

Health minister?  I think the $80,000 would be well spent some 

place else. 

 

The minister needs I think, Mr. Speaker, to stop hiding.  She 

has to stop hiding behind the health boards that she is creating 

and start taking some responsibility for the NDP health care 

decisions.  We have no problem with that, Mr. Speaker. 



March 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 685 

We're not standing here saying there shouldn't be changes.  We 

started the changes.  The minister can stand in her place and 

tell the people of Saskatchewan she's on the cutting edge.  Well 

I disagree.  I disagree, Mr. Speaker.  The cutting edge was 

started when we were in government.  And you heard the 

howls from the people over there when we had the $125 drug 

program.  You heard the howls when we stopped the escalating 

child's dental plan and put it in the hands of the professionals.  

We saved $5 billion the first year, Mr. Speaker, but we didn't 

cut it right out. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, there were some changes made.  We were 

not prepared to do the deep cuts that these people are trying to 

do and in the wrong places.  They're doing it in the wrong 

place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the big talk that the minister had . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  It now being 5 o'clock, this House 

stands recessed until 7 p.m. this evening. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


