




















































Hansard: June 14, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2489 

 June 14, 1993 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Finance 

Vote 18 

Item 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam 

Minister, I wonder if you could supply us with a list of all the 

fees and charges levied by the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I can answer that.  

All of these are listed within the individual departments.  We 

will do our best to give you that list, but I just want to point out 

that we're talking about over 2,000 individual items, so we'll 

take a great deal of time to compile it.  So if there's some 

particular purpose whereby you want them collected from each 

and every department, we'll do our best to do that, but every 

one of them will be available within the particular department 

in which they are being charged. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I'm 

pleased to know that there are 2,000 of them but I'm kind of 

disturbed to hear that you don't have them all tied down.  I 

would think that if you're collecting fees and charges from 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan, that you would keep a fairly close 

accounting of those monies. 

 

I think it's important that you should be aware of exactly what 

monies are coming in, and from what sources, and that includes 

all those fees and charges that may be levied.  So perhaps it 

would be beneficial for your department to have a complete list 

of them also. 

 

I'd like to also know, Madam Minister, what the amount of 

increase in each fee and charge was from March of 1991 to 

March of 1992. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, certainly in terms of 

the dollar numbers, we can provide that for you. 

 

I would like to clarify my position to the member opposite.  

The Department of Finance obviously keeps close account of 

all fees and charges that are out there.  So I certainly take great 

exception to any suggestion that we don't know what these are. 

 

But the point I'm making to the member opposite quite simply 

is this:  all of this information is available within each 

department.  Yes, we can pull it together into a master list, and 

we are prepared to do that if there is some pressing reason to do 

it.  But we're talking about tax dollars.  It takes time and effort 

to do that.  And if there's some reason why the public should 

have that in one list, that is fine with us.  But the information is 

available as you go through each 

individual department.  In terms of the dollar number, we can 

provide that to you. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Well we 

would appreciate having that information.  I think the taxpayers 

of Saskatchewan would appreciate having that information in 

one block where they can see exactly what's happening with 

those fees and charges. 

 

Will you also supply us with the amount of increase in each fee 

and charge from March of 1991 to March of 1993? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- We can certainly provide the 

member opposite with the list in terms of what the increase of 

the fee has been over a two-year period, rather than just over a 

one-year period if that's what the member wishes. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Will you 

also provide us with the information on the total revenues 

raised by fees and charges in fiscal year 1991? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 

would know, I'm sure, that that particular number is available 

in the Public Accounts.  If he does not want to look through the 

Public Accounts and find the number, we can certainly do that 

for him.  There's no problem with that. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I'd appreciate it 

if you would look for it because I haven't been able to find it in 

the Public Accounts listed under one particular section for fees 

and charges. 

 

Now it may be in there under each department under various 

lists and schedules, but it's not pulled together in one place, 

Madam Minister, at least not that I've been able to find.  So 

perhaps if it is pulled together in one place, you could tell me 

where that is. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd be pleased to tell 

the member opposite where it is.  It's in volume 2 of Public 

Accounts. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, would you also 

give us the information then on the total revenues raised for 

fees and charges in the fiscal year of 1992? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, as in the case of 

1991, that number will be available in volume 2 Public 

Accounts for 1992.  That information will be available on an 

audited basis in October and we will be certain that the member 

opposite gets a copy of that. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Will you 

give us the number you're projecting to receive for fees and 

charges for 1993? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, this information is 

available on page 12 of the 1993-94 



2490 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1993 

Estimates, and it's under the heading, other revenue, and the list 

is there.  If the member opposite for some reason wants the list 

broken down in greater detail, he can inform me of that and we 

will do that as well. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, what was the projected 

amount for fees and charges for the year 1991?  Not what you 

actually collected, but what was projected? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: --  Mr. Chairman, with respect to this 

question, it depends exactly how you're going to break that 

down.  But in the budget address for May 1992, you'll see on 

page 54, other licences and permits, $9.9 million is the amount 

in the budget.  It would actually have been from the members' 

opposite budget.  What was actually collected will be in the 

Public Accounts and it is a number very close to 9.9 million in 

the Public Accounts but that can be checked by looking at 

volume 2. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister. And what 

was the projection for fiscal year 1992? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I'll endeavour to 

answer that question although I must point out that you're 

talking about last year's budget.  The information we have here 

is mainly about this year's budget. 

 

But the number is 14 million and the main change, we believe 

-- although as I say this is last year's budget you're talking 

about; I'm trying to give you some answers but it's really this 

year's budget that we have the information about -- the main 

change, we believe, is because of changes in lotteries. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, would you give us the 

number for what you have collected to date on fees and charges 

for fiscal year 1993. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, in response it's 

difficult to know exactly what the member is saying because 

he's saying fiscal year 1993 which obviously goes into two 

budgets, 1992-93 assuming that is what he's talking about and 

again on page 76 of this year's budget.  The amount that we 

projected collecting was $14 million. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, how much of that have 

you collected since April 1, which would be the beginning of 

your fiscal year for 1993? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 

then is talking about 1993-94 budget year.  We do not have that 

number available.  The information -- there's a time lag before 

you actually pull together the information.  But if the member 

opposite wants to put these questions in writing, as soon as we 

have the information, we will provide it to him. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Madam Minister.  We 

would appreciate having that information supplied to us in 

writing and then on a regular basis since you're prepared to 

supply it now. 

We would ask that you table those documents as they become 

available and provide them to the opposition. 

 

Madam Minister, can you supply us with a list of studies 

conducted analysing the impact that these fees and charges 

have on the taxpayers of Saskatchewan?  We've seen from '91 

which was 9.9 million to '92 of 14 million, a $5 million 

increase.  You're projecting you say, $14 million again for 

1993 and yet we have seen across the board fees and charges 

increase.  An example is the increase on seniors' fishing 

licences which just occurred.  All of those are having a major 

impact on groups of people.  What impact have you studied 

that these fees and charges are going to have on the people of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, first of all I'd like to 

clarify the commitment I made to the member opposite.  If you 

put in writing what it is that you want, in terms of the fees and 

other charges, when that information becomes available we 

will provide it to you.  Because as I say, for '93-94 it exists, but 

there's been no purpose for us to collect it into one central 

place.  That will occur within the not-too-distant future.  If you 

ensure that we know exactly what you want, we will provide it 

to you when it becomes available. 

 

Now with respect to studies, as I've said many times in this 

House, what we did when we prepared this budget is we did 

not take each individual decision in the budget and run a whole 

model on how that particular decision would affect the 

province.  What we did was something a lot more 

comprehensive. 

 

We put into a computer all of the projections for the economy 

of Saskatchewan, whether it was what the personal income of 

the people in the province was going to be, what the 

employment levels were going to be, what inflation was going 

to be, what the real growth in the provincial economy was 

going to be -- put all of those things into a computer. Then we 

put into that, added to that, all of the changes in this budget 

package. 

 

And the results are in the budget address so that we can say to 

the people of Saskatchewan, on the basis of forecasts which 

have come to us from out of the province in terms of say the 

growth of the economy, we took that forecast and we put into 

that forecast the changes, the expenditure and revenue 

measures taken into this budget.  And what we can say to the 

people is this is what the growth in the economy is going to be.  

This is what the growth in employment is going to be with all 

of the changes that are in this budget. 

 

(1915) 

 

And as I've said again and again, what is positive is that across 

the piece there's going to be growth -- growth in the economy, 

growth in employment, and there's not going to be growth 

where there shouldn't be growth, that is, in significant numbers 

in inflation.  But we did not do it individually, we did it as a 

comprehensive package. 



June 14, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2491 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, you may think it 

works very well on a macro-system to plug it all into a 

computer and come out with a number but that does not project 

the impact that your charges, fees, and tax increases are having 

on the individuals in a micro-system. 

 

When you look at the seniors who have had a great number of 

their medical fees increased, that has an impact on each 

individual.  While it may not have a large impact on the 

population as a whole, it does have an impact, a severe impact 

on the individuals that are affected.  And that's who you are 

ignoring are those individuals. 

 

Madam Minister, since you don't have the answers to a lot of 

these questions, what I'm prepared to do is read them onto the 

record, if you will supply the answers for them. 

 

Madam Minister, will you supply us the information for 

statutory authority on each fee and charge; (b) where 

applicable, the order in council number authorizing the 

increase; (c) the date the fee or charge first came into existence; 

(d) the purpose of each fee and charge; (e) the minister 

responsible for each fee and charge; (f) a list of all fees and 

charges that are income tested; and (g) a list of all fees and 

charges that are waived for seniors, low income people, and 

other special interest groups. 

 

Will you supply that information? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I guess what I have 

to do is I have to ask the member opposite a question in return.  

My department has given me a rough estimate that it would 

require one to two individuals from three to six months 

full-time work to collect that kind of detailed information.  The 

cost to the taxpayer would be in the neighbourhood of $30,000. 

 

Now if the member opposite has some compelling 

public-purpose reason why 30,000 tax dollars should be spent 

on this relative to other places where we could spend that 

money, I'm willing to go along with that.  But I think he also 

has an obligation to tell us why the taxpayer needs two people 

to spend three to six months at a cost of some $30,000 to 

collect that sort of information. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, it's surprising how 

quickly you could come up with numbers that you want to 

support an argument with.  But when we ask you questions on 

numbers, they're not available. 

 

It seems that this $30,000 you're talking about would be 

comparable to the last couple of MA (ministerial assistant) 

salary increases, so perhaps that's the area you could get some 

money from to pay for it.  Because the people of this province, 

I believe, have a right to know what all these fees and charges 

are.  You've got it spread out all over the place.  You increase 

them whenever you feel you want some more money, and 

people don't know what these individual charges are. 

All of a sudden they just get a bill for an increase. 

 

I think it would be very important to the people of this province 

to have those listed in one particular place, that they know what 

those fees and charges are, so that they can see it when you 

increase those.  Because that will make you accountable, more 

accountable, to the people of this province when it comes time 

for you to want to grab some more money through the fees and 

charges area.  So will you please supply us with that 

information? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I'll respond again.  

This information is readily available to the people of 

Saskatchewan.  When every department comes in here, you can 

go through this.  What are the fees?  What are the increases of 

the fees?  Why have those fees been increased?  Why have this 

particular group been waived and this other group not waived?  

What you're asking us to do is to duplicate that again, right?  

And the problem is the level of detail that you want.  There are 

certain things that can be run through a computer, and we can 

give you a print-out, and we have no problem in providing that 

kind of information. 

 

But when in fact somebody has to manually try to correlate 

different lists, then you are asking the taxpayers to do your 

work, because your work can be done when each and every 

department is in here. 

 

What I said is that we will provide information that is readily 

available and will take one or two days work.  But when we 

actually see the level of detail that you're talking about, and 

people say that individuals are going to have to sit there for 

months correlating this, I think it's reasonable to say, is this 

where tax dollars need to be spent.  So if it is information that 

can be gathered within a number of days, we will certainly 

provide it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I think it's also 

very important that you and your government be accountable 

for those tax increases, for those fee increases.  You increased 

them up here, there, and everywhere.  And so one individual is 

affected by one particular fee increase and thinks, well how 

come I'm being hit. Or he thinks, well this little fee increase 

doesn't affect me that much. 

 

Whereas across the board, it affects a lot of people, Madam 

Minister, and does collect a significant amount of money. So it 

is important to the people of Saskatchewan.  And I think it 

would indeed be money spent on a worthy effort, more so than 

the increases to MAs' salaries for your departments. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, let me make this 

commitment.  We will look through Hansard, look through 

your list, and we will provide you with the information that is 

reasonably accessible. And if we cannot provide you with the 

detail because it would take hours and hours of work, we will 

specify where that information is available. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. 



2492 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1993 

Chairman, Madam Minister.  I want to spend a few moments 

here on a topic that is of some concern to me and has been for a 

number of years, I suppose; and that is dealing with the 

Provincial Auditor. 

 

And, Madam Minister, I want you to give me your impression 

of whether the auditor is doing a good job with the provincial 

books and the audit of expenditures out of the Consolidated 

Fund and agencies and Crowns, and whether or not, in your 

opinion, it would be possible for him to do a more 

comprehensive audit of all of those accounts; and if so, why 

this comprehensive audit is not going on even as we speak. 

 

So I'd like to have some input from you on that particular topic, 

Madam Minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't think it's 

appropriate for me to express my personal opinion about the 

particular job that an individual is doing in this government.  

There is a statute which governs what the auditor's obligations 

are.  There is a Board of Internal Economy which decides the 

budget for the auditor, and there's a Public Accounts where 

those numbers are revealed. 

 

But I don't think it's appropriate for me to express a personal 

opinion.  Whether I feel that he is doing a good job or not is not 

relevant.  What is relevant is there is a statute and is he 

complying with the statute. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- No, Madam Minister, you weren't paying 

attention to my question.  My question was based on the 

premiss . . . because you know full well the handicaps under 

which the auditor is performing or attempting to perform his 

functions. 

 

Now we want to pursue this a little bit.  You said it was up to 

the Board of Internal Economy to give the auditor the funds 

necessary to accomplish his objective.  And we want to pursue 

that a little bit further, Madam Minister. 

 

And I just want to ask you -- and I'll repeat that question -- 

from your knowledge of the restraints under which the auditor 

is working, is he fulfilling the function as prescribed under The 

Provincial Auditor Act?  Now that's a comment that you made.  

I don't want your personal opinion; that's not what I'm asking.  

I want your professional opinion based on your knowledge of 

whether the auditor has the wherewithal to perform the 

function as is set out for him by The Provincial Auditor Act.  

That is what I'm asking. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, once again, it's not 

up to me to evaluate the job that the auditor is doing.  It is up to 

the Board of Internal Economy to evaluate the appropriate 

budget for the auditor in terms of the functions of the auditor, 

and it's up to Public Accounts to record the numbers after the 

fact. 

 

In terms of budget and the capacity of the auditor to live within 

his budget, I would say this to the member opposite.  The 

budget of the auditor is 3.8 million. 

When I look back at the numbers paid to the auditor when the 

members opposite were government, I notice that there was a 

substantial reduction in their last term of office, particularly in 

the money going to the auditor.  I notice, for example, in 1989 

the budget was only $2.8 million. 

 

I think in times of financial restraint, we have managed to 

ensure that the auditor was exempted from expenditure 

reductions, which I thinks shows the importance we place on 

the job that he has to do. 

 

I would also point out that the board has been given the 

mandate to look at the funding and see if it is adequate, but do 

it in light of a plan which the auditor would present to the 

board -- the same as you would have to present a budget to 

anybody who is deciding how much revenue you should be 

getting; and that I have written to the chair of the Board of 

Internal Economy telling the board that they should review the 

plan and ensure the funding is adequate, but the plan has to be 

in place.  And that's all that I'm prepared to say in terms of the 

quality of the work done by the Provincial Auditor. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well then let me perhaps elaborate a little bit 

and give the people who are interested in this type of thing a 

broader scope of the issue that we're talking about, Madam 

Minister.  I will agree with you one thing, and that's why my 

initial comment was based on the premiss that this has been 

giving me concern for a while, and that is the fact that yes, we 

were not funding the auditor to the fullest extent either. 

 

But it was your very same party, Madam Minister, that made 

much political hay out of that fact.  And you led the people of 

Saskatchewan, Madam Minister, to believe that you would 

correct that problem.  Once you were the government, the 

auditor would have all sufficient funds and resources necessary 

to perform the full extent of his responsibilities.  Those were 

your promises. 

 

Now in the name of restraint, you are saying we are going to 

handicap the auditor even further by not supplying him with 

what he wants.  Now I know what the budget for the auditor is 

this year, Madam Minister, contemplated for '93-94, and that is 

$3.815 million.  But then you say the Board of Internal 

Economy is supposed to determine what he would actually be 

getting based on the plan submitted by the auditor. 

 

Well you know what, Madam Minister?  The auditor did 

supply a plan to the Board of Internal Economy and he said, 

The Provincial Auditor Act dictates that I am supposed to audit 

all of public spending.  And in order for me to fulfil that 

mandate, the law, I need $4.185 million . . . $4.815 million in 

order to be able to do that. 

 

Now you're going to get up and say, well if that's what the 

auditor needs, it's up to the Board of Internal Economy to 

supply him with that money.  Well you 



June 14, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2493 

know full well how that operates, Madam Minister.  Because I 

hold you directly responsible for the auditor being 

short-changed a million dollars to the degree that he is unable 

to audit almost 40 per cent of the money spent.  Did you get 

that, Madam Minister?  He is unable to audit almost 40 per cent 

of the money spent by your government.  Those are my figures 

supplemented by indications from the auditor.  I'm not putting 

the words into the auditor's mouth; those are my figures.  So he 

is not able to fulfil his mandate. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, I charge you explicitly for that shortfall 

in his funding.  Don't get up and tell me it's the Board of 

Internal Economy because your members from your side, your 

NDP (New Democratic Party) colleagues have a majority on 

that committee.  And it is their determination that the auditor 

shall be short-changed. 

 

(1930) 

 

Now, Madam Minister, firstly if you talk about restraint, is not 

one of the functions of the auditor's auditing books to make 

sure that indeed the money spent by this legislature and 

Crowns and agencies is spent in the most worthwhile position?  

And how can you assure that if you don't have an audit of the 

books by the Provincial Auditor?  I know all books are audited 

when you get private auditors involved. But still the auditor, 

the Provincial Auditor, must be able to do at least a cursory 

examination of all of those books to make sure that indeed he 

can rely on those private auditors. 

 

So how can we be assured that you, in the name of restraint, are 

trying to save a million dollars on a $5 billion budget?  Would 

it not seem reasonable to you, Madam Minister, to make sure 

that everything is being done, not just in an up and up manner, 

but in an efficient manner, that that million dollars may be 

indeed well-spent money? 

 

Because I'll tell you what, Madam Minister, you know what the 

auditor has told us. When he has to sit down and say, all right, 

I've got a shortfall of a million dollars; I cannot audit all those 

books, he then has to make a determination, which ones will I 

not audit. 

 

In fact members of the committee will know and remember he 

asked us, because I can't audit all the books, what do you as a 

committee recommend that I do not audit?   That's the dilemma 

that the auditor finds himself in, Madam Minister. 

 

So that's the question that I want to ask you, because I hold you 

as the Minister of Finance directly responsible for the dilemma 

that the auditor is finding himself -- you and the Premier.  Not 

the members of the committee, because they do their job well 

and they listen well and they send us the message in the 

committee as you have dictated. 

 

So, Madam Minister, could I ask you perhaps this question at 

this stage:  would you reconsider the 3.815 amount and indeed . 

. . Oh no, I just recall something else that the auditor said.  He 

says, now I don't need 

that full amount of 4.8; 4.7 is enough because we're not going 

to accrual accounting at this stage and that'll save me a hundred 

thousand dollars. 

 

So he has found a hundred thousand dollars from that 

perspective, but he will still need in the neighbourhood of $4.7 

million to properly audit all of the departments, all of the 

Crowns, and all of the agencies for which by The Provincial 

Auditor Act he is responsible for.  Will you give him the funds 

so that he can accomplish that objective? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I would be very 

pleased to shed some light on this with some facts and 

statistics.  In 1990-91, the budget for the Provincial Auditor 

was $3.04 million.  By 1993-94, the budget for the Provincial 

Auditor had jumped to $3.81 million.  That is, in that time 

frame from 1990-91 to 1993-94, the budget for the Provincial 

Auditor had increased by more than 25 per cent.  What that has 

to be seen in the context of is what happened elsewhere in 

government. 

 

In that same time frame across government, operating spending 

was cut by more than 7 per cent.  So what we're saying is when 

other departments across the piece in that time frame had to 

face cuts of more than 7 per cent, we have one area, the 

Provincial Auditor, who had his budget increased by 25 per 

cent.  The Provincial Auditor has been guaranteed $3.8 million 

this year. 

 

We have said to the Board of Internal Economy, if there is 

some compelling reason that he can show to you that he cannot 

live with a 25 per cent increase over that time period, but needs 

more, then we will look at a special warrant.  But surely a case 

has to be made why some part of government needs an increase 

in excess of 25 per cent over a period of time when all other 

parts of government, including the services that affect people in 

this province, have been cut by in excess of 7 per cent. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Madam Minister, the answer is so 

obvious.  The auditor is the watchdog, the guy who will 

determine where the monies have been properly spent.  And in 

times of restraint, I would suggest to you, he more than ever 

needs the resources to fulfil his function. 

 

Now don't call him a servant of your department.  The auditor 

is a servant of this legislature, Madam Minister.  And don't 

equate the auditor to a normal department, a line department, 

that you have control over.  Now unfortunately you do have 

control over him indirectly because you're using the power of 

your office to muzzle your members on the Board of Internal 

Economy so that proper funding is not allowed. 

 

And what's more, Madam Minister, I suggest to you again . . . 

and I'll answer that question about the 25 per cent increase -- 

I'll answer that question.  You got elected, number one, on the 

premise that you would do better.  When we were in 

government, I remember our front benches at the time were in 

continual hot 



2494 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1993 

water with the budget with the auditor.  I recognize that.  I 

recognize that. 

 

And you said you would do better.  You chastised us on a 

continual ongoing basis for our runs in with the auditor.  You 

would do things better.  But right now what you're doing now, 

Madam Minister, is just like the Minister of Health is doing 

and many of the other ministers. In your attempt to save 

money, you're being counter-productive.  And you're probably 

costing the provincial treasury more money by not allowing the 

auditor to do and fulfil his function properly.  You're 

handicapping him. 

 

So, Madam Minister, the 25 per cent increase that you're 

talking about is fine and dandy.  But the auditor is still saying: 

that's not good enough; I need more money in order to fulfil my 

function, Madam Minister. 

 

So what I'm asking you once more, would it not seem logical to 

you to give the auditor his 800 or $900,000 more that he needs 

to fulfil, totally, his function, and thereby . . . And I don't have 

the figure on this but I think it would make sense to anybody 

who's listening, that when you have a $5 billion budget that has 

to be accounted for, surely the auditor during the process of 

auditing these books will continue to find many inefficiencies 

that could be corrected. 

 

And so logically, at least in my mind, through the expenditure 

of that 900 or $800,000 more, the savings could indeed be quite 

substantial.  So that it would not be a cost to your treasury, 

Madam Minister.  It would not be a cost and in fact would be a 

saving to the provincial taxpayers.  Do you not agree with that, 

Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, a comment first on 

statistics and then on procedure because both need to be 

clarified here. 

 

With respect to commitments, certainly this government lived 

up to its commitment to do much better by the auditor than the 

members opposite.  What I would note about the members 

opposite is that they actually, from 1988 to 1989, reduced, 

reduced the funding going to the auditor by some 10 per cent. 

 

I think that for a prospective government, as ours was when we 

were in opposition, to say we're going to do better and then to 

come into office and to increase funding over a two-year period 

by 25 per cent, is doing better.  I think the numbers speak for 

themselves.  A 25 per cent increase in this day and age is a 

significant increase and it is a tangible sign of doing better. 

 

Now I really want, once and for all, to clarify the process.  I 

don't review the budget of the Provincial Auditor.  That would 

be a total conflict of interest, when the auditor is auditing the 

departments of government, for the Department of Finance to 

review the budget of the auditor.  It's the Board of Internal 

Economy that does that. 

 

We have said that the auditor is guaranteed 3.8 

million. We have said that that is a significant increase over 

what has historically been given in the recent past. But we have 

said that it's up to the board to look through his plan and to see 

whether or not there is any reason for an extension of funds. 

And that's the way the process has to work.  That is not a 

function of the Department of Finance or the Minister of 

Finance.  It is a function of the Board of Internal Economy, and 

we are going to respect the integrity of that process. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Oh I wish I could believe you, Madam 

Minister, because we all know -- and I'm looking at one of 

them now -- we all know that that's not how this place works. 

 

You, Madam Minister, with direction from the Premier, control 

the purse strings.  That's as simple as it is.  You and two 

members on the Board of Internal Economy sit on treasury 

benches.  Then you send those two cabinet ministers to the 

Board of Internal Economy with a couple of back-benchers, 

and here I and another member from our caucus sit out-voted 5 

to 2 on any issues that are raised. 

 

Now you mean to tell me that those members are the ones that 

determine whether the auditor is going to get a million dollars 

more or not, without any interference from you?  Come on, 

Madam Minister, let's be realistic.  And I agree then, all right, 

you've given him 25 per cent, but he is telling us he needs 

more. 

 

Now you are so fond, Madam Minister, of saying that the 

auditor was getting 25 per cent more this year than he was 

when you took over.  If my colleague could just give me that 

book that he's got in hands here, and he's got the wrong page, 

but I think I can remember the figures.  The figures that I want 

to say is that the amount of money for the Provincial Auditor 

has risen over the last two years now by 25 per cent. 

 

But do you know what else has risen, Madam Minister, just so 

that we keep this thing in perspective.  The very next item in 

that book, after the Provincial Auditor is what?  Well guess 

what?  Provincial Secretary -- Provincial Secretary -- the 

deputy minister's budget.  And what has happened to the 

deputy minister's budget since that time, during that time?  We 

find out, when I look at the figures -- and I just happen to have 

them here now -- the Provincial Secretary is 6.835 millions of 

dollars for this coming year.  Last year it was 5.9.  Well now, is 

that where the $900,000 has gone that the auditor is asking for?  

You've given that $900,000 to the Deputy Premier, the man in 

charge of the next federal NDP election campaign in 

Saskatchewan.  That's where you've put the money.  But you 

won't give it to the Provincial Auditor.  That's the irony of the 

situation, Madam Minister. 

 

So don't get up and try to tell the people of Saskatchewan what 

a wonderful job you have done by increasing the Provincial 

Auditor's appropriation by 25 per cent, while in the same breath 

the next line shows that you've given your political cronies 

more impact so that the federal NDP may do a little bit better in 

Saskatchewan.  That's the irony of the 



June 14, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2495 

situation, Madam Minister. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, the auditor has told us that, not only is 

he incapable because of lack of funding of accomplishing the 

objectives of The Provincial Auditor Act; it's going to get 

worse.  Do you know why, Madam Minister?  He is telling us 

right now that there are three health boards, your newly 

established health boards, that are causing him concern, and 

he's got to audit them. 

 

By all accounts the Minister of Health, I don't think this 

afternoon I was able to dissuade her from embarking and 

continuing on her headlong mad rush to establish 29 boards by 

August 17, either by the local folks or unilaterally decreeing: 

this is it; you've got your health board.  And you know what 

else, Madam Minister, that concerns us on this side?  I was able 

to elicit from the Minister of Health on Friday that yes indeed, 

the provincial Health budget is $1.5 billion, give or take -- $1.5 

billion.  And she conceded after some strenuous questioning 

that yes, the health boards in this province were going to get $1 

billion -- $1 billion that the health boards would be spending.  

Right now, Madam Minister, there does not seem to be the 

mechanism in place to hold these health boards accountable. 

 

Do you know what the Minister of Health told me?  She said, 

oh but those boards are going to be audited if they want to be.  

That's what she said.  She said, if those health boards want to 

be audited, they can ask the Provincial Auditor to audit them.  

Now to be fair to her, she recognizes that there are going to be 

private auditors involved in those health boards, but if they 

want to be, the Provincial Auditor . . . And she further said, but 

don't ask me any detailed questions about them; I don't know.  

We're just giving them a billion dollars and my goodness, 

you're going to go have to ask each of those individual health 

boards: what did you do with the taxpayers' money? 

 

Am I overdramatizing?  Perhaps a wee bit.  I don't know.  But 

if I am, I'd like you to get up now and tell me. 

 

(1945) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like to begin 

first of all by clarifying something.  The members opposite 

refer again and again to the budget of the Provincial Secretary.  

And really this is very misleading information and I would like 

to read into the record the facts about what occurred there.  In 

the reorganization of the government, certain departments were 

eliminated, downsized, had their functions changed to 

streamline government, to make it more effective, and make it 

more affordable. 

 

One of the changes that occurred was that parts of other 

departments were moved from those departments to the 

Provincial Secretary, and there are a significant number of 

departments involved, and I would like to read into the record 

exactly what those departments were.  Parts of the Department 

of Community Services was moved into the Provincial 

Secretary's department.  Parts of the Department of Justice 

were moved into the Provincial Secretary's department.  Parts 

of Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation functions 

were moved into the Provincial Secretary's office.  Parts of the 

Executive Council function was moved into the Provincial 

Secretary's office. 

 

So of course the overall funding for the Provincial Secretary 

increased but it was not because there was an increase in 

government spending. It was because in order to consolidate 

the government and make it more effective and affordable, 

parts of these departments were moved into the Provincial 

Secretary's.  So it is a different department than it was last year, 

and the members opposite are comparing apples and oranges 

when they're trying to compare the budgets. 

 

With respect to the auditor and the health boards, it is simply 

not clear that the auditor will be the individual auditing the 

health boards.  Yes, the health boards will be audited, but there 

is no decision made as to how that auditing will occur.  So for 

the auditor to be saying that he requires the funds for the health 

boards, when the decision as to who will be doing the auditing 

hasn't been made, is premature. 

 

But again I go back to my main point with respect to the 

auditor.  This is not the forum under which we decide the 

budget of the auditor.  It is the Board of Internal Economy that 

makes that decision. 

 

The members opposite should have some respect for that 

process because it was the members opposite when they were 

in government that first proposed that process, that is that the 

Board of Internal Economy decide the auditor's salary and 

budget.  We are now respecting the integrity of that process 

and this is not the forum in which we decide that budget. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Quite frankly, Madam Minister, that's exactly 

why I know what's going on. We were involved in that type of 

process.  But we never said that we would change it.  We have 

been working with that process.  You're the ones that said, elect 

us and things will change. 

 

Well the people are expecting things to change and you've just 

committed yourself to a status quo on that issue.  And you've 

admitted through your answer that you are the one actually 

pulling the strings on the members of the Board of Internal 

Economy and that they are following your direction. 

 

Madam Minister, one other thing that is in contradiction to my 

interpretation of the auditor's statements is this.  When these 

health boards are elected, is there not a requirement that as long 

as some of those individuals on those health boards are 

appointed by the Executive Council that it is the mandate and 

the responsibility of the auditor to audit those books? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Again let me clarify the point the 

member opposite made because again it was 



2496 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1993 

not correct.  Your suggestion was that this was long-standing 

practice of the previous administration to separate the functions 

of the Provincial Auditor and the budget of the Provincial 

Auditor, that is to make the Board of Internal Economy a 

separate body responsible for the budget. 

 

Your intimation was that your administration had had that as 

long-standing practice.  Indeed nothing could be further from 

the truth.  After having been in power nearly nine years and 

allowing the process to not function in that way, finally in your 

last year you proposed to clean it up by making the board 

responsible for the auditor's salary.  But it was in that ill-fated 

session that never was completed and the change was never put 

into effect. 

 

Because it was one of the conversions on the route to 

Damascus that the members opposite experienced in the dying 

days of their administration and it was a good idea, yes, we 

picked it up and we've continued on in the spirit of that change. 

 

Again with respect to the Provincial Auditor and the health 

boards, I think what you need to get into when the Department 

of Health is here or when you have an opportunity to ask in 

question period about the Department of Health, is the issue as 

to the composition of those boards in the future. 

 

As I say, that decision has not yet been made and this is not the 

forum in which we are going to decide who is going to audit 

the health boards. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, my question was a very 

simple question.  As long as those health boards have members 

appointed and elected -- as long as there are appointed 

members there -- is it not the responsibility of the auditor to 

audit those books? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, as I say, the decision 

hasn't been made and this is not the forum in which we are 

about to make that decision.  It has simply not been broached.  

The health boards will be audited.  I'm sure there is a 

possibility that it could be the Provincial Auditor, but that 

decision has yet to be made. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, it's in the Act.  That's all I'm 

trying to get you to admit.  It's not a matter of whether or not 

they're going to be appointed or all elected.  I'm saying as long 

as the boards are appointed and elected, as long as there are 

appointments made by Executive Council, then you're going to 

have to have the Provincial Auditor auditing those books.  Now 

that's my interpretation of what the auditor has told us.  And 

would you confirm or deny that. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, we will check into it.  

Again, the government is committed to conforming with the 

Act.  But this is not the forum in which we go through the Act 

and try to apply the Act to issues like the health boards.  All 

that I'm saying is that decision has yet to be made.  If in fact the 

Act specifies that, that will occur. 

But what I keep saying is, we have a process in place whereby 

the budget for the auditor is decided, and it's decided in the 

Board of Internal Economy, and the government is committed 

to respecting that process and to respecting the Act. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Madam Minister, Mr. Chairman, now 

I'm totally shocked.  When the Minister of Health and her 

officials couldn't answer that question that I was asking them, I 

kind of said, well okay, maybe that's not their expertise.  I 

mean, they're just busy spending one and one-half billion 

dollars of taxpayers' money but they're really not too concerned 

about what the accounting procedures are. 

 

But now I'm asking the Minister of Finance of the province of 

Saskatchewan what mechanism is in place to ensure proper 

accounting procedures for one and one-half billion dollars of 

expenditures.  And you say, I'm not quite sure.  Is that your 

position, Madam Minister, or have you got something now to 

clarify that in talking with your officials? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, let me be specific.  

The auditor, yes, will have oversight of the whole budget. But 

there is still a possibility -- and again, this decision has not 

been made so I don't want to suggest that it has -- that private 

auditors could do the district boards, for example.  So it is not a 

clear situation, and it's obviously not clear because the boards 

are yet to be up and running.  That's an issue that will be 

confronted in '93 . . . in '94 because all of the district boards 

will be functioning and will be funded on a district basis. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- No, no, no, Madam Minister.  You're not 

following here what the responsibilities of the auditor is, or are.  

You say it's not quite clear yet whether it's going to be private 

auditors that do the auditing or whether it's going to be 

Provincial Auditor. 

 

Madam Minister, even if you decide to break the law, to break 

the law by not having the Provincial Auditor directly auditing 

those books because he said that's his mandate, under the 

circumstances, the way the boards are intended to be set up, 

even if the private auditors will do the auditing of that one and 

a half billions of dollars -- well, one billion if it's that amount 

that goes through the district health boards -- even if the private 

auditors are doing that, it's still incumbent upon the auditor to 

give his okay that those private auditors have done a reasonable 

job because he has to be able to rely on the work of the private 

auditors. 

 

And in order to do that, he doesn't go through everything that 

those private auditors have done, but he does take a sample of 

their work to assure him that, yes, indeed, they have done a 

credible job and that he can endorse their work.  So even at that 

stage the auditor has to get involved because that's his mandate 

and that's his responsibility, Madam Minister.  That's what I'm 

trying to get through to you. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, maybe if I 



June 14, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2497 

could use a specific example.  Let's look at a Crown 

corporation like SaskPower.  The auditor is ultimately 

responsible for the oversight of SaskPower, but unless there is 

some particular reason for concern, he's not intimately involved 

in the audit because there's a private sector auditor there.  So he 

just does a quick overview, and if there's a problem then he 

goes into it in more detail and requires more funding.  But the 

majority of the funding goes to the private sector auditor 

because the private sector auditor does the thorough audit. 

 

Now I'm not suggesting that this is necessarily the route that 

the health boards are going to go, but it is an option.  And I 

think that the other main point is that this is an issue that will 

become a pressing issue, not this year, but in 1994 when the 

boards are up and running and are being funded as district 

boards.  Then this issue will have to have been decided. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, they are currently, as we 

speak, they are already spending taxpayers' money.  After 

October 17, they'll all be up and running.  And the fiscal year 

goes until the end of March, Madam Minister.  So it's not good 

enough for you to get up now and say, well in due course we'll 

have something figured out.  That's my concern here. 

 

But I want to take this a step further now, Madam Minister.  Do 

you know what?  The auditor had a solution, a very, very, easy, 

good, sensible solution to the dilemma that we're finding 

ourselves in, Madam Minister.  He simply said this: the 

appropriation for my department, and I use that word in 

quotation marks, is going to be 3.815 millions of dollars.  

That's not enough for me to be able to do the Crowns and the 

agencies and the Liquor Board and a few entities such as that.  

It's not going to be enough. 

 

But you know, Madam Minister, what the auditor has been 

doing over the past time.  He figures out and says, all right, to 

do this particular agency is going to cost, for an example, 

$300,000.  So when I go to the Liquor Board and I do the 

Liquor Board, you, Madam Minister, or the Board of Internal 

Economy through you, has short-changed the auditor so he 

doesn't have the funds for that.  So what does the auditor do?  

He bills the Liquor Board and says, this is my fee.  This is how 

much it's costing my department to audit the Liquor Board.  So 

Liquor Board hears the fee of $300,000, pay me.  And that's 

what's been happening and it works.  It works.  A direct billing 

for his actual expenses and then he can perform his duties. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, you have written to the Board of 

Internal Economy and you have said in your letter two things: 

basically, Mr. Auditor, you can't and you can't.  You can and 

you can't, pardon me.  Yes, you have the right.  Your legal 

opinion says, yes, Mr. Auditor, you have the right to charge 

those fees but no, you don't have the right to keep those fees to 

offset your expenses.  Now, Madam Minister, that's your legal 

opinion because you're telling him that the money that you 

collect, although you have the right to collect that money, that 

money has to come back into the consolidated account if it's 

not charged against 

your department, or not put in as a credit to your department. 

 

So when the auditor does that type of billing, what is he doing?  

He's actually increasing your slush fund, that's all he's doing.  

The money that he's charging that should go credited to his 

department goes into the Consolidated Fund and who knows 

what you're going to be using it for? 

 

Now, Madam Minister, in that letter that's exactly what you are 

telling the Board of Internal Economy.  The auditor may be 

able to collect money but he can't keep it.  That's your auditor 

or your opinion from the Department of Justice.  Is that correct, 

Madam Minister?  I'd like you to either confirm, deny, or add 

or subtract from what I've said. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, yes, I would be 

pleased to answer that question.  As I said, the commitment of 

this government with respect to the auditor is twofold.  We said 

adequate funding -- I'll deal with that second; we also said 

compliance with the Act and the legislation.  The auditor 

proposed to charge for some work to be done and to retain the 

fees for those services. 

 

What the department did was ask Justice, the Department of 

Justice: is this legal, is it in conformity with the Act?  And the 

answer from the Department of Justice -- which has been sent 

to the Chair of the Board of Internal Economy  

_- is no, it is not legal to charge a fee and to keep a fee.  And 

it's quite consistent with what the auditor has been saying 

throughout himself. 

 

(2000) 

 

That is, all transactions of government have to pass through the 

Consolidated Fund, so that if in fact money is coming to an 

agency of government, it goes through the Consolidated Fund 

before it is assigned to another purpose.  So it is the 

Department of Justice which said to the government, and to 

me, and then to the Board of Internal Economy, that no, this is 

not consistent with the Act. 

 

Again with respect to funding, our commitment when we were 

in opposition was to ensure that there is adequate funding.  I 

would repeat, from 1990-91 till '93-94, there has been a 25 per 

cent increase in the auditor's budget, which is way out of line 

with what has occurred in other parts of government where 

there has been more than a 7 per cent reduction.  We have said 

that this is reasonable.  But we've also said that there is an 

independent process to check and ensure that that is reasonable, 

and that is the Board of Internal Economy, and we will respect 

the independence of that process. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, it's becoming quite apparent 

to us that when it suits your cause you hide behind the Act, and 

when it suits your cause, you attack the Act.  You can't have it 

both ways, Madam Minister, and that's precisely what you're 

trying to do. 



2498 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1993 

You sent a letter, Madam Minister, to the Board of Internal 

Economy, dated March 16, '93, in which you indicate your 

legal opinion that you had received from the Department of 

Justice.  And I think we've addressed that sufficiently enough 

so that we all know what we're talking about.  But I really take 

exception to the latter part of your letter, where you try to 

justify and rationalize by keeping the auditor short-changed as 

far as his ability would be to collect fees to offset his expenses 

and then to retain those fees, and this is some of the rationale 

that you're saying.  And then you say the reasons for this are as 

follows: agencies and departments charged for their services 

would have to increase their budget to accommodate additional 

costs. 

 

Well what's wrong with that?  What's wrong with that if some 

of the earnings of the department, for the Liquor Board, for 

example, would be used to offset the cost of the auditor fee?  I 

see nothing wrong with that. 

 

Then you say that the costs of the services are simply shifted 

from the auditor to agencies and departments.  Rightfully so.  

It's the agents and the departments that are doing the 

transactions, the financial transactions.  They're the ones that 

are receiving the appropriation from this legislature, and they're 

the ones that are disbursing the funds, sometimes for a profit, 

sometimes as an non-profit agency, but regardless, they are the 

agency that should be budgeting internally for that type of 

accounting procedure. 

 

Then you say that the fees charged by the auditor could reflect 

inefficiencies which can be passed on to the agencies who have 

no opportunity to seek services other than through the auditor.  

I've tried to figure that one out, and I'm having a little bit of 

trouble following your rationale along that twisted route. 

 

But this one really bothers me.  I guess this is what you call turf 

protection.  You say the auditor would be able to determine the 

size of his operation.  This could significantly expand his 

operation without the approval of the legislature.  The auditor 

would be able to determine the size of his operation. 

 

Madam Minister, that's precisely what it is intended for him to 

do.  He has to be able to determine the resources that he needs 

to fulfil the mandate that he is required to achieve under The 

Provincial Auditor Act.  Who is in a better position than the 

auditor to know what his resources have to be?  And so of 

course he's going to charge fees to cover his expenses.  That's 

the natural process. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, and I will be tabling this document, but 

you talk about a legal opinion, and I guess any time you get 

two lawyers in the room, you'll wind up with three legal 

opinions.  I have a legal opinion in my hand right now.  Yours 

comes from the Department of Justice.  Mine comes from the 

office of the Legislative Counsel and Law Clerk; the Law 

Clerk of this Assembly, legal counsel, professional in his field.  

His view, Madam Minister, is diametrically opposed to yours. 

Now having said that, let me backtrack and say first of all that 

he agrees with the Department of Justice's opinion that yes 

indeed the auditor does have the right to charge a fee to cover 

his expenses in the operation.  So both of our counsels, both of 

our legal counsels concur in that assessment. 

 

However, diametrically opposed is the position of these two 

offices when it comes on the second issue of what happens to 

that money that the auditor charges.  You would have us 

believe that it's got to go into the slush fund so that you can do 

with it what you want.  You want it to go into the Consolidated 

Fund. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, I have here from the Legislative 

Counsel and Law Clerk the legal opinion.  Further, he says -- in 

addition to agreeing that the auditor, number one, does have the 

right to collect those fees -- Further, I am of the opinion that 

the Office of the Provincial Auditor may retain the fees 

collected in this regard. 

 

Now you are not a lawyer, I am not a lawyer.  I'm not going to 

go into some of the machinations that he goes through as he 

discusses The Financial Administration Act, The Provincial 

Auditor Act, and goes into particularly section 25 of The 

Financial Administration Act.  I will read the concluding 

paragraph, Madam Minister, and you can look at this at your 

leisure. 

 

But his concluding paragraph is: 

 

 In summary then I am firmly of the opinion that section 28 of 

The Provincial Auditor Act authorizes the Provincial Auditor 

to charge any and all Crown entities upon which he performs 

an audit a reasonable fee for such audit; and that section 25 of 

The Financial Administration Act does not operate to capture 

such fees to the benefit of the Consolidated Fund. 

 

Madam Minister, unquote. 

 

That is the legal opinion that this Legislative Assembly has 

received from its Law Clerk, where he says that yes indeed the 

auditor can recapture his costs for doing the audit and that the 

Consolidated Fund does not receive that money. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, if you were to do that, if you were to 

concur with that, then your cronies in the Board of Internal 

Economy wouldn't have to vote $4.815 million -- 4.7 since he 

doesn't need that hundred thousand.  But that indeed the auditor 

would still be able to operate effectively, efficiently, and fulfil 

his mandate if you were to agree and stop being an impediment 

to this officer of the Legislative Assembly to be able to do his 

job fully.  Would you agree to that, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, if I could respond to 

that on three different levels, first of all, with respect to the 

legal opinion. The legal opinion we obviously take most 

seriously is the opinion from the Department of Justice.  We 

have a department there to 



June 14, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2499 

give the government legal opinions.  We asked them a legal 

opinion; they gave us a legal opinion. 

 

The second point is, the legal opinion is quite consistent with 

ideas of accountability in government.  I think what has to be 

explained is that every other department of government that is 

a normal department of government -- Health, Agriculture, 

Highways, etc. -- the members of these departments have to 

come before Treasury Board with detailed outlines of how 

they're going to spend their money: we're going to spend this 

amount of money on these different projects, and we're going 

to spend this other money on these other projects.  These 

budgets have to be scrutinized by officials in the Department of 

Finance and they have to be scrutinized by Treasury Board 

members, cabinet ministers.  These numbers also then have to 

go to cabinet and then they're discussed here in the 

departments' Estimates. 

 

So there is an incredible process of scrutiny of the tax dollars 

being spent and are they being spent well, and there is an 

opportunity here for the public debate with respect to these. 

 

Now this is quite different with respect to the auditor.  The 

auditor does not appear before Treasury Board; he does not 

explain to officials or to cabinet ministers or to anyone else 

how he is spending his money through that process.  But 

nobody gets a blank cheque.  Nobody, no matter how important 

their function is to government, who is spending tax dollars, 

gets to spend those tax dollars without showing to some 

independent body: here's how I'm going to spend it.  Okay?  It's 

not the Treasury Board, it's not the cabinet, but it is the Board 

of Internal Economy.  And that is their function, and they're 

performing a Treasury Board-like function: how are you 

spending your money?  So that we can say to the taxpayers of 

the province, you are spending your money as effectively and 

as efficiently as possible. 

 

And I'll make one final point.  I highly resent my colleagues -- 

and your colleagues too, because your colleagues are on the 

Board of Internal Economy -- being called cronies.  These are 

not sheep.  These are independent people who have their own 

judgements, their own intelligence, and their own views.  And 

it is simply an insult to them to suggest that they are puppets, 

because they're not. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, with due respect to what 

you just said and the members who I like and respect in many 

instances, on that board, that is exactly what they are -- exactly.  

That's the bottom line; that's the bottom line.  They are doing 

your bidding.  That's where we have this problem, Madam 

Minister, just so that we understand each other.  That's exactly 

it.  Now we've hit the crunch. 

 

And so, Madam Minister, if you would release them from that 

bind, if you indeed would allow them to do what is good for 

this province, for this legislature, then that 700 or $800,000 

more would allow the office of the auditor to fulfil without a 

hassle the job that he has been given.  And he would be able to 

accomplish your 

objective, Madam Minister . . . and I can appreciate what you're 

trying to do. You're talking about the burden of restraint that 

you're under. 

 

But I'm going to suggest to you that if he had that, it would not 

be a cost of 7 or $800,000 to this legislature but would indeed 

be not counter-productive but in the long run would probably 

save the Consolidated Fund a large amount of money.  That's 

the points that I've been trying to get across. 

 

Madam Minister, I'm not sure whether you have a copy of the 

legal opinion that I was referring to before.  Your official 

indicates he does not, so I will ask the page to bring a copy of 

this over to you, so that you can peruse it and perhaps in the 

light of morning you may be able to see things our way a little 

bit better.  So thank you, Madam Minister. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 

on page 77 of the budget address book, there is a line there that 

talks about financing, servicing the public debt, the government 

share.  And last year you had estimated $760 million and you 

came through at 735 million.  Is that an accurate figure or is it 

close to being accurate?  Would you know that? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, the final number was 

739.9. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Seven thirty-nine.  Okay.  Would you give me 

the volume of dollars of debt that that paid the interest on. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, member opposite, on 

page 83 of the budget address, there is a line called General 

Revenue Fund.  And if you look at the forecast for 1993 the 

number there is 8.184 billion.  So it's 8.1. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So that would roughly be 9 per cent on the 

average, or 11 per cent . . . 9 per cent.  Okay, now the 

difference between 8.184 billion and 8.591 billion is roughly 

$400 million.  And yet, Madam Minister, if you turn back to 

page 77, you have $112 million extra interest cost for that 

additional $400 million. 

 

(2015) 

 

What we would like to know is what the 112 additional service 

requirements are in relation to the overall debt when what goes 

up $400 million.  And if I took a 9 per cent average, it would 

be $36 million that I should increase the overall debt for, if I 

was assuming that all of it was at the average rate.  Now there 

has to be something substantially different than that in order to 

make the $112 million additional interest costs. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, the general answer 

is, the change is because of the move to accrual accounting.  

But there is a detailed explanation on pages 54 to 55 if the 

member would like to read the detailed explanation.  I can read 

it into the record or he can read it himself. 



2500 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1993 

Mr. Martens: -- So it's because of accrual accounting for this 

year.  Now could you give me what the value of the interest 

would have been if you hadn't had accrual accounting in 

1992-93, in the amount of dollars in the  

_- I'll get the number for you -- in the 8.184 billion, is that 

accrual accounting?  Where you established that $739 million 

was the volume of dollars that it took to service that debt. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, let me answer that 

question in this way because there is a comparison there in the 

explanation.  What we said is that it's not realistic to compare 

the 735 for '92-93 with the 847 for '93-94 because the 735 is 

the cash basis of the accounting, 847 is the accrual.  However, 

if you want a comparison, if you want to try to figure a way to 

level that issue so that you're not comparing apples and 

oranges, but you're comparing apples and apples, the 

commentary does that for you. 

 

And what it says is, had you done '92-93 on an accrual basis, 

the interest would have been $41.6 million higher, so it would 

have been in the neighbourhood of 776 instead of 735. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay, so then really the difference in the 

interest is still 69 million or $70 million.  Is that right? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, yes, that's correct. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay, that means that I still need to have $28 

million.  And you talk about $28 million there and it's 

amortizing commissions.  Amortizing commissions on what? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, again there is a 

difference in the process with respect to accrual and cash 

accounting. 

 

Under cash accounting, if the province incurs a debt for say a 

30-year debt, -- there's a bond for 30 years -- under the cash 

system, the commissions that are paid to underwriters are all 

accounted for in that one year.  When you move to the accrual 

system, if in fact it's a 30-year bond, rather than the cost being 

incurred in that one year, they're amortized over the 30-year 

life of the bond. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well this is where accruing accounting and 

cash accounting mix and mesh.  Amortizing, in my logic, 

would have that you have the volume of dollars accruing as a 

commission to start the 30 . . . If you're dealing with $700 

million additional money or whatever the volume of dollars 

was, that amortizing those commissions, if I was to take this on 

an average of a 10- or a 15-year bond, that would be 28 . . . on 

accrual accounting basis, that would be $28 million dollars 

every year for 30 years, to use your example, or 15 years, to 

use another example, or 10 years, whatever the volume of 

dollars there were to deal with. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, perhaps we can 

clarify this by moving to the Estimates, page 62, 

and what you'll see there is debt servicing, sub-programs, fees 

and commissions, authorized by law.  You'll see for '92-93, the 

estimate there is 7 million, the estimate for '93-94 is only 1.5 

million, which reflects the change and the decline in the 

amount being booked. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay.  Now we've got another batch of 

numbers here to legitimize, I would say.  So servicing the 

public debt went from $7 million down to one and a half 

million dollars on the fees and the commissions.  And the 

foreign currency adjustments, I think we went through that one 

other time, but I still am not sure why you would have that $28 

million floating around.  Is that the total volume of dollars that 

you expect to pay over the life of the loan, or is that the annual 

incremental cost to deal with providing the debt costs for 

acquiring the debt? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm not clear on what 

the member's saying because to me that footnote that he's 

talking about, the 28 million, is adequately explained and I'll 

just read it: 

 

 Under the accrual method of accounting, commissions paid 

in respect of new debt issues are expensed or amortized over 

the life of the respective issues regardless of when they are 

paid.  Under the modified cash basis of accounting 

commissions are expensed in the year that they are paid.  In 

1992-93, the Province is forecast to have paid $29.1 million 

in commissions on debt issued during that year.  Accruing 

these commissions would result in the Province expensing 

$1.1 million of this amount in 1992-93 and the remaining 

$28.0 million in future years. 

 

So what we're saying is that is amortized over the life of the 

debt. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay, so then I go back to my assessment 

here that you have $112 million, and we reduced that to 69 or 

$70 million because of accrual accounting, so you got $70 

million left -- $40 million or $36 million is roughly the cost of 

that money, and it would be less than that because you went out 

and you got the money, some of the money from the 

Saskatchewan public for a little over 7 last year.  So you're 

going in at 7 times 400 million additional funds is 28 million.  

So you've got more spread yet. 

 

And my question to you is where did the money go that is in 

between there?  And then you say that the 28 million is 

accruing, these commissions would result in the province 

expensing in '92-93, 1.1 million, which takes it from the 29.1 

down to 28.  You still have 28 million that you plugged in 

there, and I don't get those numbers to add up. 

 

Now I think what I'm asking here is an explanation for this.  

And what we got from asking our accountants who we talked 

to, is they had a whole lot of difficulty in gaining access to the 

information that was provided in the detail that you provided to 

me here.  And that's why we're asking the questions, because 

other 



June 14, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2501 

accountants are saying, we're not sure where you got the money 

from. 

 

So I would say that 112 million, I'll give you the accrual 

accounting down to $70 million.  I'll give you $30 million 

roughly for the additional increase in the volume of dollars in 

the budget.  If you had to take some additional monies and 

market some treasury bills or whatever, and buy new ones, you 

still come up with an average of 9 per cent at $36 million.  

You're almost $35 million difference there. 

 

Then you take the $28 million off because you attach all of the 

accrual accounting cost to the one year, which you shouldn't 

have done, in my view.  So you should have $28 million, and 

$1.1 million a year in accrual accounting for that additional 400 

million.  That's the way I would say it should add up and I'd 

like to have you explain that to the Assembly on what it should 

be. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Again if I could refer the member 

opposite to the commentary on page 55.  I think there is an 

explanation there and if he would like, I can expand on that 

explanation.  We go through the cost in the second paragraph 

of page 55.  We go through the fact that approximately 19.4 

million of this is an increase in the financing of the '93-94 

deficit, which we have accounted for, an increase in the 

borrowing requirements of the General Revenue Fund, which 

we have accounted for, and talked about. 

 

(2030) 

 

But what's added is the remaining 51.5 million, is the cost of 

financing for a full year in '93-94 and '92-93 forecast deficit 

and other '92-93 forecast borrowing requirements of the 

General Revenue Fund.  For example, we wrote off Crown 

debts last year but we did not have to write off the full year, we 

only wrote off part of the year.  Now this year we're having to 

write off the full year on those sorts of debts, so that accounts 

for the difference. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Can you give me those items that you wrote 

off in those . . . with a detail of which ones you did in this 

assessment that you just explained? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, yes we can provide 

him with that information.  But just briefly, last year 875 

million in Crown debt was transferred to the Consolidated 

Fund.  Last year we only covered three-quarters of the year for 

that debt; this year we're having to cover the full year. But we 

will give him a list of what was transferred. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I appreciate that.  I want to change the subject 

a little bit to the news today as it relates to the GDP (gross 

domestic product).  Was it correct -- I was in here most of the 

day and I didn't hear -- was it correct that the GDP of Canada 

was at .5 per cent-plus? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- The statistics that we have is for 

March, .7 per cent, which was . . . that was 

announced at the Finance ministers' meeting which would, on 

an annualized basis, turn out to be 3.9 per cent.  And I know 

what was significant about that statistic is it was by far the best 

in the G-7 countries and it was consistent with the projections 

that Canada, of all the G-7 countries, is to experience the 

highest rate of growth next year. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- That's calculated .7 times 4? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- The 3.9 would be the annualized 

estimate.  The .7 was just with respect to that one time period.  

But what I think is significant and what the Finance ministers 

greeted with enthusiasm was the idea that the growth projection 

was very high by G-7 standards and very high in terms of 

Estimates that existed.  And they're still projecting something 

around 3.9 on an annualized basis. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- What portion of the GDP does Saskatchewan 

have in relation to Canada? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- In the neighbourhood of 3 per cent. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Was it also stated today that Saskatchewan's 

was at minus 3.5? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I think as the 

member quotes these statistics, he is not talking about the same 

thing I'm talking about.  You are probably referring to a 

Statistics Canada report which did not refer to this year, but in 

fact referred to last year.  So we are not talking about GDP for 

1993, we're talking . . . that number that you're talking about I 

believe was a 1992 statistic. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well we'll find that out later tomorrow and 

we'll find out what exactly they are.  Can you provide me . . . I 

visit with a lot of people and I get a sense that there's a 

reduction in the volume of sales.  Have you done any tracking 

so far from March 31 or April 1, have you got any tracking that 

deals with where we're going in the last two months? 

 

Are we going up?  And if you have that in various sectors like 

automobiles, retail hardware or goods and services or any of 

those kinds of items, can you give me an overview of how that 

is being accomplished or what's happening in those areas? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to that 

question, it's Statistics Canada that keeps track of those figures.  

So what we have is we have the first three months of this year 

as Saskatchewan sales for January over January, were 

increased by 4.4 per cent, '93 over '92 for January; for 

February, Saskatchewan sales increased 5.3 per cent over 

February; and for March, Saskatchewan sales increased 3.1 per 

cent.  And what would be very interesting about the March 

figures is sales in Saskatchewan increased by 3.1 per cent.  

With all the talk the members opposite do about cross-border 

shopping, Alberta sales declined by .3 per cent in that time 

period. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. 



2502 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1993 

Chairman.  Madam Minister, and officials, good evening.  I 

have some few but very specific questions.  Why is the 

Department of Finance the only department which has an item 

which is entitled "unforeseen and unprovided for" in its 

budget?  This item was $660,000 in the '91-92 fiscal year and 

it's now at $50,000.  And I'm just wondering if you would 

explain that to me, please. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, Madam Member, if I 

could give you a simple answer. These monies are monies 

involved in court judgements where the government, in 

response to some issue, like a pension issue, is required to 

refund money to a claimant or some other issue that has gone 

through the courts.  The reason that specific detail is not 

provided is because all the names are here.  So it's the kind of 

information that has to be kept confidential because it has 

individuals' names and the circumstances under which the 

government was required to, say, refund the money or to pay 

out money to an individual. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I was 

actually somewhat confused by it.  I really didn't know what 

this particular item was for.  If in fact there's a way of sharing 

that information with the deletion of the names, I would be 

most interested in knowing how the monies are spent.  Is that 

possible? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, there's no problem in 

doing that.  What we will do is just take out the obviously 

identifying information and provide you with a list of the items 

that are involved. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  I have a question 

regarding pensions.  I've noted that there's an increase in the 

MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) pension plan of 

$86,000, an increase in judges' pension plan of $289,000 -- 

which is some 40 per cent increase -- but a reduction in the 

municipal employee superannuation plan. And I'm wondering 

if you would expound on that, please. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Madam Member, if I could explain 

the differences.  First of all, in the budget address we 

announced a 1 per cent increase to superannuates, people who'd 

been employees of the government and who had had their 

pensions frozen for a period of time, a significant period of 

time.  And many of these people had been retired for some 

period of time and had fixed pensions and there was a hardship.  

So that explains the increase there. 

 

With respect to the municipal pension plan, that was a fixed 

commitment whereby the government guaranteed the pensions 

of a group of people.  And, quite frankly, because the pool of 

people is not being increased -- it's a frozen commitment -- as 

those people age and retire and pass away, the level of 

commitment from the government because of that guarantee 

will decline. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Why have early retirement 

and cost of living allowances gone from $59,000 in the 

1991-92 budget to $1.026 million in 1993? 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, the simple answer to 

that is basically downsizing of government.  As we downsize, 

different employees have different rights so some would have 

rights to early retirement packages. 

 

And also we have tried as a government to be as compassionate 

as possible in downsizing and so if there was any possibility 

that an employee should be eligible for early retirement . . . 

There's a formula in place which is quite a demanding formula 

in that you have to have a combination of a certain number of 

years of service and a certain age, then you would be eligible 

for early retirement.  The number has increased because we are 

downsizing government. 

 

(2045) 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Madam Minister. So how 

many people are we talking about here, that make up this 1.026 

million in 1993? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Madam Member, if I could give you 

an answer it's that we budgeted 1.2 in the expectation that that 

would be the uptake.  But to date 70 members have 

participated. But we're not clear until we get to the end of the 

year how many other people will participate, because there has 

to be a combination of circumstances, has to be somebody 

whose position is going to be abolished and it has to be 

somebody who fits the criteria, that is a certain lengthy period 

of service plus a certain age. 

 

So the budgeted number was based on an estimate of how 

many people:  (a) would qualify; and of those who would 

quality, how many would actually take advantage of the 

opportunity to have early retirement.  To date it's 70, but we do 

not have an accurate estimate because we'll have to wait till the 

end of the year to know exactly what the number will be. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  I take from that then that what 

you're saying is you anticipate that there will be a greater 

number than 70 by year's end.  Thank you. 

 

This is a workmen's compensation question.  Why is the cost of 

workers' compensation increased by 8 per cent?  I'm just 

curious, are there more employees or is that the new cost of 

premiums? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Madam Member, I would suggest 

there are three explanations:  one is the number of people 

involved.  Our experience . . . or to use another word, the 

record as you look over the past and you try to estimate what 

the statistics have been in the past in terms of potential claims, 

then you adjust your Estimates in future years on the basis of 

past experience.  And the legislation being introduced will 

result in an increase in fees which will have to be paid by us as 

well. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  I appreciate you taking these 

very different and specific questions, but these are the ones that 

I had most interest in.  They just really quite surprised me and I 

couldn't figure out the 



June 14, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2503 

logical answer to them. 

 

I have a couple of questions -- well one in particular -- 

regarding the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, under item 8.  I'm 

wondering how many people actually withdrew from the plan.  

And in your discussions, please, with your officials, I want to 

know what the cost was of administering the wind-down, after 

the $10 withdrawal fee was accounted for. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Madam Member, if I could give you 

an estimate on the cost.  We budgeted 700,000 for the 

wind-down.  Our rough estimate is that it came in about 

730,000 but we can check the accuracy of that.  But the budget 

was 700,000.  It was very close to the budget and our rough 

estimate is that it was 730,000.  With respect to the withdrawal, 

45 per cent of the members withdrew, so it means that 55 per 

cent remained in the plan for the long term. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  Madam Minister, I 

have one final question.  The Finance department seems to be 

the one department which has substantially reduced its 

operating budget, its expenditures.  And the department seems 

to have made noticeable reductions in the operating expenses, 

except for administration.  It's been able to reduce its salaries as 

well.  I think that's highly commendable.  But I am rather 

curious and concerned about the fact that while this was 

happening the department was unable, after starting in the right 

direction, to produce an overall net reduction in the spending 

for the department.  And I'm wondering if you could give some 

explanation for that.  Because if it isn't even possible for the 

Department of Finance to set an example and come in spending 

less money than it did in '91-92, then I think it would be very 

difficult for other departments to do so as well. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Madam Member, actually I'm very 

pleased to answer that question because I do think it is 

important that the Department of Finance is a model of 

restraint.  And I think actually if we go through the numbers, it 

will become apparent that the department is a model for 

restraint. 

 

On page 59 of the Estimates, you'll notice that there's an 

increase in pension costs.  This is something that the 

Department of Finance and the government has no control over 

in the sense that they're automatically built in.  The increase 

there is 3 million.  So there's an increase in pension costs too 

that have to go onto the department's budget of 3 million.  The 

department cannot make any reductions internally to control 

that amount. 

 

The other thing that has increased is because of the move to 

accrual accounting.  On page 58 we are now required to put 

into our budget an amount for doubtful accounts.  So we have 

been forced to add $2.3 million to our budget for doubtful 

accounts, and there was no number in '92-93 for doubtful 

accounts. 

 

So if you put in . . . if you add up the fact that we had to add to 

the budget $2.3 million for doubtful accounts, that we had an 

increase in the pension costs to 

different pensions throughout government of 3 million, our 

costs that we had no control over had increased by 5.3 million, 

and in fact our budget had increased only by just about 2 

million.  So what we have saved the government, our net 

reductions are still $2.5 million. 

 

So I welcome that question because it gave us an opportunity to 

explain some of these other factors. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

I want to have a short discussion about the upgrader and your 

role in some of what has transpired there.  And your 

department is involved in I believe some of the financing that is 

obtained.  I wonder, Madam Minister, if you could tell me the 

period of time that you sat on the board of the Saskatoon Co-op 

Association. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- I'm interested in the relevance of 

this.  As I recall it was probably 1986 to 1990. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Madam 

Minister, it appears that when one reads all of the various 

articles and parts that have been going around about this 

particular negotiation, that your government has perhaps been 

involved in an agenda other than a financial one. 

 

I wonder, Madam Minister, if you could tell me what portion of 

the upgrader's debt is, I understand, up for voluntary 

renegotiation in December of 1994, and what classifications of 

debt that is. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, this is really a Crown 

Investments Corporation question, but we will look and see if 

we can give you any assistance.  But I certainly welcome this 

opportunity to respond to my role with respect to Federated 

Co-ops.  As my colleague has pointed out, I was president of 

the Saskatoon Co-op from 1986 to 1990. 

 

But there are two points of misinformation out in the public, 

the press, and the members opposite have alluded to it.  And I 

would really welcome this opportunity to clarify the situation.  

First of all, with respect to Mr. Don Ching and I, we never sat 

on the Saskatoon Co-op board together.  Mr. Don Ching was 

not even on the Saskatoon Co-op board when we had our initial 

agreement signed with Federated. 

 

But with respect to the relationship with Federated, in the 

initial stages when Federated first came into our board and 

presented us unilaterally with an agreement, we took objection 

to the process.  But as you will find in the newspapers . . . and I 

will get the member opposite a copy of this newspaper article 

because it would clarify very nicely the situation. 

 

When I was appointed associate Finance minister last year, in 

1992, an article was run in the Star-Phoenix. The author of the 

article was Paul Martin, the business editor, and it was a very 

complimentary article to the effect that I have a lot of 

experience dealing with difficult situations and I was a person 

who had good 



2504 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1993 

judgement in these situations. 

 

Now what's interesting about that article is who was being 

quoted in making these favourable comments about my 

abilities and integrity.  It was Federated Co-ops; it was the 

regional manager for Federated Co-ops who had worked with 

me and the rest of the board over a period of time. 

 

So the question would not have arisen except the member 

opposite asked for my involvement in the board.  I think it's 

important to understand that by the time that relationship ended 

because my term as president ended, the relationship between 

Federated Co-ops was a very positive relationship, and there is 

a record in which a high-ranking official of Federated Co-ops 

was willing to say that to the press when I was appointed 

associate Finance minister.  And I will ensure that you get a 

copy of that newspaper article tomorrow. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Obviously, Mr. Chairman, the minister has a 

touchy spot here.  I simply asked a question and I got a very, 

very long answer.  And I'm glad she puts so much stock in Mr. 

Paul Martin because I will be asking some questions related to 

things that Mr. Martin has mentioned in his newspaper, and I 

hope Mr. Martin has as much credibility in her other answers. 

 

Madam Minister, the financing for the upgrader -- and you can 

correct me if I'm wrong -- does have a significant portion of its 

debt up for voluntary review in December 1991 . . . I believe 

it's December 31, in fact, of '94. 

 

Madam Minister, would it be the responsibility of your 

department to go out and if necessary, if that review demands 

further implementation or borrowings, would your department 

go borrow that money? 

 

(2100) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- At present it's Crown Investments 

Corporation that is the lead agency for the upgrader project.  So 

the details of what would be required and the formal request for 

more money to be borrowed would come through Crown 

Investments Corporation. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- But ultimately it would be your responsibility 

to go out and borrow the money.  Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, we just 

respond . . . all that we do is centralize the monitoring of the 

borrowing.  But if the money had to be borrowed, it would be 

Crown Investments Corporation that would make that decision. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, do you sit on the board of 

Crown Investments Corporation? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I sit on the board of 

Crown Investments Corporation but I'm not the chair of it. 

Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, let's not get cute here.  I've 

been there, okay?  I know how it works. 

 

Now your department will go out and borrow the money.  And 

there isn't a chance, or at least there shouldn't be a chance that 

you're going to allow the chairman of Crown Investments 

Corporation to go out and borrow the money by himself.  So 

why don't we dispense with the footwork here and just get 

down to the fact that your department will go out and borrow 

the money.  You sit on the board of Crown Investments.  And it 

is all cabinet ministers, senior cabinet ministers in your 

government that'll make this decision.  It's one and the same, 

okay? 

 

Now, Madam Minister, Mr. Paul Martin says, and I quote: 

 

 But one interesting perspective comes from Toronto lawyer, 

John Levine, (who I suspect is known to your officials) 

counsel for the Canadian banks who advanced several 

hundred millions of dollars to finance the upgrader 

construction.  Mr. Levine says it is performing up to 

expectation.  No one believed it could generate profit until 

the end of the decade.  That's the basis that it was represented 

to lenders, and that's the way it was handled. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, my information is that the consortium 

of lenders who lent money to this project, until your 

government threatened legislation, unilateral legislation to 

change the upgrader agreement, were not concerned about their 

investment.  In fact, according to Mr. Martin, who you so 

eloquently backed and quoted here just the question before, 

they didn't see any problem with the financing arrangement at 

all.  Madam Minister, it is only your threat of unilateral action 

that has placed the financing for this project in some jeopardy. 

 

Madam Minister, would you tell me what would happen if the 

financing in December of 1994, because of your legislation, 

goes from a voluntary review to a mandatory review by the 

consortium of Canadian banks that hold several hundred 

millions of dollars in debt on this project? What would happen 

then? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to respond in 

three different ways.  First of all, with respect to the capacity of 

the project to be sustainable, I can tell you, when I was the 

minister in charge of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan), that last year the interest payment on the 

NewGrade project was only paid because the different parties 

were able to take out another loan to pay your interest. 

 

To put that in terms that the average person can identify with, 

it's like your mortgage payment coming due and you have to go 

to the credit union and get a loan to pay your mortgage 

payment.  And I think anybody who is in that situation, as this 

project is in that situation, would know that they are in a 

hand-to-mouth existence. 



June 14, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2505 

The problem for the province of course is that we have 

guaranteed the debt so the taxpayers are on the hook for 360 

million.  But if the member would like some new information 

with respect to NewGrade that has yet to be made available to 

the public, I will make this available to him.  The information 

is, my officials have told me that when the members opposite 

were government, they too had concerns about this project. 

 

And the officials were asked to look into the feasibility of a tax 

on the refinery in order to recoup some of the funds.  Now 

what we have to date is the word of my officials but we are 

looking now for documentation to substantiate that in more 

formal terms.  So this is a problem that is a problem for our 

government, but from the recorded memory of my officials, it 

was a problem for your government as well. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Madam Minister, you certainly have a 

right to impose taxes. You could raise the royalty rates on the 

synthetic crude oil that's produced out of that refinery. There's 

lots of things I suppose you could do rather than bring 

legislation in here and upset the apple cart. 

 

What I asked you was -- and your officials should know this -- 

if the financing, and a major portion of it is up for voluntary 

review in December of 1994, if because of your legislation that 

becomes a mandatory review, what normally would happen? 

 

Would the cost of the borrowing go up?  Would it go down?  

Would it stay the same?  Mr. John Levine, the legal counsel for 

the consortium that lent the money, says that without your 

legislation, they don't feel under any pressure because the 

upgrader is living up to expectations.  If you force a mandatory 

review, Madam Minister, what is going to happen to the 

borrowing? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, we have no idea 

what the member opposite is talking about in terms of the 

particular article that he's talking about.  What we do know is 

that Judge Estey has said that the project has financially run 

aground. 

 

Now with respect to what the effect would be on interest rates, 

it is impossible to predict, and again this is a question that you 

should ask CIC because CIC would have all the details about 

the investors involved. 

 

But I certainly take strong exception to a particular individual 

saying that this project is financially sound.  We had a 

distinguished, former Supreme Court justice -- who has by the 

way, besides being a distinguished individual, fixed a number 

of troublesome deals -- look at this project for a number of 

months and his conclusion was that in a financial sense it had 

run aground. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Madam Minister, the distinguished 

former Supreme Court judge didn't recommend bringing in 

legislation that takes away the rights of Saskatchewan citizens 

to go to court.  He 

didn't recommend bringing in legislation that would 

unilaterally change the board of directors of the NewGrade 

project.  He didn't recommend that you bring in legislation that 

may -- if we've got $300 million, say, in class C debentures or 

notes up for renegotiation in December of '94, and you by 

doing this are forced into a mandatory review -- have your 

interest rates jacked up 1 or 2 per cent on that because of your 

foolishness.  Judge Estey didn't have anything to do with any of 

those things.  Unless you think you can find a way, Madam 

Minister, to legislate that you don't have to pay increased 

interest rates, because of your foolishness, to chartered 

Canadian banks.  Maybe you've got that one figured out too, I 

don't know. 

 

There are a lot of concerns, Madam Minister, because another 

eminent Saskatchewan person that you so often like to quote, 

Mr. Donald Gass of Deloitte & Touche, who you often use as a 

raison d'tre for doing certain things in here, has done an 

analysis of what your government is up to and says that 

Federated Co-ops would be very foolish to do what you are 

recommending because you would put their entire retail system 

at risk. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, if the consortium of Canadian banks 

that lent the money to the project didn't think it was going to 

make a profit until the end of the decade, and Justice Estey 

didn't recommend bringing in heavy-handed legislation, and 

Mr. Don Gass says that your solution could jeopardize the 

entire Federated Co-operative retailing structure, don't you 

think, Madam Minister, that it might be prudent to take a 

second look at what you're doing? 

 

Now I ask you, Madam Minister, just give me a what if.  Say 

you've got $300 million on the upgrader that has to be 

renegotiated on a mandatory basis.  I want to know -- your 

officials would understand -- I want to know what the impact 

would be on the interest rates if that process takes place. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- With respect to the question that was 

asked most recently, it depends on the interest rates at the time.  

Everybody knows that when you go to renegotiate a loan it 

depends, if the interest rate in which the loan was taken out is 

lower than the interest rate now, they'll pay more; if the interest 

rate was higher when they took out the loan, when they go to 

renegotiate, it will be less.  But this is all very hypothetical. 

 

I guess I just want to point out a few things about what the 

government is doing here.  The taxpayers of this province have 

already paid out of their pockets, $232 million to have had to 

write off.  It's about a quarter of a billion dollars, of tax dollars, 

got into that project and the taxpayers of this province are 

never going to see it again.  It's a quarter of a billion that could 

be spent on hospitals, job creation, and the list goes on. 

 

We are also on the hook for another 360 million should this 

project run aground financially. And the learned justice who I 

would remind the member opposite, when he was appointed, 

the member  



2506 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1993 

opposite said was a very credible appointment -- said that the 

project has in fact run aground. 

 

Our solution is a simple one.  We're saying that the taxpayer 

can no longer alone be on the hook.  The project is owned half 

by the province, half by Federated.  If profits occur at some 

distant point in the future, the profits will be shared half by 

taxpayer, half by Federated. 

 

Why is it reasonable that every time the project loses money, 

only the taxpayer puts in money?  What we're saying is that the 

losses should be shared as the profits are shared.  And we're 

saying that because that's what the judge said. 

 

The other thing the judge said was this.  The judge said that 

there's a basic conflict of interest in Federated's position.  

Federated owns the refinery exclusively, all by themselves.  

None of the profits from that refinery go to the taxpayers.  

They jointly own, with the taxpayers, an upgrader.  The 

refinery makes money, the upgrader loses money.  Federated 

runs both projects. 

 

The allegation has been made that costs that should be paid by 

the refinery, by Federated, are being put on the taxpayers' side 

of the ledger.  It's a very serious situation.  The judge saw this 

as a serious situation.  And he said, it was a conflict of interest 

from the point of view of Federated. 

 

And he recommended a solution -- that there had to be an 

arbitration process in place.  Actually the process is in place, 

but it had to automatically kick in so that we could decide 

whether the costs were being apportioned fairly. 

 

I guess the final point is: yes, we want to negotiate, we want a 

negotiated agreement.  But this has been 18 months; we have 

had a Supreme Court justice in here looking at the situation. He 

has concluded what the solution is.  We have tried to sit down 

with the other party and talk about the solution.  Even the 

federal government is willing to talk in terms of a solution, 

from their point of view.  We have had no significant 

movement on their part.  They're not willing to negotiate with 

us in terms of the principles of Judge Estey. 

 

Our commitment, our obligation -- again the judge says this in 

his report -- is to defend the taxpayers and the treasury of this 

province and that's what we're doing. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, the minister wants to mislead 

the Assembly and, Madam Minister, that's simply not 

acceptable.  You know darn well that that 50/50 split does not 

occur until Saskatchewan's portion is paid back.  And I would 

hope you would have the courage to stand on your feet and 

admit that.  Because you know the agreement: that that money 

will be paid back in its entirety to the taxpayer before the 

profits are split. 

 

Now Madam Minister wanted to quote Paul Martin. 

Paul Martin says: 

 

 The NDP has done a masterful job of portraying the upgrader 

situation as a disaster needing urgent attention.  If you stop to 

think about the financial realities versus the political realities, 

it seems the urgency stems from Brian Mulroney's decision to 

retire.  The NDP wants to deal with Ottawa now, not with a 

cabinet under the leadership of Kim Campbell whose views 

on the upgrader are unknown, or Jean Charest whose 

Saskatchewan organizer is the member from Estevan, the guy 

who negotiated the deal in the first place. 

 

Paul Martin's view, the journalist Madam Minister quoted to 

me as being the guy right on the money, is that there's a high 

degree of politics here.  Okay?  The guy that represents the 

banks who lent the money said they weren't expecting any 

return till the end of the decade.  Don Gass says the province is 

flawed.  Madam Minister stands up here and says that the 

taxpayer is only getting 50 per cent of the profits when she 

knows full well that the province's contribution will be paid 

back first. 

 

I would say that would lead me to believe, Madam Minister, 

that it's mostly politics rather than financial.  So would you 

mind telling me that the taxpayer isn't going to get paid back 

before the 50/50 split occurs? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, there are a number of 

things unfortunately have to be clarified.  First of all with 

respect to Paul Martin, all I said was he wrote the article.  The 

favourable comments were made by a Federated official.  It's 

an interesting way that the truth is taken and twisted to say 

something somewhat different, but really substantially 

different.  So I've said nothing about Paul Martin except he 

wrote the article; the favourable comments were made by 

another individual who's a Federated official. 

 

With respect to the long-term profits, if this project ever does 

become profitable in the long term, Federated will share in the 

profits even though all the equity put into the project was put 

there by governments. 

 

And again, we can stand here and you can go through this 

individual who had this opinion and another individual who 

had that opinion, and we can ask this individual what his 

opinion was.  But the key point is the government appointed a 

former Supreme Court justice.  We have on the record 

comments which I can again make available to you which the 

member opposite said, this is a credible appointment. 

 

And he studied this project from every possible angle for 

months.  He heard from all of the interested parties, and he 

didn't take the point of view of the Government of 

Saskatchewan or of Federated Co-ops, or the Government of 

Canada.  He took his own independent view and his judgement 

was simple -- from a financial point of view the project has run 

aground. 



June 14, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2507 

(2115) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Madam Minister, we'll get into this 

with some other members of your government, but I think it's 

clear to most people that what we've had going on here has a 

lot more to do with politics in this issue -- politics when you 

were on the board of the Saskatoon Co-op Association, politics 

when you were the minister in charge of CIC, and politics 

today when your friend, Don Ching, sits as the president of the 

Crown Investment Corporation, and the decisions that are 

made, vis-a-vis the NewGrade upgrader project. 

 

I would have thought that the general counsel for the Canadian 

Bankers' Association members who lent the money to the 

project, if they had their shirt twisted in a knot over this thing, 

would have been prepared to, at the same time that he was 

talking about the project with Mr. Paul Martin, would have put 

some kind of a caveat on here about their deep concern.  But he 

didn't do that, and he had the opportunity.  He didn't do that. 

 

My deep concern is, Madam Minister, with your political 

agenda on this thing, that a whole bunch of the loans that are 

mandatorily reviewed, don't necessarily have to change, the 

interest rate doesn't have to change, nothing has to change.  By 

bringing legislation in here, walking in and taking control of 

the board of directors, saying that there is no recourse under the 

court system for anyone affected -- including the Canadian 

Bankers' Association members who lent the money -- that you 

can simply use the power of this legislature to take the court 

process totally away from each and every person connected 

with this thing, that this isn't going to have financial 

repercussions for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I say to you, Madam Minister, as the Finance minister, 

you should be concerned that when the government has the 

ability to do that, that there are other folks around the world 

who take notice of it and aren't particularly going to be pleased 

with it.  And the end is going to be increase to the province of 

Saskatchewan, the taxpayers here. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, there seems to be a growing body of 

opinion out there that your government is up to no good on this 

and that you need to get back to the operating . . . to the 

consulting table, to the negotiating table.  You need to take that 

legislation off the books and get on with it. 

 

You still, Madam Minister, haven't answered the one question I 

asked you, and I know your officials can answer it.  If a 

voluntary review goes to a mandatory review, is it a half a 

point, is it one point, in the experience of people over there 

who have borrowed lots of money worldwide?  If it goes from 

a voluntary to a mandatory review, what usually is the 

outcome?  Because people in the financial sector that I've 

talked to tell me there is a penalty you pay.  I want the best 

guess from your officials who borrow money each and every 

day. 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm really not going 

to allow the member to keep on putting inaccuracies on the 

record.  And this is fine; I like going over these facts. 

 

The fact is, there's an allegation of a political agenda.  Don 

Ching was not on the board of the Saskatoon Co-op when it 

was taken over by Federated Co-op.  The fact is, Federated was 

on record last fall as to what their view of me was.  It was a 

positive endorsement.  These people, by the time I left the 

co-op, were people we worked cooperatively with.  These are 

our friends which makes this situation even more difficult to 

deal with. 

 

So please let's keep the facts straight . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . yes, with respect to the financial community, I 

don't have any clue what the member opposite could possibly 

be conjuring up because we have met regularly with members 

of the Canadian banking association, other people in the 

financial community. 

 

We've explained the problem with NewGrade.  We've 

explained what we were doing.  I can tell you, you could try 

freedom of information.  I do not have one record, one letter on 

record of any complaints or problems. 

 

So what it is is once again a gloom-and-doom scenario, the sky 

is falling in and somebody out there who doesn't even contact 

the Minister of Finance is telling the members of the opposition 

the sky is falling in because of this. 

 

With respect to the specific question, the people in my 

department cannot give you an opinion.  They do not know 

what the difference would be and they don't see any reason 

why there would necessarily be a difference.  So no matter how 

many times you ask that question, they cannot give you a 

different answer. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Item 9 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, on these 

pensions and benefits that are identified here, how many of 

them -- you can do this in a letter to me afterwards -- how 

many of them are allowed to have a opportunity to transfer 

these pensions to a registered investment fund at retirement.  

Would you be able to provide that for me in writing and then 

I'd like to have some discussion with you afterwards about 

them.  Would you do that. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I would commit to 

give the member opposite that information and then to discuss 

it with him. 

 

Item 9 agreed to. 

 

Finance 



2508 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1993 

Servicing the Public Debt Government Share 

Vote 12 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Last week in Estimates I asked the minister 

for a list of . . . for the $157 million in capital projects, or 

projects under construction, which because of the changing in 

accounting methods have been bumped into this year's debt, 

and I haven't received them yet, and I'm wondering if I'm going 

to. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, this is here with us 

today and we will send it across. 

 

Vote 18 agreed to. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Debt Redemption, Sinking Fund and Interest Payments 

 

Items 1 to 3 inclusive, authorized by law. 

 

The Chair: -- That concludes Estimates for the Department of 

Finance, if the minister would thank her officials. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank 

my officials and also like to thank the opposition for their 

questions. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I too would like 

to take the opportunity to thank the officials for coming in.  It's 

always nice to know they're diligent enough to come in, in the 

evening, and help us work it out.  So thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Loans, Advances and Investments 

                        Saskatchewan Gaming Commission Vote 142 

Item 1 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you very much, Mr. 

Chairman.  To my left I have Dave Innes, the special adviser 

on the casino projects; and behind me I have Gwen 

Frankowski, who is the director of administration and human 

resources. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a few 

questions as it relates to items that appeared in the Star-

Phoenix over the weekend.  And I want to begin where I left 

off in my discussion about whether in fact the public would 

agree to have these video lottery terminals in bars. 

 

And I guess from the review that the paper has regarding that, 

there is some question about whether the public would accept 

where they are.  And I noticed you made a statement that said 

that was probably just because they hadn't seen them there yet 

and they weren't prepared to accept them there yet.  And I'm 

not sure that that is relevant.  I'd like you to explain that. 

 

(2130) 

 

And then I have a strong feeling about why . . . or I 

have a strong opinion about why women, in the survey that 

they did, are more against this kind of a focus than men are.  

And I believe that if you would take an assessment of 

alcoholism and have a survey done on the same basis, you 

would find that same variable occur when women are asked the 

questions.  And the question is due to the individuals becoming 

addicted to the process. 

 

And I think that that's a significant point to be made in why 

these individuals would have something against it.  And they 

have consistently been more against this gambling than the 

men have.  And that is because the dollars flow out of the menu 

for the home.  And the groceries and the things that the 

individuals need to live on are slowly eroded out of the home 

by the very fact that they get addicted to it. 

 

And I think, and I said this the other day when we were visiting 

about this, Mr. Minister, that I think the very fact that you have 

these video lottery terminals in bars has a significant impact on 

the two items that could cause addiction getting together and 

even making the matter worse.  And I'd like to have you 

respond to that. Since you're both the gaming coordinator and 

the liquor coordinator, maybe we could have a significant 

answer from you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'd like 

to answer the member from Morse in this way.  I think he was 

referring to the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix article in which I 

indicated that I guess familiarity would have something to do 

with the reaction and the response when I was shown the 

results of their survey. 

 

And the reason that I mentioned that was that, as you will 

know, there's been existing forms of gaming in Saskatchewan 

for a long, long time.  We have lotteries, and I note in their 

survey that 82 per cent favour lotteries; bingos, and 58.7 

favour, according to this survey are in favour of bingos as a 

form of gaming; and horse racing, in the neighbourhood of 

64.2 per cent.  And I guess what I was saying is that people, I 

guess, are not aware of how these casinos will look, the size of 

them, how the video lottery terminals function, and how they 

work. 

 

And I just want to say, in terms of an explanation, that we are 

concerned in terms of the impact of gaming on the general 

public.  We know that there are problem gamblers.  And the 

fact that we have existing forms of gaming in this province, 

and people who have some problems controlling the amount 

that they will spend on gaming, is there.  It's existing now and I 

. . . you know, and we certainly don't deny it.  We recognize 

that. 

 

What I do know is that in the polling that we have done, which 

has become public information, and I'm sure the member will 

be familiar, what people were asking for is that there be a great 

degree, a strong degree, a large degree of government 

regulation and government control.  And we've indicated in our 

conversations in this House, and I've said to the media, that we 

intend to ensure that there will be a strong regulatory body and 

strong control by the 



June 14, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2509 

government. 

 

And the other issue that became very apparent in the 

questionnaire that we put forth was that they were concerned 

with respect to minors having access, either playing or having 

visible access to the machines.  And we have indicated that in 

both cases we clearly will recognize that and we will deal with 

that through regulation, to ensure that those two things: one, 

that the age restriction is there; and that there is strong 

government control and regulation. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- In the overall assessment, are you in favour of 

full-time casinos in Saskatchewan -- 53 per cent said no.  If you 

take a look at the female side of it, it was over 60 per cent, Mr. 

Minister, and I think that that has some significance.  And then 

to take a look at when you put it in a bar, it goes up 10 per cent, 

and I think that that is significant in itself.  And I'm not here 

speaking one way or the other way, for or against hoteliers who 

want to have these machines in their hotels.  However, what it 

tells me is that the women in the province of Saskatchewan 

have a concern about where the dollars are going to go that 

come into the home.  And I think you need to be concerned 

about that, Mr. Minister.  When you hit 70 per cent, 71 per cent 

of the people saying that, I think you need to take that very 

seriously and I would suggest that you do that. 

 

You've mentioned too that there is a significant volume of 

people who want the industry regulated and controlled, and you 

can do all of that, but there's still the things that fall through the 

cracks regardless of whether you do it one way or another way.  

And I think different groups or agencies or government or 

people who regulate the industry have found that out, that it has 

to be absolutely clean and above-board.  And that, Mr. 

Minister, is why we have asked you as many questions.  And 

we're up to 80, I think, already. 

 

That's the reason why we keep asking you those questions 

about the value and also the perception that people have to 

have about it being absolutely clean.  And we have a lot of 

problems with how you have done it.  And some days you say, 

I've made a deal with VLC (Video Lottery Consultants) and 

GTECH.  Some days it's not.  Some days it's off; some days it's 

on.  And I'm not sure that the public are that sure of what 

you're doing.  And that says to me that there is some . . . I 

wouldn't call it irresponsibility, but there is some problem in 

how you're dealing with the public on this very issue.  And why 

has it got that high volume of question related to video lottery 

terminals, I would suggest to you, is that there is some question 

about whether you're doing it right. 

 

And I guess we could argue a long time about that, about 

whether I think you're doing it right, or whether I think you 

should be using Saskatchewan people, or whether I think you 

should be doing it with American people.  I believe that we 

should think about Saskatchewan first in this business and 

seriously consider what the value is to Saskatchewan. 

 

The other thing, if that when you're spending $23 

million, there's a certain amount of that money is profit to 

whoever is going to manufacture those.  And that profit, if it's 

10 per cent, is a significant amount of money.  That's 2.3 

million.  If it's 15 per cent, if it's 20 . . . let's say it's 20 per cent, 

that's almost $5 million worth of profit is going to some place 

else than in Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister.  And these are 

Saskatchewan tax dollars.  And I believe we have an industry 

here that would have the capacity to do that, to manufacture 

and put these things together. 

 

And so, Mr. Minister, those are the items that we're concerned 

with and we want to have you know that we will be watching 

you very carefully about how you handle it.  And when we get 

to Crown Corporations, we'll ask you there how you're dealing 

with it.  Because I've sat in the last Crown Corporations 

meeting and you thumbed your nose at the opposition when 

asked the questions, and it was not a good scene. 

 

And that's the reason why we put special emphasis on this, 

because legitimately there isn't one industry in the world that 

does as many irregular things as we have pointed out 

throughout United States.  And examples after examples of 

irregularities, improprieties, and all those kinds of things.  And 

that's why you need to have it clean, and we are going to make 

sure, Mr. Minister, that you make it clean. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

when you were here last, I asked you a particular question.  I'm 

going to cite that again, because it fits with the next.  And I 

don't expect an answer for this particular question; you were 

going to provide it for me in writing. 

 

I asked you to tell me what the results of being in your 

discussions with particular groups all of whom have asked for 

some revenue once VLTs (video lottery terminal) are 

operating.  And I also wanted to know what, if any, percentage 

sharing will take place.  The first was with the hotel industry, 

the charities licensed to operate bingos, private clubs such as 

veterans clubs and curling clubs who will not be allowed the 

machines and the horse racing industry whose revenues will be 

hurt by that move. 

 

Now I was asking this particular question because of the 

Manitoba experience as you can probably anticipate, where the 

government did not really appear to have a clear idea of what it 

was getting into initially.  They've subsequently had to make 

concessions to Assiniboia Downs by putting slot machines at 

the track.  And they have been making peace with private clubs 

because of the fact that those private clubs' revenues went 

down substantially. 

 

I would just like to know what you've done to anticipate and 

deal with this particular issue because it's going to affect 

revenue projections. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, I would say to the 

member from Greystone that we're quite aware of the fact that 

there will be a shift in terms of revenues, changes in gaming as 

you introduce new forms of 



2510 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1993 

gaming; some will decrease and I think that's quite clear. 

 

We have been studying experiences in other provinces, in other 

jurisdictions to determine what their experience has been.  And 

in the context of putting all of that information together we are 

trying to, I guess, second-guess what the changes may be; at 

this point we just don't know.  We're in the process right now 

of discussions with respect to the revenue sharing and casinos.  

And on the VLT program within the casinos, as yet those 

numbers haven't been totally finalized but it will be a cabinet 

decision item.  Cabinet will make a recommendation.  And 

we'll be out talking to the different people involved to 

determine whether or not they would be satisfied with what 

government would recommend with respect to sharing of the 

revenue. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'm interested in 

knowing the dates that you've met with the Manitoba Lotteries 

officials to get their advice on this particular situation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I could say to the member from 

Greystone that I was in Manitoba, I think roughly about three 

weeks or a month ago, and met with the gaming officials, with 

the gaming minister.  Officials from the Gaming Commission 

had met with the Manitoba gaming association on a number of 

occasions over the past 12, 18 months.  We can, for you, get a 

list of the dates when officials from Saskatchewan met with 

Manitoba officials.  And I'm not sure, do we have a . . . We 

don't have the whole, entire list here but we can get that to you 

and we'll get the dates in writing to indicate exactly when we 

met with them. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  I'm interested in that.  I 

appreciate that very much.  Has the Manitoba Lotteries ever 

presented to your people in the department, in Gaming, with 

the proposal to come in and set up the Saskatchewan system 

based on the Manitoba model? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I'm told by my officials that in the 

initial stages there were discussions with them.  And basically 

that's where it was. 

 

We entered into an agreement with the Western Canada Lottery 

Corporation to introduce our pilot project.  After that point we 

did a request for proposal and we looked at the proposals that 

we received.  And as you will know, GTECH and VLC were 

the two that were short-listed, the two companies that we had 

indicated we chose to enter negotiations for the purchase of the 

VLTs. 

 

So I can say to you that there were preliminary discussions 

with respect to the Manitoba corporation, but they were not 

short-listed.  The two companies that were short-listed were 

VLC and GTECH. 

 

(2145) 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I take it then 

that Manitoba Lotteries had come to 

Saskatchewan or had contacted Saskatchewan and had 

indicated to you and your government the kinds of thing that 

they had experienced with gaming in their province. 

 

As we already know to date, they really ended up with many 

things different from what they had initially anticipated.  And 

so much so that we probably could learn a substantial amount 

from them. 

 

I take it from your comments that you didn't think what they 

had learned was worthy of our being able to adopt or perhaps 

learn from them, from their experience. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- No, what I can say to the member 

from Greystone is that we certainly didn't want to create the 

same problem that the Manitoba Lotteries Foundation found 

themselves in.  And that's why we've been discussing with 

them some of the problems and some of the ways they 

introduce gaming, and some of the changes that we would not 

want to embark upon. 

 

As an example, I know that in Manitoba their revenue sharing 

on their video lottery terminal program in their taverns, in their 

beverage rooms, has a revenue share of 80/20.  They indicated 

that they felt the revenue was far too high for the hoteliers and 

it was one of the examples that we use of things not to do.  

We've introduced our program that has an 85/15 revenue share 

split.  So what we are trying to do is learn from their 

experience clearly.  With respect to this industry, we will be 

introducing a Saskatchewan-made policy, and as I've said, it 

will be based on corrections of errors made in other 

jurisdictions. 

 

I'm not going to suggest to you that I think we'll have a 

trouble-free industry because I don't believe that to be the case.  

Because it's a new industry, things are going to be changing 

fairly dramatically, and we know that there are going to be 

some problems with the introduction of an industry of the 

magnitude that we're about to introduce into the province.  So 

we know there's going to be problems. 

 

But we have done is we've been prudent in learning from other 

people's mistakes, and hopefully we won't create a number of 

our own.  We're hoping to minimize that.  What I can guarantee 

you though is there will be a strong regulatory body controlled 

by the government, the Saskatchewan Gaming Commission, 

and that we will do everything in our power to ensure that the 

industry is run effectively, efficiently, and open and 

above-board. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Have you 

consulted with them about what companies upon which to rely 

for video lottery supplies? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well I can say to the member 

opposite, if you're here lobbying on behalf of IGT 

(International Game Technology) or the Manitoba Lotteries 

Foundation or a corporation that may sell out of Manitoba, that 

we're not into that.  What I can say to you is that we looked at 

the 



June 14, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2511 

manufacturers of video lottery terminals, we looked at their 

ability to produce the machines, we looked at the technology, 

and a number of different criteria that I've indicated before in 

this House.  We short-listed two that we're sitting down and 

negotiating and trying to finalize the purchase arrangements for 

it. 

 

IGT is one of the companies that submitted a bid.  They were 

not chosen and that was the same with all of the companies 

with the exception of VLT and GTECH, and I guess that's how 

it is in all submissions in proposal calls.  There are some 

companies win, and some that don't.  IGT was one that didn't.  

VLC and GTECH did. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I always find it 

rather ironic that with most people who come into this room 

with their officials, I can ask very civilized questions and get 

very civilized answers, which is more than I can say is 

transpiring this evening.  I'm not here to lobby on anyone's 

behalf except the people of Saskatchewan.  I'm here to ask the 

questions on their behalf and I think they have a right to hear 

the answers. 

 

What I'm asking you about and what I'm most interested in is, 

because I have it on reasonable authority, and as you probably 

are quite aware as the minister in charge, that the Manitoba 

government was way off the mark on their initial projections of 

revenue and there was far, far more money that was coming in 

than they had anticipated.  And that is what this is about. 

 

I don't know who has put forward any kind of offers to you and 

who you've accepted tenders from.  I'd like to know what 

portion of your revenue budget is the result of VLTs and what 

you anticipate the net cash proceeds to general revenues to be 

once you have achieved your targets for machine installations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well let me then clarify for the 

member from Greystone that in this fiscal year we're budgeting 

in the neighbourhood of $30 million revenue.  We hope to 

generate between 40 and $50 million when the program is up 

and running on a fully implemented basis.  And part of how we 

arrived at that figure was the Manitoba experience. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  If there are additional 

revenues to that figure, where will they be specifically 

directed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- To the Consolidated Fund. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- You're stating then that the site operators 

will not be eligible for a greater share percentage-wise and that 

you are not perhaps looking after some of the groups who are 

adversely affected by your decisions, such as the horse racing 

industry or bingo charities, if it turns out to be the case that 

they've been hurt by this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- The decision is that after one year 

of full operation we would assess the revenue sharing, the 

percentage, operators versus 

government. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  The Gaming 

Commission has now merged with the Liquor Commission to 

form the Liquor and Gaming Authority.  And I'd like you to 

answer two things at the same time if you wouldn't mind 

addressing them.  When this was officially announced -- I don't 

have the date for it -- and what constitutes an Authority? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- The amalgamation was announced 

in the budget and it's a regulatory body that serves the functions 

that the Liquor Commission and the Gaming Commission 

previously did.  When it's introduced it will serve the same 

functions. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Do I take it then . . . I would like to 

understand, are they an independent body then with the right to 

make decisions and to instruct department staff to carry out 

those decisions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I guess there were to be two 

components to it.  There will be an appeal board that will be set 

up that would review decisions made with respect to 

regulations set out by the Authority.  And the other portion of it 

is that it will be there to -- after cabinet direction and upon 

cabinet direction -- set out the rules and the regulations for the 

Authority. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister. How will this 

affect the physical make-up of the board? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- We haven't determined yet the 

number of board members.  We're going to be consulting 

people in the industry, affected in the industry.  What I can say 

though is we will be saving a substantial amount of money with 

the amalgamation, somewhere we believe in the 

neighbourhood of a half a million dollars-plus. 

 

There won't be a duplication of having two boards; we'll only 

have one board.  So my guess is that the costs would be 

reduced substantially just on the board alone.  I'm guessing that 

it would be somewhere downsized, but will still be able to 

function and act appropriately on the decisions that it makes. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you. Do you know how many of the 

current gaming commissioners are going to move to the new 

Authority at this time? 

 

If I may, Mr. Minister, just to add to this.  I'm wondering 

what's going to happen to the current minister of the Gaming 

Commission and her acquired experience over the last few 

months. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well the current minister of the 

Gaming Commission? I think you perhaps mean the 

chairperson of the Gaming Authority.  The decision hasn't been 

made yet with respect to the make-up of the new commission.  

That will have to be presented.  A recommendation will go 

from the minister to cabinet, and cabinet will make the decision 

at the appropriate time. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I think perhaps by putting a 



2512 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1993 

couple of things together, I muddied the waters here.  I'm 

wondering how many of the current gaming commissioners 

would move to the new Authority.  And I'm also wondering 

about the current chair of the Gaming Commission, and if in 

fact she will be playing a role on this board in a specific way 

given that her role may indeed be changing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well I can't give you any specifics 

with respect to who in fact will be on the new commission.  

That decision hasn't been made, as I've answered.  It'll be a 

recommendation from the minister to cabinet, and cabinet will 

make the final determination as to who in fact sits on the board. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- So if you could clarify for me please, Mr. 

Minister, from where does the direction actually come?  I mean 

is this commission going to have significant autonomy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- The make-up of the new 

administration will give the minister and Executive Council 

much more discretion in terms of setting policy, but the appeal 

body will have all of the independence that we could draft into 

legislation.  The appeal body will be separate and apart.  They 

will be there to enforce regulations and do the things that an 

appeal body does.  But as I said in terms of policy and the 

design and the building of policy, there will be more input from 

the minister, from Executive Council. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I guess in part that's why I'm somewhat 

worried.  Mr. Minister, it goes without saying that the previous 

administration left the gaming industry in an abominable 

condition.  For 10 years it is quite, I think, publicly known that 

they interfered in gaming politically, and consistently 

overturned decisions of the Gaming Commission, and that was 

nothing less than political interference. 

 

Stories abound among charities and operators about how 

gaming inspectors could come and rap their knuckles for 

violations, but the abuses were rampant.  And the reason, Mr. 

Minister, they were rampant was because the commission was 

never empowered to enforce its actions.  That's where the 

problem was to lie.  So, do you . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- It's still that way. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: --  I know.  And the member from Morse 

says and it's still that way, which actually is a corroboration of 

what I've just stated. 

 

Do you believe that the industry is being brought under 

control?  I can anticipate that particular response, but my next 

question which goes with it is, do you agree that there is still a 

considerable way to go? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well let me answer to the member 

from Greystone that the appeal body that's set out in legislation 

will have total independence.  That's how the legislation is 

drafted and I'm sure you've had a chance to look at the new Act 

that was introduced to this House.  And so you will be well 

aware of the structure and how that functions and how the 

appeal body functions. 

 

Let me say that I believe we need to have a very strong 

regulatory body.  This is an industry that I think needs some 

careful controls, some careful regulation.  We have set out the 

guidelines in legislation that allow for careful control and 

regulation, and I feel that that's how it should function. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, the Gaming Commission 

under the most recent chair, seemed to be making substantial 

progress.  And I think there was a real intention to clean up the 

industry.  I've spoken with a number of people who are 

involved, and I think the general sense was that things were 

going to change in a positive direction. 

 

Has the current Gaming Commission made recommendations 

to the government and will those recommendations be carried 

out by the new Liquor and Gaming Authority? 

 

(2200) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- It's my understanding, Madam 

Member, that they do with respect to regulations on the bingo 

policy.  But I want to point out that government, elected 

officials, will be taking a much greater role in terms of 

developing policy.  I want to say that no one will deny that 

there are problems in terms of bingo and the regulations.  We're 

doing a review of the policy and of the regulations as it pertains 

to bingo, and we hope to have some changes introduced by fall. 

 

I just want to say to the member, I don't mind her line of 

questioning.  Certainly I know that she has a number of 

questions that she's concerned about.  I want to remind her that 

these Estimates are basically to deal with the money that's 

allocated for the expenditure to purchase the video lottery 

terminals. 

 

I mean we can go on to bingo and we can go on to horse racing 

and talk about the Saskatchewan Horse Racing Commission. 

But I want to remind her that under this budget item, we're 

dealing with the purchase of video lottery terminals. 

 

I think sitting on Public Accounts and Crown Corporations, 

you're well aware of detailed Estimates with respect to the 

Gaming Commission.  We'll come before those committees and 

that is the appropriate place for them to be dealt with in a 

similar fashion that we do on an annual basis with the 

Saskatchewan Horse Racing Commission. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well I am going to assume, Mr. Minister, 

that you would be more than welcoming of questions about the 

Gaming Commission considering that the Star-Phoenix was 

nothing but gaming from beginning to end this weekend.  I 

think that people in the province are very, very interested in 

this issue and that all questions would likely be more than 

welcomed by the government at this stage.  I don't think the 

people of Saskatchewan would be terribly 



June 14, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2513 

thrilled to have to wait until the fall when this comes before 

Public Accounts and Crown Corporations, or wherever it's 

going to turn up, to get answers after the fact. 

 

So perhaps what we will do is attempt to entertain some more 

questions and I think they're within your purview of being able 

to answer.  Now until now rulings on licences, the granting of 

licences, or the revoking or suspending of licences, were made 

by the Gaming Commission and people accused of violating 

the rules could appear before the commission. 

 

Just recently a question was raised about Moose Jaw Bingo 

Country whose licence was apparently revoked one minute and 

then reinstated the next.  Under the system, until a few days 

ago, a licencee would have to appear before the commission 

and have this discussed.  Who will they appear before now, and 

what knowledge collectively will the commission have of the 

Gaming Commission, of the gaming industry overall? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well I want to say to the member 

from Greystone that in terms of specific questions as it pertains 

to the operation of bingos, I haven't my officials here to deal 

with the details, so if you'll forgive me if I don't answer in 

detail some of the questions that you might ask. 

 

As I've indicated before, Public Accounts is the appropriate 

place to ask detailed questions where I'll have an opportunity to 

bring my officials.  I have with me today the special adviser 

with respect to the casino project because I am here to answer 

questions as it pertains to the money that we've allotted for the 

purchase of video lottery terminals. 

 

Let me say this with respect to the new Act and the 

commission, that we expect the regulatory body to enforce 

policy that will be set forth by government and to deal with that 

in an independent fashion.  And I think that that's the 

appropriate way for that to be handled.  That's how the 

legislation is drafted, to allow for that.  And we have every 

confidence in the world that that's what will happen when the 

new Act and the new commission is put into place. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I have a couple of questions that deal with . . . 

Why would you put at some risk taxpayers' money when 

individuals would be prepared to make the investment in video 

lottery terminals and put them in their facilities on their own?  

Why put the purchase of video lottery terminals at the forefront 

of this business? 

 

Why wouldn't it be just as easy to lease them?  Then you can 

regulate, then you can control them.  You don't have to have 

the investment.  What would the minister say to the fact that 

the province probably would be better served if they were 

leased? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I want to say with respect to 

ownership of the machines, to the member from Morse, under 

the Criminal Code the interpretation of our legal people 

indicate to us that government must 

manage and control, which would indicate that the Government 

of Saskatchewan, our legal opinion tells us, should own the 

machines. 

 

With respect to leasing over purchasing, it's by our officials and 

the people who have done the economic analysis indicate that 

it's far cheaper to purchase the machines outright rather than to 

have a lease arrangement with any particular company, and 

that's why the machines were purchased, or will be purchased. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well you could probably do all of this for less 

than $5 million if you leased them all, and then you could leave 

the $20 million sit there, and that wouldn't cost the taxpayers 

much at all.  It would give an opportunity for outside 

investment to come in and have equity in the video lottery 

terminals, and would relieve the taxpayer of the responsibility 

of when these things break down that they got to be fixed, that 

when they break down they got to be replaced.  And that, Mr. 

Minister, isn't nearly as significant as when they become 

outdated. 

 

Each one of these machines as I have . . . I'm not totally 

familiar with them, but they all have different kinds of games 

that you can play with them and those different games become 

outdated, or the volume of dollars that flow through them is 

less because they don't have the right kind of games, so they 

put a new game on it.  All of that, Mr. Minister, if you have a 

whole bunch of these terminals that are outdated, you're not 

going to have the revenue that you're projecting you're going to 

have.  So why not allow the company to bring them in and 

have that risk themselves.  Why should the taxpayer be 

required to have the risk. 

 

We just finished talking here earlier about the upgrader and all 

of the things involved in it.  And then you say, well we have to 

reduce the government risk in a capital project.  Well here is a 

way to reduce risk.  ISM (Information Systems Management 

Corporation) is significantly interested in becoming involved in 

a lease program.  Why not become involved in it, in that way? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well let me answer the member 

from Morse.  The way we are proposing to handle this is that 

we will be purchasing the machines through a loan that is in the 

budget item.  The cost of this loan will be completely paid 

through what we recover from revenue that the government 

share will generate.  And that's how they're going to be paid.  

We've put in place a payback period over a period of five years. 

 

In terms of the technology changing and the number of games . 

. . or the kinds of games, the types of games, these machines 

are all adaptable to changes.   In terms of repair and 

maintenance, we will have qualified people handling the repair 

and the maintenance. 

 

And as I've indicated before, people who have done the 

financial analysis on this indicate to us that the cheapest way to 

handle this is to purchase the games and pay them back through 

the profits, which is what 



2514 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1993 

we intend to do.  They didn't recommend the lease arrangement 

because the lease arrangement costs more money.  And that is 

the reason that we have determined to do a straight purchase 

arrangement as opposed to a lease. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well you said the lease costs more money.  

Well the lease costs more money because the risk is high, 

because of the maintenance probably and the change in the 

menu on the video lottery terminal.  And so I would say that 

you're increasing the risk.  And why not allow those companies 

to carry the risk?  That's what I'm saying to you.  That's what 

we need to have.  Reduce the cost, reduce the volume of dollars 

that the taxpayer has to put out so that it can be spent on other 

things that are legitimate. 

 

You're going to recover the cost of them anyway.  You said 

you're going to recover the cost in five years.  Well how many 

of those machines in Montana, where they're overstocked by 50 

per cent, how many of those machines are available today for 

next to nothing?  And you, sir, could be in exactly the same 

position in four years or three years.  If people aren't going to 

use them, then you're going to be overstocked.  And that's 

going to cause all kinds of problems. 

 

You've made the investment. It's going to reduce and it's not 

going to take five years to recover, it'll take eight years to 

recover.  And that, Mr. Minister, you could solve that problem 

by just leasing the machines.  And if there's nobody going to 

use them, that's fine.  Then it isn't your risk.  And that, Mr. 

Minister, would be a lot cheaper for the province of 

Saskatchewan than doing it this way. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well let me point out to the other 

member, there isn't a jurisdiction near us that I know of who 

are leasing machines -- not Manitoba, nor Alberta.  By their 

analysis, I would assume it is cheaper to doing an outright 

purchase as we have. With respect to the number of machines 

that we're going to be introducing, we're going to be 

introducing less than what the professionals, the people who 

are involved in the business, are indicating that the market in 

Saskatchewan can handle. 

 

So we're going to ensure that, first of all, those machines are 

going to be busy with people involved in electronic gaming.  

And that's why we're starting with a smaller number.  And if 

the demand would require more, we'll increase the number of 

machines. 

 

And I guess what I ask the member from Morse, do you buy 

your TV, the one you've got sitting in your front room at home? 

Is it purchased or do you lease it? 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, did Alberta decide not to buy 

GTECH for their video lottery terminals? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I can . . . I'm not familiar with the 

exact equipment that Alberta has bought but I can tell you that 

I do have knowledge that they have purchased machines from 

VLC, one of the companies that we short-listed. 

Mr. Martens: -- From my information, they didn't buy any 

GTECH because the quality wasn't good enough.  The types of 

games that are on GTECH aren't what people want to play and 

so the volume return is substantially less than what they have in 

VLC's, and that is a reason why we challenged you earlier:  

why you went with one over another; why you decided to use 

them both; or maybe you haven't decided to use them both, 

we're not just sure where you're at in this discussion.  But 

would you be able to tell us why GTECH and VLC are . . . 

what the difference is and why they would have gone to VLC 

instead of GTECH. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well let me answer the member in 

this fashion.  I'm told by my officials that they have purchased 

the same central computer system from GTECH that will be 

installed here in Saskatchewan, that the call for proposals that 

they put forward, and the information that was supplied by 

GTECH, and the technology that GTECH was offering, was 

done one year prior to the time we put out our call for proposal. 

 

GTECH put forth a different model of video lottery terminal 

than the one they proposed to sell us on the call for proposal.  

So you're talking an older machine that was offered to the 

people of Alberta as opposed to a newer machine in 

Saskatchewan that was put forth for us.  The central computer 

system comes from the same company. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Is that new machine a 19-inch video screen? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- We plan on purchasing all 19-inch 

video screens. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well how many of the 19-inch video screens 

that GTECH have put together have worked?  Like what we 

hear is that GTECH video screens don't last and there is 

considerable problems with them.  Is there any way to 

substantiate that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well I'm, you know I'm not going 

to stand here and hypothesize.  I would say to the member that 

I have a background in electronics and I'm quite familiar with 

how electronic machines work.  And I would want to say that 

one year a company can produce a model that is fault free, that 

has a breakdown rate that is very low, way below industry 

standard.  And the next year they can come out with a very 

much, very much a superior machine, one that has little 

breakdown qualities, that performs well in the market place. 

 

(2215) 

 

So I can say to you, I mean if you're suggesting that GTECH 

machines, all GTECH machines of all models are unreliable 

machines, I would argue with you because I would say to you 

that as technology improves and as people introduce 

modifications to circuit boards and to electronics, the internal 

workings of the machines, that they can reduce the number of 

breakdowns on very much similar 



June 14, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2515 

machines. 

 

But I say to you that you can't generalize that every GTECH 

machine has a problem with the screens because, I mean, that 

just, that is not necessarily the case.  I guess what you have to 

do is compare apples to apples and oranges to oranges.  You 

compare one model.  You have a look at the breakdown rate, 

whether it's been a good machine, whether or not . . . I guess no 

different than when you're out buying televisions.  If your 

neighbour has, as an example, a Zenith television that has 

worked very, very well, that doesn't mean that you can walk 

into a hardware store or into an electronic shop and buy a 

television with the Zenith brand on it and be assured that it's 

never going to break down, because that's not how electronics 

work. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you made my point about 

why you should be leasing rather than buying.  Technology is 

moving as fast in this industry as it is in any other 

computerized industry.  The industry is moving faster . . . in 

fact when you buy a computer, if you buy one, you're already 

outdated.  And it's in a capacity and it's memory bank, all of the 

things that a computer can do today, is outmoded if you buy 

one today, it's outdated tomorrow. 

 

And these will probably be very similar to that, not only in 

their capacity to play different games, but in their capacity to 

be well-run machines.  And that's why we're saying to you, you 

should lease them rather than buy them.  Allow the company to 

take the risk.  Allow the company to update them on the 

condition that when they break down, and new people or new 

machines give new games, provide that kind of an 

entertainment for the people.  Allow that to happen.  Allow the 

lease component to drive the industry rather than the purchase 

program. 

 

I got another question for you.  What was the cost of setting up 

the control in Saskatoon for all of the videos in the province?  

Is that going to run every video in Saskatchewan through a 

common telephone terminal system? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I want to say to the member from 

Morse, with respect to the purchase of the VLTs as opposed to 

leasing them, we are buying them with a warranty that comes 

from the manufacturer, as you do if you buy a computer.  I 

mean as an example, when you were in government, did every 

computer you buy . . . I mean every computer that was in any 

government office, did you lease them all?  The answer is no, 

you didn't; you purchased them.  Is computer technology 

changing?  The answer is, of course it is. 

 

There may have been some occasions when you leased 

machines; there may have been some when you purchased.  

But in terms of what your government did over 10 years is no 

different than ours.  We buy some computers; we may lease 

some, and we do them based on what we feel is the best dollar 

buy that we can get at the time. 

 

In terms of these particular machines, our people tell 

us that the technology will last the length of the machine and 

the use of the machine.  We will pay them back in enough time 

that when we need to update, we can go out and purchase 

machines again.  And that those machines, we will look at it at 

that time as to whether it's cheaper to lease or whether it's 

cheaper to purchase.  At this time our people tell us that it's 

cheaper to purchase the machines and that's what we've done. 

 

In terms of the central computer system, as the member knows, 

it will be housed in Saskatoon.  We have some property that's 

under lease and we will be introducing the central computer 

system in Saskatoon.  All of the machines in the province will 

be run through one central computer system.  These machines 

will report into the central computer between 3 and 6 a.m. in 

the morning.  We will have an indication of how much play the 

machine has had.  We will have an indication of percentage of 

pay out.  We will have an indication through that computer 

terminal as to whether or not the machine has been tampered 

with. 

 

That's a report that will come in from every single machine, 

every 24 hours, and that's how the function is going to work.  

We've employed and will be employing in Saskatoon some 28 

people.  We're creating some 28 new jobs in that area -- some 

clerical and some administrative and some people who are 

familiar with the computer system.  And they'll be monitoring 

that on a daily basis, and that's how the machines will function.  

As I've said, everything will be put into the central computer 

system and that's where this will all be monitored. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Was it new and how much did it cost? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- It's brand-new GTECH equipment, 

and the cost is $2,058,216. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Is that a part of the 23 million? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Yes, it is part of the 23. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- How much do you have to pay for the 

telephone hook-up for all of that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- None of that has been invoiced, and 

I don't have those figures with me.  The telephone hook-up has 

not yet happened, but it'll happen through SaskTel's lines as 

you would any other computer network. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- On the hotel system that you've already got in 

place, is there a central terminal that runs them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- That's monitored through Western 

Canada Lottery's facilities in Winnipeg, and they're all hooked 

up through that process. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- GTECH supplied the material.  From the 

information that I had, I was under the impression that it was 

used equipment from western Canada lotteries in Winnipeg and 

that they had taken a lot of 



2516 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1993 

the computer equipment out of the warehouse in Winnipeg and 

moved it into Saskatoon.  Would you either confirm or say yes 

or no to that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I can say to the member from 

Morse, whoever your source of information is, is speculating, 

and it's totally untrue.  It's all brand-new equipment.  It has 

never been used by anyone.  We purchased new equipment.  

We purchased the whole package from GTECH.  It doesn't 

come from Western Canada Lottery Corporation or anyone 

else; it comes through the purchase from GTECH. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I don't have my material.  Did you provide me 

with the information about the volume of cost that SaskTel was 

going to be in proportion so that you have an idea what it 

would be in relation to the operating costs?  Did you have a 

percentage of the operations of what it would cost? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- We don't have that information 

here.  You know, I would really like . . . if I had it, I would -- 

but I just don't have it.  As you will know, we're prepared to 

deal with all of those detailed questions when we do Public 

Accounts Estimates.  We certainly have no problems with 

sharing the information for you. 

 

The other thing is I . . . we don't have a firm cost in terms of the 

installation.  All of those were put out on a proposal call and 

that hasn't been determined yet.  So it's just really premature to 

give you that information.  We just don't have it at this point. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Have you . . . I saw an ad in the paper for 

maintenance men and women to apply.  Have you completed 

that already or are you waiting for some future day when that's 

going to be concluded? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- No we haven't completed that 

process yet.  It's close to being completed but at this point it's 

not finalized. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Have you decided which VLTs you're going 

to buy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well as I indicated on a number of 

occasions, the short-listed companies were GTECH and VLC.  

And as it stands, that's where negotiations have been taking 

place. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- With the capacity that you have in transition 

and the time that you've allocated yourself, when are you going 

to have them in place in order to generate any income from 

them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- We expect the central computer 

system to be up and running and ready to accept information 

from machines by July 15. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- And by July 15 are you going to license these 

machines into those locations already?  Are you going to have 

them purchased by then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- We're certainly hoping that that 

would be the case.  As I've indicated, July 15 is our 

target date for having the central computer system in 

appropriate position to accept the information from the VLTs.  

And we certainly would want to start installations by that time. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So in a month you're going to decide to order 

2,000 video lottery terminals?  You're going to . . . pardon me, 

decide the company.  And they're going to be installed and in 

place within the next 30 days.  Am I to assume that that's a 

fact? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I'm told by my officials that they 

have the physical capacity to install in the neighbourhood of 3 

or 400 machines a month.  And the companies would be able to 

supply well within the ability of the people who would be 

installing.  They would be able to supply all that we could 

install. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Do these companies have a thousand video 

lottery terminals on hand in wherever they're made?  GTECH 

and VLC, do they have the terminals already manufactured?  

Are they sitting and waiting for you to get through the session 

so that you can go out and buy them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well let me say to the member for 

Morse that we are told that they can supply our needs.  I don't 

know how many they may have warehoused.  I have no 

knowledge of that.  I'm not personally that intimate with how 

much stock they carry, how many VLTs that they have in 

storage. 

 

But under the proposals, they've indicated that they have the 

ability to deliver.  I have no reason to believe that they can't 

and I guess we will see.  We have to assume that based on their 

past ability to deliver to other jurisdictions, that they can supply 

our needs as they have the needs of other jurisdictions who 

have purchased from them. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- When you did your assessment, did you have 

one company have more video lottery terminals than the other?  

Did GTECH have less or did GTECH have more than VLC so 

that you had some realization about the stock on hand, that they 

could manufacture what you're planning on buying? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- No, we would be signing a legal 

document that would tie them to the supplying of the VLTs as 

we requested in the call for proposal.  So quite clearly if they 

were not able to supply, they would be held liable and they 

could be open to a lawsuit.  So I don't know any reason why a 

company would put forth a proposal giving a commitment to 

supply a certain number of machines at a certain time without 

having the ability to produce the goods. 

 

So I guess if they are unable to supply under the limits and the 

guidelines of the contract, we would take the appropriate legal 

action to recover any costs that might be incurred by the 

Government of Saskatchewan for their inability to deliver.  But 

we believe that they have the ability to deliver and will live up 

to the terms and the conditions of the arrangements that are 

made with the Government of Saskatchewan. 



June 14, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 2517 

Mr. Martens: -- They would definitely have a lot of 

experience with legal problems coming from the jurisdictions 

that they're coming from.  And so I think that it's incumbent 

upon you, Mr. Minister, to be absolutely sure that the tax 

dollars are put at the least amount of risk, and that's another 

reason why I believe you should lease them. 

 

Leasing has a whole lot of positive options in relation to these 

video lottery terminals.  And I say again, I point out the fact 

that new technology comes along and it's improving every day.  

You don't put taxpayers' dollars at risk.  You don't put the 

servicing contracts in the hands of the government; you allow 

other people to service.  You can monitor the service.  You've 

got the technology to control whether there's tampering or 

whether there's involvement. 

 

(2230) 

 

All of the things tell me, Mr. Minister, that you would be better 

off to lease these than to buy them, and I'm going to make that 

point because I think it's substantial.  And I say again, you're 

going to save $20 million in a fiscal year in rural Saskatchewan 

cutting 52 hospitals.  And I say that's what you're going to cut, 

and then you're going to try and invest it in video lottery 

terminals.  There's people that say no, don't do it that way.  

Lease them rather than buy them.  And that's, I think, far more 

of a benefit to the province of Saskatchewan than doing it this 

way. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well I . . . you know I can 

understand what the member from Morse is saying, but I can't 

understand the rationale.  As I've indicated to him quite clearly, 

we're doing a straight purchase arrangement with these 

companies.  On on hand, he says, don't deal with these 

companies.  And on the other hand, he says, enter into a 

long-term lease agreement.  And I mean . . . I can't . . . one days 

it's apples and the next day it's oranges.  I get a little confused. 

 

But let me say to the member is that this is nothing but a loan 

from the Consolidated Fund that is fully recoverable.  And it's a 

straight purchase arrangement that we're intending to enter into 

and that's where we intend to take this arrangement.  Our 

people tell us that it's cheaper to lease than it is to outright 

purchase, and for those reasons . . . or cheaper to purchase than 

it is to lease. 

 

I guess I just ask you again, your television sitting in your front 

room at home, do you purchase it?  Or have you leased it?  My 

guess is, you're like 90 per cent of the people in this province, 

that you own your television sitting in your front room.  You're 

not very concerned about technological change in that aspect.  

You went out and purchased it, which is what we're doing with 

the VLTs.  Some people purchase cars because for whatever 

reason; for whatever business arrangement, some people lease 

them.  Some people own their telephones and some lease them. 

 

So, you know, I guess it's . . . all I can do is take the 

information that . . . and the knowledge that our experts put 

forth to us and make the recommendation to purchase as 

opposed to lease.  We've made the decision to purchase 

because we feel it makes more business sense and rather than 

leasing, would save the people of Saskatchewan money. 

 

Vote 142 agreed to. 

 

The Chair: -- That concludes Estimates for the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Commission.  If the minister would thank his officials 

for having attended here this evening. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you very much, Mr. 

Chairman.  I would indeed like to thank my officials for their 

assistance tonight and their patience.  We have a process here 

where you're on call and sometimes your officials wait on 

stand-by for a long period of time, and I would compliment my 

officials for their patience. 

 

And I'd also like to thank the member from Greystone for her 

questions, and the member from Morse for his questions.  I'm 

hoping that we were able to share information that would 

indicate to you that we are acting in the best interests of the 

people of the province on the purchase of these video lottery 

terminals. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'm still not 

satisfied that you're acting in our best interests, but I have to 

agree with you . . . I want to thank the officials for their 

attendance and their willingness to participate, and I want to 

thank them for being here many times when we didn't get to do 

the job, and I appreciate that. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:35 p.m. 

 

 


