




















































Hansard: April 29, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1305 

 April 29, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: — According to order, the following petitions have 

been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7), they are hereby read 

and received: 

 

 Of citizens of the province humbly praying that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to postpone consideration of The 

Health Districts Act. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on Monday ask the government the following question: 

 

 Because of the highly controversial nature and the varying 

public opinions throughout the province, will the government 

allow a free vote on Bill 38, an Act to amend the Human 

Rights Code, in order to allow members of the Legislative 

Assembly the opportunity to register their vote based upon 

personal principles and convictions in concert with the 

wishes of the constituents they represent? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I'm 

very pleased to have two groups of students to introduce this 

afternoon. Mr. Speaker, they are all from Moose Jaw, and they 

are all seated in the west gallery, the gallery closest to Moose 

Jaw. 

 

There are 46 students in total, about half-and-half I believe, a 

grade 3 and 4 class from Alexander School, and their teacher, 

Mr. Keith Silversides. And, Mr. Speaker, a few weeks ago I 

had the opportunity to visit these students in their classroom 

and had a delightful time, and so now I'm very happy to be 

welcoming them here to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

And the other group is from King Edward School, with their 

teacher Aleen Tanner. And I am particularly happy to be 

introducing this group from King Edward School because just a 

few short years ago I too graduated from King Edward School. 

 

So welcome to all the students and I look forward to meeting 

you right after question period. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 

sounds a bit like Moose Jaw day, but I would like to introduce 

as well a group of visiting students from Moose Jaw. These are 

from Central Collegiate and they are seated in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker. 

I see the teacher, Brian Swanson, who is also a city councillor 

in the city of Moose Jaw, accompanied with it looks to me like 

six members of the government club at Central Collegiate in 

Moose Jaw. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a special group in that these are young 

people who in their own time take noon hours on a regular 

basis to come together and talk politics. And so it's especially 

with special pride that I introduce these young people to the 

legislature. 

 

I'd also ask that members take a very close look because it 

could very well be that somewhere down the road one of these 

young people will be in fact taking a seat in the legislature, 

although I hope it's not too soon, Mr. Speaker, if it's in my 

riding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd ask all members to welcome them. I look 

forward to meeting for photos and a visit immediately 

following question period. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to introduce to 

you and through you to all members of the Assembly 39 grade 

8 students seated in your gallery, which is the closest gallery to 

the city of Saskatoon. They attend Caroline Robins School, 

which is in my constituency in Saskatoon, and they're 

accompanied by their teachers, Mr. Balon and Mr. Colson, and 

chaperons, George Grant, Jackie Douville, Myron Sosnowski, 

and Mrs. Penner. 

 

And they're going to be touring some of the interesting sites 

here in Regina as well as this building, and I'll be meeting with 

them for photos and also refreshments. And I'd like all 

members to join with me in welcoming the students to the 

legislature today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to join with 

the member from Moose Jaw Palliser in welcoming Councillor 

Swanson and his group here to the legislature today. As the 

member for Moose Jaw said, this is a regular occurrence and 

I'm very proud to say that two members of Mr. Swanson's class 

are members of my constituency. In fact, they're both 

neighbours of mine very shortly, and I know their parents very 

well. 

 

And I just say, welcome to the legislature and welcome to your 

interest in politics. We're a lot better than most people make us 

out to be, so live and learn. Thank you for coming today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Workers' Compensation Legislation 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the Minister of Labour and has to do with the 

workers' compensation legislation 



1306 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1993 

introduced into the House yesterday. 

 

Mr. Minister, we all recognize the need to protect workers and 

to ensure that they are fairly compensated for injuries incurred 

on the job. But it is also equally important to ensure that there 

are jobs for those people in this province. And the business 

community has to have a competitive environment which 

allows it to maintain and create jobs. The Saskatchewan 

Chamber of Commerce estimates that these changes may cost 

businesses in this province as much as $200 million a year. 

 

Mr. Minister, giving your government's dismal job-creation 

record and the fact that our province is struggling to pull out of 

a recession, how can you justify placing that type of additional 

burden on Saskatchewan businesses at this time? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, in answer to the 

member's question, I couldn't justify that, nor will we be doing 

that. Nor am I confident the member's information is up to date. 

The Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce had access to a 

report, an actuary report done last November on what was 

understood to be the Muir report. I have since then provided to 

the chamber of commerce — and I'll table it in the House 

actually when question period is over for the benefit of the 

member — a study done by Price Waterhouse. The lead person 

on the team was Don Rosten who's a senior managing partner 

for Price Waterhouse in Saskatchewan. 

 

His estimate was that the legislation which I tabled yesterday 

would increase the assessment by about 10 per cent. Ten per 

cent will still leave us second lowest in Canada, something I 

think most business persons will accept if somewhat 

begrudgingly. So I think the member's information is out of 

date actually. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, your 

government says these changes will cost about $20 million a 

year. The government also said that they were going to create 

2,000 new jobs last year, and we all saw how that turned out. 

You've set a new job target of 7,000 jobs in the previous year 

and again this year; those are yet to be borne out. 

 

The fact is, Mr. Minister, no one really knows how much these 

changes will cost. The Price Waterhouse calculations are based 

on one set of assumptions. The chamber's calculations are 

based on another set of assumptions. Either one could be true, 

because the legislation is so open for interpretation it's 

impossible to tell how much this will cost. 

 

Mr. Minister, you've already been driving businesses out of the 

province by piling up tax after tax after tax on top of these 

latest tax increases. How can you justify introducing this new 

mystery tax, an expense that no one can even estimate the cost 

of it yet? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The member leaves me somewhat 

mystified. On one hand he says it's impossible to know what 

the cost is. On the other hand he's quite sure it's 200 per cent. 

 

The member may want to wait until Committee of the Whole. I 

will be here on that Bill. I'll be here with the officials and we 

will explain to them how the figure was arrived at. 

 

I think when the members hear the explanation as to how the 

costing was arrived at, they will be satisfied, as I think this 

chamber of commerce is now satisfied that the earlier study 

was based on a false set of assumptions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I didn't 

say it was going to cost $200 million; the chamber said it's 

going to cost $200 million. Price Waterhouse says they don't 

know what it's going to cost. It's you, Mr. Minister, that's 

unclear on this. Once again, Mr. Speaker, the minister doesn't 

have any real answers so he just goes on to say, trust me; I 

know what I'm doing. 

 

Mr. Minister, how can we trust you when your government 

never tells the truth? The Minister of Health doesn't know the 

truth about hospital closures. The minister of SEDCO 

(Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation) doesn't 

tell the truth about hiring NDP (New Democratic Party) hacks. 

The minister of Gaming doesn't tell the truth about tendering. 

The Premier doesn't tell the truth about anything. 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I ask the member to not use 

inflammatory words of the nature that he is using in question 

period. It adds nothing to the question period at all. 

 

Order, order. I'd ask the member to please put his question. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, could your tell us what the cost to 

businesses in this province will be, of your changes? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Well the member will find 

Committee of the Whole to be a refreshing change in that 

event. Because you will find when you get to the Committee of 

the Whole in the Bill that in fact this Bill was developed in 

concert with as good as advice as we could get, which was the 

senior managing partner in Price Waterhouse. 

 

The Bill was developed with him. He understands the 

assumptions and we costed it very carefully. So the member is 

in for a real treat when we get to Committee of the Whole on 

this Bill. 



April 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1307 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, I don't think the business 

community in this province can afford any more treats from 

you. Mr. Minister, how many more, how many more jobs will 

be lost in this province, do you estimate, as a result of the 

changes you're proposing? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The answer is . . . the answer fairly 

clearly is none. Mr. Speaker, we will still have, even with the 

10 per cent increase, we will still be second lowest in Canada, 

second only to the Yukon. Mr. Speaker, the business people in 

this province are more than capable of competing with an 

assessment that low. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, this 

legislation, as proposed, the chamber of commerce says will 

cost an additional $200 million, the same as a payroll tax on 

Saskatchewan businesses. Add this to the increased sales taxes, 

increased fuel taxes, increased income taxes, increased utility 

bills since your government took office — all of which the 

Premier promised he wouldn't do. He promised no new taxes 

— and you say that this is a strategy to create new jobs in this 

province. 

 

Mr. Minister, prior to the last election the Premier said taxes 

are the silent killer of jobs. Higher taxes do not create jobs. 

Higher taxes take jobs out of the economy. Now as usual the 

NDP has another version of the truth that says higher taxes do 

create jobs. Mr. Minister, could you please explain this 

new-found economic theory that says piling up cost after cost 

after cost on Saskatchewan business is somehow going to 

create additional jobs in this province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — It's not a new-found economic 

theory. In fact it's contained in the document of my colleague, 

the Minister of Economic Development, Partnership for 

Renewal. That document clearly states that if we are going to 

succeed in this area, if we're going to survive, we need 

everybody working together — management, employees, and 

government. 

 

Everybody should be pulling on the oars and going in the same 

direction and that's what this is about — redressing an injustice 

which I think everybody agrees has been an injustice in the 

past, the operation of this WCB (Workers' Compensation 

Board). 

 

We're redressing that, we're doing so at a very reasonable cost, 

and when we get beyond some of these injustices we will truly 

be able to work as partners and survive and thrive. So if the 

member wants to see a more complete explanation, look at the 

document Partnership for Renewal which my colleague issued 

a few months ago. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

SaskEnergy President 

 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

yesterday we heard of patronage in SEDCO at the the highest 

levels. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to bring the attention to the Minister of 

SaskEnergy. My question, Mr. Minister, is this, and it has to do 

with NDP patronage at the highest levels. Very simply put, Mr. 

Minister, can you confirm that long-time NDP supporters and 

super-bureaucrats David Dombowsky and John Sadler have 

been short-listed for the position of president of SaskEnergy? 

 

And it's my sincere wish, for the good of the province, that this 

information is not true, Mr. Minister. Can you confirm this? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — I would like to thank the hon. member 

for his question. There has been no active search to replace the 

president of SaskEnergy, and therefore there would be no 

short-listing at this point. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Gaming Commission Appointment 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, consumers in 

this province have bought a product that has been sold by false 

and misleading advertising. Mr. Speaker, people bought the 

product based on those claims. Now it seems with each passing 

day we see another example of just how false and misleading 

this advertising was. 

 

My question is to the minister responsible for Gaming. The 

NDP government advertised to the electorate that when they 

got in power there would be no more patronage, no more 

political appointments, no more unadvertised placements of 

personal staffs on boards, commissions, departments, or Crown 

corporations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, can you confirm for this Assembly that another 

NDP political aide has been appointed to the office of the 

Gaming Commission; and can you confirm that Lisa Thomson, 

who currently works in Executive Council, has been given the 

communications position at the Gaming Commission? Can you 

confirm that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I can 

confirm that Lisa Thomson has been hired as the 

communications officer at the Gaming Commission. I would 

want to indicate that she is well qualified for this position after 

having worked in the print media. She has worked as a part of 

the Executive Council communications staff. I think she is well 

qualified to handle this job and we're looking forward to her 

performance in the Gaming Commission. I think she'll do a 

very good job for the people of Saskatchewan. 



1308 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1993 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, you have 

already appointed the top bagman for the New Democratic 

Party to the top position of the Gaming Commission and now 

you are appointing another political aide into the same office. 

The Gaming Commission seems to have become another 

dumping ground for your political hacks. 

 

Mr. Minister, could you tell this Assembly if the position that 

was filled was advertised. If so, when, for how long, and how 

many people applied for that position? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let me correct 

the member opposite. To my knowledge Lisa Thomson has 

never acted as a ministerial aide in this administration. I want 

to say to the member opposite that not unlike Mr. Nystuen, she 

was hired because of her qualifications and her ability to 

handle the job. 

 

I want to say to the member opposite as well that I know she 

will be doing a very capable job for the Gaming Commission 

and I look forward to working with her in that capacity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, could you tell 

this Assembly if the position that was filled was advertised. If 

so, when, for how long, and how many people applied for that 

position. This is the second time I'm asking you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I could say to the 

member opposite that I'm not aware of whether or not the 

position was tendered or whether it was advertised. I will check 

with the chief executive officer of the Gaming Commission 

whose job it is to look after the administrative details, and I 

will report to the member as soon as I've found that 

information. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Minister, this is just another very lengthy 

list of patronage appointments that you have been . . . made in 

direct violation to the pledge you made to the voters, Mr. 

Minister. They elected you on false and misleading advertising 

and people are now saying that you have . . . they want to take 

their product back. 

 

Can you tell us how many people, Mr. Minister, under the 

guise of restructuring, how many people have been fired from 

the Gaming Commission, Liquor Commission, and how many 

positions have been or will be refilled? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I'll be more than 

happy to answer these questions in estimates. As the member 

will know, I don't carry that type of detailed information to the 

House, with respect to the number of employees that have been 

released due to 

restructuring. 

 

But let me say this to the member opposite. Unlike the former 

administration, we will operate with a lean and an efficient 

administration. And that is why we are consolidating the 

Gaming Commission and the Liquor Licensing board. 

 

And I want to say to the member opposite that it is our 

intention to balance this budget and that means a lean 

administration. And I want to say with respect to misleading — 

this government has been open and straightforward and will 

continue to be with tendering and with other issues. 

 

I want to say that the track record that that member brings 

along, with respect to the projected deficits and the $800 

million mistake that they make in one year with respect to 

deficit budgeting, will not happen under this administration. 

We intend to be fair, and to be open, and to be honest with the 

people of Saskatchewan, unlike the former . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, could you tell 

this Assembly if the position that was filled was advertised? If 

so, when, for how long, and how many people applied for that 

position? That, Mr. Minister, is the question. 

 

You took notice of the question only because you did not want 

to tell this Assembly that the issue was in fact not done. You 

did not advertise for that position, and that's why you say to 

this Assembly, I'll give . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. We cannot allow 

the question period . . . The minister took notice of that 

particular question . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No. Next 

question. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the 

Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, would you repeat to this 

Assembly the statement that you made in this Assembly that 

dealt with relieving employees of their responsibilities in the 

workplace in government and then hiring back and back-filling 

with NDP hacks? Would you repeat the statement that you 

made in this Assembly to this Assembly so that the people of 

Saskatchewan can see what your position really is? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I think that if I said such a thing, and I 

believe I did, the record is there in Hansard and it remains 

there in Hansard, and I have no cause to withdraw it or 

anything like that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, the point is, 

Mr. Minister, that Zach Douglas is a political hack from your 

administration in former times; Lisa Thomson is; and we could 

name dozens and dozens 



April 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1309 

more from your administration. You said that you wouldn't do 

that. Is that false advertising or is that false advertising? 

 

I want you to confirm the statement that you made in this 

Assembly again for the people of Saskatchewan to clearly 

understand what your official position is, and then we can tell 

the people of the province what your underlying position is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I don't know what I can add to my 

previous answer. I made the statement that I made in the 

House. It's there on record in Hansard. The government stands 

behind it. 

 

We were dealing with a particular situation at the time. I 

answered the question at the time. I think the member will find, 

if he checks the records and inquires into the matter in Public 

Accounts or wherever the appropriate forum is, that my 

statement was delivered upon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Constituency Letter 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question today 

is to the Minister of Economic Development and it regards, Mr. 

Speaker, a letter that was sent out on his behalf. 

 

Mr. Minister, I have here a letter dated April 20, 1993. Make 

note of the date, Mr. Minister — April 20, 1993. This letter 

was sent out to your constituents on behalf of the member from 

Regina Elphinstone. And it reads in part, and I'll quote, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

 We all know this government is in big trouble with the 

people of Saskatchewan . . . Even at this late date in their 

mandate they continue to try to bring in new taxes in the form 

of the Provincial harmonized GST. 

 

It goes on to say: 

 

 . . . you know your contribution will be important in helping 

defeat the Devine government. 

 

 On behalf of Dwain Lingenfelter (the member from Regina 

Elphinstone) . . . I thank you in advance for your support. 

 

 (Signed) Fred Dulmage, President, Regina Elphinstone NDP. 

 

Mr. Minister, I know your government is unpopular and I know 

that you're having trouble raising money, but I never thought 

that you would go so far as to deny that you are even the 

government. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you take it upon yourself to inform Mr. 

Dulmage that you are in fact the government and that it is your 

NDP that is responsible for the fact that, 

as it says in this letter, that this government is in big trouble 

with the people of Saskatchewan. Would you do that, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — It seems appropriate enough, Mr. 

Speaker, that the Leader of the Opposition addressed his 

question to an empty chair. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I think . . . Order. I think the minister 

knows full well that that comment is out of order, and I wish 

he'd address the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I withdraw . . . In my enthusiasm for 

the truth I forgot that, Mr. Speaker. I say to the hon. member 

opposite, it would ill behove the opposition to give us the 

courtesy of seeing a copy of the document before you ask us to 

comment on it. 

 

It is clear however from the content of the letter that it was 

written — if it was written at all — that it was written before 

the election and not afterwards. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — I will be happy to table the letter in the 

Assembly so that the members in the Democratic Party can 

read from it. And I would further read from the letter, Mr. 

Speaker. It says: 

 

 We must be ready to fight the most important election in 

Saskatchewan's future. We must elect John Solomon who has 

fought Devine since he was elected in 1988. 

 

Mr. Speaker, obviously this government who have such a 

terrible economic record, who are in so much trouble with their 

own supporters that they would try and make believe that the 

member for Estevan is still the premier . . .  

 

I say to the member, I say to the hon. minister, the Minister of 

Labour, would you stand in your place today, sir, and answer 

Mr. Dulmage and those NDP supporters who say that this 

government is in trouble because of your tax increases, because 

of the things that you're doing to Saskatchewan people. 

 

Would you stand in your place and give him an honest answer 

of who the government is today and what you're doing wrong? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Clearly the Leader of the Opposition 

is a little disorientated. This is not the theatre of the absurd, this 

is the legislature of Saskatchewan, and these questions are 

utterly nonsensical, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask you to draw to the attention of the 

Leader of the Opposition that the question period is to address 

questions of government policy 



1310 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1993 

which we are in a position to respond to, not letters written by a 

third party which we are in no position to respond to. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Crop Insurance Corporation Appointments 

 

Mr. Martens: — My question is to the minister responsible for 

Crop Insurance. 

 

Will you confirm to this Assembly that the secretary that you 

hired to be in the Crop Insurance office, is the personal 

secretary for the member for the Melville constituency, and 

that you hired her? And then, Mr. Minister, when he got a new 

secretary, would you confirm that you hired that one as well? 

And would you confirm that . . . would you confirm for this 

Assembly that each one of these is probably a back-fill in 

individuals who were fired from the Crop Insurance 

Corporation? Would you provide that information to this 

Assembly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, I do not hire 

secretaries for Crop Insurance. That is the business of the Crop 

Insurance administration. I'm not aware of who was hired as 

secretaries out there. It's not my business nor do I make it my 

business to know each individual that's hired out there and their 

background. I'm assured that the quality of people that's hired 

is excellent. 

 

If you're criticizing these people on an individual basis and 

condemning people, I think you should have some evidence 

before you come here to question their capabilities and their 

backgrounds. Certainly we do not do a political check on 

people that are hired in our Crop Insurance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I would like to ask our guests in the 

galleries please not to participate in the activities on the floor. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, another question 

to the minister responsible for Crop Insurance. Will you 

confirm also to this Assembly that the president of Crop 

Insurance, whose girlfriend has a . . . Will you also confirm to 

this Assembly that his girlfriend has an agency and is . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Will the members please come 

to order. Order. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, will you 

answer to this Assembly whether the president of Crop 

Insurance's girlfriend has an agency in Crop Insurance and that 

it officially is still in his own name? Would you confirm that to 

the people of this Assembly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, this is ridiculous. 

The people opposite use the immunity they have in this House 

and call people bagmen, to make references to people's 

personal lives, to slander people, on the basis that they have 

immunity in this House. We do not, we do not hire people in 

Crop Insurance on those bases. I am not responsible for the 

secretaries that are hired at Crop Insurance. It's done in a 

professional manner and we intend to continue to do that. And 

I personally raise objection to the members opposite in their 

personal attacks. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member: — A point of order. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. What's your point of order? Order. 

What's your point of order? 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Mr. Speaker, I clearly heard the Minister of 

Environment use the word "crap. The other day you sat me in 

my place and lectured me soundly and firmly for using that 

word. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I don't have to take any advice 

from the member from Maple Creek. If he has a point of order, 

make your point of order. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — I'd like you to rule on the word used in this 

Assembly by the member, the word "crap". 

 

The Speaker: — That's a much better point of order . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . If the member from Rosthern would 

just give the Speaker an opportunity, he would rule . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — You wouldn't have ruled on it unless he 

got up. 

 

The Speaker: — I'll warn the member from Rosthern one 

more time: if he interferes with the Speaker, there are other 

means that I can deal with him, and I intend to. 

 

Does the member from Arm River have a question? If the 

Minister of Agriculture used the word "crap", I did not hear 

him. It is unparliamentary, it is unparliamentary and . . . Order. 

I have asked if the member . . . if the minister used that word I 

would ask him to withdraw it. I did not hear it. If he says he 

didn't say it, I will check the records and it clearly would be in 

the records . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The Minister of 

Environment wasn't even on his feet. 

 

Order. Order. My apologies to the House. He said the minister, 

but obviously he was referring to the Minister of the 

Environment. If the Minister of the Environment used the word 

"crap" in the House, I would ask him to . . . if the Minister of 

the Environment used it, I would ask him to withdraw the 

words. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, I used the word from my 

seat. I withdraw it. 

 

The Speaker: — I thank the minister. Order. 



April 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1311 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 38 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Human 

Rights Code 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today 

to move second reading of The Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Code Amendment Act, 1993. 

 

I want to begin my remarks by recalling the very special role 

which our province has played over the years in the promotion 

of human rights. 

 

In 1947 the Government of Saskatchewan under Premier T.C. 

Douglas introduced into this Assembly the Saskatchewan Bill 

of Rights. It guaranteed fundamental freedoms: freedom of 

religion, freedom of speech and of the press, freedom of 

assembly and association, freedom from arbitrary arrest or 

detention, and the right to vote. It also prohibited 

discrimination on the basis of race, creed, religion, colour, or 

ethnic or national origin. 

 

I cannot overstate the importance of the action of this 

Assembly in 1947 when it passed the Saskatchewan Bill of 

Rights. It was Canada's first comprehensive human rights 

legislation and it was a very important act of political 

leadership. All of Canada was profoundly affected by it. 

Following Saskatchewan's lead, all of the other jurisdictions in 

Canada began passing legislation that addressed the serious 

issue of discrimination. 

 

I should take a moment to remind members how it came to be 

that human rights and discrimination found its way onto the 

public agenda in Canada. The concern about fundamental 

freedoms and the determination to make discrimination illegal 

took huge impetus in the years immediately following the 

Second World War. The people of the world were outraged by 

the revelations about the grossly discriminatory treatment of 

Jews in Nazi Germany and by the murder of six million Jews in 

Nazi Germany and in territories occupied by the advancing 

armies of Adolf Hitler. 

 

After the war, Mr. Speaker, the United Nations was formed, 

and the question of human rights was one of the first items on 

its agenda. The countries of the world worked very intensively 

on the subject and in 1948 produced the Universal Declaration 

of Human Rights. This declaration continues to stand as a 

beacon to all the people of this troubled world, pointing the 

way to a future in which people will be more accepting, more 

tolerant, and more respectful of their fellow citizens. 

 

The Universal Declaration of Human Rights was the 

inspiration behind Premier Douglas's Bill of Rights in 1947. 

Saskatchewan's human rights legislation continued to evolve 

and progress steadily through the 1950s, the 1960s, and the 

1970s. This process 

 culminated with the consolidation in 1979 of our various 

anti-discrimination laws under our current Saskatchewan 

Human Rights Code. 

 

Our present Premier, then the Attorney General, introduced this 

important legislation into this Assembly and I know he's very 

proud of this achievement. 

 

The place of the code in our legal regime indicates its 

importance in our society. It is pre-eminent among our laws. It 

takes precedence over every other provincial law except where 

the legislation expressly states that it will operate in spite of the 

provisions of the code. 

 

It is extremely interesting to note that there was unanimous 

support for the code when it was passed into law in this 

Assembly. The code was clearly grounded in the philosophy 

which rose above partisan politics. 

 

I want to make one other important observation about the role 

of Saskatchewan in the development of human rights. 

Saskatchewan can proudly claim as its own two first ministers 

who were great champions of human rights. Both are legendary 

figures in the history of this province and in this country. They 

stood, Mr. Speaker, at quite different points in the political 

spectrum. I speak of course of former Premier T.C. Douglas 

and of Prime Minister John Diefenbaker. 

 

Premier Douglas, as I have already said, headed the 

Saskatchewan government when it introduced Canada's first 

Bill of Rights in 1947. In 1960, 13 years later, Prime Minister 

John Diefenbaker realized one of the great goals of his lifetime 

when he shepherded the Canadian Bill of Rights through the 

Parliament of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a proud record, a proud record indeed. It is 

a record of progressive thought and strong leadership. It is a 

record based upon a century of cooperation, of compassion, of 

mutual respect and toleration — core values shared by all the 

sons and daughters of this great province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, by its nature, human rights legislation must 

evolve and must be amended from time to time to meet our 

changing social values. 

 

Our human rights legislation is intended to protect people from 

discrimination. Over time our understanding of the problems of 

discrimination which people encounter has broadened and 

deepened. 

 

For example, during the 1970s we came to understand that it 

was no longer acceptable to discriminate against people on the 

basis of their age or their sex. The legislation was amended to 

include these matters as prohibited grounds for discrimination. 

All members of this Assembly know and all accept that our 

social values, our understanding of ourselves, our society, and 

the relationship between people in the society, are not 



1312 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1993 

frozen and stagnant. As a society we progress, we improve, our 

understanding broadens and deepens. We become more 

tolerant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our laws must keep up with this progress. In 

particular, our laws must be amended to afford protection to 

groups of persons who, because of certain characteristics, face 

special barriers and persecution. There are countries where the 

legislation that safeguards human rights has been controversial 

and very difficult. This type of legislation often strikes chords 

of deeply held social belief and prejudice. 

 

Our American neighbours have suffered these controversies in 

spades. The right to equal use of public transit by blacks in the 

American South and the right to equal educational 

opportunities for all children regardless of race, colour, or 

ethnic origin are two examples. The protection of these human 

rights by the rule of law were explosive and controversial 

actions in their time and they were difficult for every politician 

and every civil rights leader who advocated on behalf of these 

basic human rights. 

 

To some extent we face these challenges and these 

controversies with this Bill, but we are prepared to do so 

because we are convinced that it is the right thing to do. And I 

personally welcome the responsibility and the opportunity to 

state clearly in this legislature the content and the purpose of 

these amendments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have to say that in recent years the evolution of 

our human rights legislation has begun to lag. Saskatchewan 

has only added one new protective ground to the code since 

1979. That ground was mental disability. This was an 

important change but is the only substantial change this 

legislature has made to the code in more than a decade. And the 

decade of the 1980s was a time when changes and advances in 

human rights legislation was taking place all across the 

country. 

 

I believe that the amendments proposed in this Bill will restore 

and strengthen our province's reputation as a jurisdiction with 

strong and progressive human rights legislation — legislation 

which is based squarely on our traditions of tolerance, fairness, 

and understanding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we should all reflect on the principles which 

underlie the public policy respecting human rights. A stated 

objective of the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code is to 

promote recognition of the inherent dignity and equal rights of 

all members of the human family. This objective is based upon 

the fundamental principle that every person is free and equal. 

 

(1445) 

 

How is our society to advance this principle? How are we to 

accomplish this objective? Our starting point must be to 

eliminate wrongful discrimination. The amendments we are 

proposing today are entirely consistent with these objectives. 

 

The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code provides 

protection to persons who, because of certain characteristics, 

may be subjected to special barriers. People face these barriers 

as a result of stereotyping, historical disadvantage, or 

vulnerability to political or social prejudice. The code states as 

a general proposition that these individuals are equal in dignity 

and rights to all other members of society. At present, the code 

prohibits discrimination on the grounds of race, creed, religion, 

colour, sex, marital status, disability, age, nationality and 

ancestry, or place of origin. 

 

In this Bill — Bill 38 — the protection of the code is being 

extended to persons who may be discriminated against on the 

basis of sexual orientation, family status, and receipt of public 

assistance. 

 

The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that discrimination on these three 

grounds is happening today to individuals in our society. Most 

citizens of this province strongly reject discrimination. They 

sincerely believe that all members of our community deserve to 

be treated equally, to be treated with tolerance and with 

respect. However there remains a minority who, out of fear or 

intolerance or simple misunderstanding, actively discriminate 

against persons with these characteristics. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the most significant amendment proposed by this 

Bill will extend the code's protection to those discriminated 

against on the basis of their sexual orientation. This is the 

feature of the Bill which has generated some controversy. And 

I want to deal with several aspects of it. 

 

First, everyone should be clear as to what this legislation 

actually does. The protection that is extended is a very limited 

but a very important protection. It prohibits discrimination in 

employment that covers such things as hiring, firing and 

promotions. 

 

Let me give you an hypothetical example. Take the case of a 

woman who has been employed in a company for 10 years. Her 

performance has been excellent and she has been promoted 

twice. Then one day her employer discovers that she is a 

lesbian and fires her. 

 

Does that make sense, Mr. Speaker? Is that fair? Can we in this 

Assembly stand by and allow such discrimination to continue? 

I suggest our answer must be a loud and ringing no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The Bill also prohibits discrimination 

with respect to living accommodations. For practical purposes, 

this means rental accommodations other than in private homes. 

The prohibition also extends to public services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we debate this Bill, that is all we're talking 

about. Essentially we're talking about the right of people to 

work and to have a place to live. A job and a home. I ask 

members to think about those 



April 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1313 

words, Mr. Speaker — a job and a home. These are concepts 

that are absolutely fundamental to the lives of everyone. And 

the idea that any of our citizens should suffer discrimination 

with respect to their job or with respect to their home should be 

unacceptable to all of us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The second point I want to deal with is 

the argument that this Bill extends special rights to 

homosexuals. Mr. Speaker, that is not the case. The Bill does 

not confer rights at all, it merely prohibits wrongful 

discrimination. To suggest that it creates special rights is to 

profoundly misunderstand the scope and the function of human 

rights legislation. 

 

The thrust of our Human Rights Code is to extend to 

Saskatchewan people the very basic freedoms to live their lives 

without fear that they will be dismissed from their jobs; 

without fear that they will lose their housing; without the 

danger of being denied public services because of their race, 

their creed, their religion, their colour, and the other matters 

mentioned in the code. Now with these amendments there will 

be added to this list their sexual orientation, the fact that they 

have children, or that they receive public assistance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the right to work free from discrimination is not a 

special right. The right to rent an apartment without 

discrimination is not a special right, and the right to enjoy the 

same public benefits as other persons is not a special right. The 

plain fact is that these amendments do not create any special 

rights at all. They do not create any extraordinary legal status. 

They seek only to eliminate discrimination. 

 

The third aspect of this Bill that I must draw to the attention of 

the members is the situation in other Canadian jurisdictions. 

We can't ignore the similar developments in human rights 

legislation in other provinces of this country of ours and at the 

federal level. Only four provinces have not extended the basic 

protection of their human rights laws to include sexual 

orientation. The remainder have done so. At the federal level, 

similar legislation to this Bill was introduced into the House of 

Commons last December by the then minister of Justice, the 

Hon. Kim Campbell. The current Minister of Justice, the Hon. 

Pierre Blais, has recently assured me that the federal 

government intends to proceed with this legislation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, not to afford the protection of human rights 

legislation to groups that have been subjected to considerable 

and blatant discrimination undermines the very integrity of 

these laws. All jurisdictions that have passed this law sees the 

issue in these terms; this is a fundamental human rights issue. 

If we do not protect this group, how will we proceed in the 

future when other groups are singled out for their particular 

characteristics and are denied full participation in our society? 

To leave one group beyond the pale sets a very dangerous 

precedent. 

Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, a recent Ontario court ruling found 

the Canadian Human Rights Act to be unconstitutional because 

it did not provide protection against discrimination on the basis 

of sexual orientation. The court ordered that the Canadian 

Human Rights Act must be interpreted, applied, and 

administered as if sexual orientation was included in the federal 

code, as if it were written into that law. In effect, the federal 

government was told it must amend its law to comply with the 

charter. 

 

The fourth point I wish to make is that in prohibiting 

discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation, the 

legislation does not make a value judgement about the 

homosexual lifestyle. This statement is consistent with the 

whole of the code. For example, the code protects people from 

discrimination on account of religion but does not make a value 

judgement about any religion. 

 

This Bill does not speak to the question of individual 

acceptance of homosexual behaviour. It does nothing to 

promote homosexuality. It simply prohibits discrimination 

against a citizen based solely upon his or her sexual orientation. 

 

The government simply does not believe and does not accept 

the suggestion that protecting individuals from prejudice and 

discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation will contribute 

to a breakdown of family values or traditional family lifestyles. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in light of some of the concerns we have heard 

over the past few weeks it is appropriate for me to state on 

behalf of the government four important aspects of this point. 

 

First, there is nothing in the Bill that changes the traditional 

definition of who can be considered as married. In plain terms, 

the legislation does not recognize homosexual marriages. 

 

Secondly, there is nothing in the Bill that speaks to the question 

of the entitlement of homosexual partners to spousal benefits. 

Whether benefits accrue under a benefit plan depends upon the 

terms of that plan. This legislation will not affect that question. 

 

Thirdly, there is nothing in the Bill that affects the adoption of 

children. In this province the courts have always determined 

questions of adoption on the basis of the welfare or best 

interests of the child. This Bill will not affect the way in which 

the courts have approached or will approach these questions. 

 

Fourthly, this Bill is not the thin edge of the wedge on the 

question of the legal position of homosexuals. So far as this 

government is concerned, the law will go this far and no 

farther. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I leave the sexual orientation provisions of 

this Bill, I should note an important exception to its 

application. In effect the exception permits discrimination in 

one circumstance. 

 

Presently the code permits a home-owner who rents 



1314 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1993 

one suite in his or her home to make distinctions on the basis of 

sex, whether renting to a man or a woman. For example, where 

the home-owner is a woman, she may choose to rent her 

basement suite only to women. This provision, by virtue of this 

Bill, Mr. Speaker, is being extended so that a home-owner 

renting one suite may decline to rent that suite to a 

homosexual. 

 

I want also to add that there is nothing in the Bill that touches 

on the content of school curricula. The rights of parents as they 

relate to educational programs in our school system will not be 

affected by these changes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now turn to the other provisions of this Bill. As 

I said earlier, the government does not believe that this Bill 

weakens family values or traditional lifestyles in any way. On 

the contrary, one of the three new prohibited grounds of 

discrimination which we propose to add to the code is family 

status. 

 

The addition of family status will protect persons with children 

against discrimination in respect of employment and 

accommodation. Individuals with children should not be 

discriminated against in employment opportunities or in 

advancement solely because they have assumed the very 

difficult task of balancing work and family responsibilities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — This amendment addresses the 

changing social reality of families where both parents work full 

time. The government believes that family relationships are 

fundamentally important in our community and wishes to 

ensure that discrimination against mothers and fathers and their 

children does not occur. 

 

Here too appropriate exceptions are included to permit 

distinctions to be made in certain circumstances. For example, 

an exception is included to permit seniors-only housing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the code will also ensure that another vulnerable 

group, those who receive public assistance, are included within 

our code. Persons who receive public assistance are protected 

from discrimination in the human rights statutes of Manitoba, 

Ontario, and Nova Scotia. With this amendment to our code, 

this province will also recognize that there should be no insult 

or injury as a result of discrimination based on economic 

disadvantage. 

 

Finally, an amendment clarifies the provision of the code 

respecting injunctions. It will now be clear that the commission 

may apply to the court for an order to stop a continuing 

discrimination. This amendment, Mr. Speaker, responds to a 

recent court ruling which limits the ability of the commission 

to apply for an injunction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude my remarks with a few general 

observations. Legislation alone cannot 

eliminate prejudice. It's not possible to legislate charity, to 

legislate tolerance or understanding or compassion into the 

hearts and minds of people, but some moral goals can be 

expressed in legal terms. And in this way our statute law and 

the judiciary can play important roles in establishing new 

patterns in legal and social order. 

 

(1500) 

 

The common thread in many of the discriminatory acts covered 

by the code is that fear or hatred caused by reactions to 

characteristics against which these discriminatory acts are 

directed, this is the basis for racial discrimination, religious 

discrimination, and in too many cases, gender discrimination. 

In many cases unfortunately this common thread of fear or 

hatred lies at the root of discrimination against homosexuals. 

When there is no law challenging this wrongful discrimination, 

society is free to choose scapegoats with impunity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the importance of law as a positive force in 

society, a positive force that serves as an example for positive 

behaviour, is immeasurable. This legislation gives voice to 

society's rejection of the passive acceptance of prejudice and 

wrongful discrimination. This legislation serves values shared 

by most Saskatchewan people, values of fairness and equality, 

values that fully encompass an outright rejection of 

discrimination in all of its forms. 

 

Saskatchewan people understand that our community is much 

richer and more productive when we treat each other with 

respect and with dignity, recognizing that all people are equal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to make a general comment about our 

responsibility in this Assembly as legislators. Legislators must 

of course consider popular opinion when making laws, but the 

basis of this opinion must be examined carefully. When 

popular opinion is based on prejudice or when it is based on a 

lack of understanding of the effect of the legislation, then as 

legislators, each one of us is duty bound to give calm 

consideration to the proposed law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we must do so here. We must consider the 

horrible injustice of wrongful discrimination. We must 

consider how this horrible injustice blights the lives of the 

victims of discrimination. We must consider how this horrible 

injustice harms the fabric of our society, and how we are all 

lessened and damaged whenever it occurs. 

 

I believe that most citizens of this province will support our 

approach to this issue, based as it is on values that lie at the 

very root of our existence. 

 

Great strides have been made in the lifetime of the members of 

this Legislative Assembly to end discrimination. Thoughtful 

men and women, recognizing the lack of any rational basis for 

their prejudice, choose to overcome it. They choose to embrace 

a belief in our common humanity. It must not 



April 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1315 

be forgotten that it was not so long ago that racial 

discrimination was not only common but was accepted on our 

continent. The civil rights legislation enacted in our country, in 

our province, in the late 1940s and 1950s and in the United 

States in the early 1960s marked an end to that acceptance. It 

called for men and women to examine their individual 

consciences. That legislation marked the beginning of the end 

of public acceptance of discrimination on the basis of race, 

creed, and colour. 

 

Today I invite this legislature to continue this province's great 

tradition of fairness, and to extend the protection of the 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Code to other groups who 

continue to suffer the horrible injustice of discrimination. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to end my remarks by quoting from a 

speech given in 1950 by then Premier T.C. Douglas. With all 

of his deep compassion and with all of his commitment to 

humanity, and in his grand eloquence, he said these words: 

 

 I hope that this province will be an island of tolerance and 

good will. I hope that in this province there will be a haven of 

neighbourliness in which we shall give to all men, and to all 

classes, and to all creeds, and to all colours, the same rights 

and the same civil liberties that we ask for ourselves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, listen to the power of those words: an island of 

tolerance and good will; a haven of neighbourliness. Mr. 

Speaker, I invite all members of this Assembly to join with me 

in working towards this end. 

 

I move second reading of An Act to amend the Saskatchewan 

Human Rights Code. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

address the minister's comments and the amendment to the 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Code. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe we start at a position that discrimination 

is wrong, discrimination in any form. And protection from 

discrimination should cover everyone in society, not just those 

that might be specified in an Act. 

 

As a society we have stated there shall be no discrimination 

based on race, religion, creed, sex. We have set out other 

declarations that we are all equal; that no one should be 

excluded or penalized on the basis of their class, status, or 

beliefs. 

 

However, we continue to see various examples in our society, 

of discrimination, but we have provided avenues and rules to 

handle such situations. Mr. Speaker, these avenues are already 

in place. We have the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code; we 

have the Canadian charter of rights. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I'd 

like to bring to your attention and to the Assembly, a letter 

that I received, dealing with the Canadian charter of rights. 

 

And this letter is from EGALE Regina — Equality for Gays 

and Lesbians Everywhere — and this letter is dated February 5, 

1993. And I would like to read one sentence because I think it 

says where the Canadian charter of rights stands on this issue. 

The sentence reads: The courts are consistently finding that the 

Charter of Rights and Freedoms does indeed protect lesbians 

and gay men from discrimination. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that sentence says it all. It says that the 

Charter of Rights and Freedoms does indeed protect lesbians 

and gay men from discrimination. And this is from EGALE 

Regina, Mr. Speaker, a group that represents gays and lesbians 

in this city. And they are saying in their letter that the charter of 

rights does indeed afford them protection. If that is the case, 

Mr. Speaker, why is there a need to change the laws that we 

already have in place, that are providing those protections? 

 

Is there some other reason perhaps for this legislation which is 

not so readily apparent? We see people in other areas of society 

who are discriminated against, and yet they are not identified 

for inclusion of this protection under the Human Rights Code. 

Mr. Speaker, we see rural residents discriminated against in 

health care. We see people discriminated against because of 

their political beliefs or because they have no political 

involvement. 

 

We see people fired because of their beliefs in a particular 

political party or process, or we see them fired to allow 

government partisans to have those positions at the taxpayers' 

expense. Are not these people also worthy of protection from 

discrimination? 

 

The minister who mentioned a woman who was fired from her 

position because it became evident to her employer that she 

was a lesbian. Well, Mr. Speaker, I suggest that is wrong, but 

there are protections in place to handle that situation. 

 

But the government has exemplified that if that same woman 

had happened to belong to a particular political party with 

which they did not agree, then it's perfectly acceptable for her 

to be relieved of her position. And, Mr. Speaker, that too is 

wrong. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have seen this government deny a class of 

people the right to have access to the courts, right to have 

access to the court when a contract was broken. The 

government, Mr. Speaker, this government today broke 

contracts with farmers under GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) and then denied them the access to courts, an access 

to court, Mr. Speaker, which each and every one of us as 

citizens have. Mr. Speaker, this is a clear example of 

discrimination - 

_ discrimination by this very government that brings forward 

this legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister talks of protection for jobs and for 

homes. Mr. Speaker, those protections are already in place in 

this province. The minister spoke 



1316 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1993 

of wrongful discrimination. When he spoke of that, Mr. 

Speaker, what came to mind was that he was suggesting that 

discrimination in some cases is acceptable. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

I would suggest that discrimination is discrimination and it is 

not acceptable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we support protection from discrimination. We 

feel that all members of society should be protected equally; 

that no member of society should be singled out for special 

protection or privilege. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my colleagues and I wish to have the opportunity 

to study this legislation and the minister's words. Therefore I 

would move that this debate now be adjourned. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. The point of 

order, Mr. Speaker, is that how do we get into the Committee 

of Finance when the resolutions are only being indicated that 

on Friday next, which is tomorrow, we're going to be 

considering that? It's in the motions and in our books right 

now. 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. First of all, I'd like to draw to 

the attention of the member from Rosthern that the House can 

go into Committee of Finance at any time they wish to go into. 

 

Number two, the appropriate . . . the notice has been given of 

the Appropriation Bill, and that will be coming up tomorrow, 

unless members move by leave. 

 

Thirdly, resolutions do not need any notice. And so therefore 

what we have done moving into Committee of Finance is quite 

in order in what we have done. And therefore I find the 

member's point of order not well taken. 

 

(1515) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Interim Supply 

 

The Chair: — Order. I would ask the Minister of Finance to 

please introduce the officials who are here with us today. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

would like to introduce, on my right, the deputy minister of 

Finance, John Wright; behind me, the associate deputy minister 

of Finance, Craig Dotson. 

 

I would like to make a few comments about the purpose of 

interim supply. Each year the annual budget is tabled in the 

legislature to provide funding for the entire fiscal year. The 

Assembly then reviews the details of the budget, department by 

department, and it's at that committee stage that detail 

questions 

can be asked about the budget. Then the whole budget is 

ultimately passed by means of The Appropriation Act. 

 

In the interim, however, the operations of the government have 

to continue. And therefore it has been tradition for some 30 

years for interim supply Bills to be passed by the legislature to 

allow the basic affairs of the government and the province to 

continue in the interim before the final budget is passed. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move: 

 

 That a sum not exceeding $796,545,000 be granted to Her 

Majesty on account for the twelve months ending March 31, 

1994. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Would the 

minister provide for us the items that interim supply is being 

asked for and if we could have that, please? 

 

Would the minister provide to us — because I haven't had the 

time to look at this — information as it relates to where the 

variables will come in relation to the one-twelfth and not being 

the one-twelfth, more or less? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, the additional 

funding of 99.174 million will be used to finance the 

government's commitment of providing six-twelfths to school 

divisions by June 30. School divisions operate on a calendar 

fiscal year and the government's fiscal year is April 1 to March 

31. 

 

Due to the difference in the fiscal years, school boards are 

forced to borrow funds to finance operations for the period 

January to April. To alleviate this financing burden, the 

government has traditionally provided one-twelfth K to 12 

funding on April 2 . . . in April and two-twelfths in May and 

three-twelfths in June. The second interim supply for May and 

June has five-twelfths funding for K to 12. 

 

The impact of not providing this additional funding would 

result in educational funding being used to offset the higher 

financing costs associated with a longer borrowing period. 

 

Another area is in the area of fire fighting. Fire-fighting costs 

are predominantly incurred in the summer months and 

two-twelfths funding for May and June will likely be 

insufficient to cover expected or potential fire-fighting costs. 

The additional funding of 3.36 million will be used for 

potential fire-fighting activities to ensure the protection of our 

forest resources. 

 

The other area is medical practitioners. Medical practitioners 

get paid on a biweekly basis. There are three biweekly pay 

periods in May. The additional funding of $12 million will be 

used to accommodate the additional biweekly payment run. 

Not providing the monies would mean delaying the payment of 

the government's obligations to medical practitioners. 



April 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1317 

Funding with respect to legislation. The additional funding of 

$243,000 will be used for the extra administrative costs 

incurred when the House is in session. 

 

Mr. Martens: — You mentioned, Madam Minister, that the 

$99 million would be used for the funding to education as it 

relates to the requirements to be paid out. Is that under the 

authority that that 99 million is going to be adequate until the 

end of the 6 month . . . or until the end of June, or does it go 

beyond that for money that is required until the end of May? 

 

Is that requirement the end of May, or is it the end of June that 

that requirement for the 99 million is there? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, the last interim 

supply provided for one-twelfth. This provides for 

five-twelfths. So what they will have is six-twelfths or half of 

their annual funding. So it will take them to the end of June. 

 

Mr. Martens: — I didn't quite hear you, Madam Minister. 

Would you repeat that for me? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, yes, I'd be glad to 

repeat that. The last interim supply provided them with 

one-twelfth; this will provide them with five-twelfths. After 

this is passed, they will have six-twelfths. Because they run on 

a calendar year, that will take them until the end of June. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Is that the volume of dollars that has 

traditionally been given for the requirements for the 

Department of Education? Is that the normal requirements that 

have been made? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, yes, this is the 

traditional practice. 

 

Mr. Martens: — You also indicated that the reason for the 12 

million to Department of Health was there for a specific reason. 

Would you outline that for me again, too. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, medical 

practitioners get paid on a biweekly basis. There are three 

biweekly pay periods in May, therefore the additional funding 

of $12 million will be used to accommodate the additional 

biweekly payment run. And not providing the monies would 

mean delaying the payment of government's obligation to the 

medical practitioners. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Madam Minister, the 3 million in 

Environment and Resource Management is for fire fighting. I'm 

not sure whether there would be any reason for that now, as it 

relates to the springtime. Normally the fire-fighting component 

is dealt with in the fall or the late summer. Would you give us 

an explanation as to why the Environment and Resource 

Management needs the extra three and a half . . . $3.3 million? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, our hope is that they 

will not need the extra $3.36 million. 

However it has been quite dry in the North — I was up there a 

few weeks ago — extremely dry, and there is a hazard for 

forest fires in May and June. So we just want to be sure in the 

eventuality that there is that problem because of the dry 

conditions, that the department has the resources to be able to 

fight the fires effectively. 

 

Mr. Martens: — What's the normal requirement for fire 

fighting? Is this a percentage of the total that is listed for fire 

fighting? Would you provide us with that number so that we 

can judge whether this is one-twelfth or two-twelfths or a 

quarter or 50 per cent, whatever that is? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, the total budget is 

about 26 million; we are providing just over 3 million. So it is 

about an eighth or ninth of the total budget allocation. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Madam Minister, what happens to this 

budget if it isn't used? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — It is just part of the department's 

ongoing budget. Just because we . . . if we pass this motion, 

just because the money is allocated it doesn't mean that it has to 

be spent. If it's not spent, it would be retained in the 

department. But it does not have to be spent. It just allows the 

money to be spent if it's necessary to spend it. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Well what if they don't spend the $20 million 

in their budget? Does it go back to the Department of Finance 

then? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, if at the end of the 

year the money allocated for fire fighting was not totally spent, 

it would be recorded as an underexpenditure and essentially it 

would go to deal with the deficit problem. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 

when we went through this exercise a month ago or so, we had 

quite a long debate and deliberation on some of the tracking 

that you do and some of the things that your Department of 

Finance does, and you and I agreed on some things and 

disagreed. 

 

Recently the federal government has released figures dealing 

with consumer spending, retail sales, areas that obviously 

affect their budget in a big way and obviously would affect 

your budget in a big way. 

 

Madam Minister, I know that you've allocated money in your 

interim supply to do some of that analysis and tracking, as you 

did in the month before. These numbers that the federal 

government has released would make us wonder if your 

predictions made in the budget aren't a little bit off the rails 

already. And I'm wondering if you could give us some of the 

analysis and the tracking that you've done since the budget on 

retail spending and some of the consumer-related items that 

would be of great interest to how well your budget is doing. I 

wonder if you'd provide that to us today. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, the deputy's 



1318 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1993 

going to look up some more detailed information, but I 

welcome that question about the federal budget and the 

economic forecast upon which it was based. Because I will say 

for the current year, the year that we are in right now, there is a 

pretty close relationship between our assumptions and the 

federal government's assumptions. 

 

But when you get beyond this year, you move into '94, what is 

very striking is the fact that the federal government is much 

more optimistic in its assumptions about growth than the 

Government of Saskatchewan. Their statistics with respect to 

unemployment, their statistics with respect to growth in the 

economy, their statistics with respect to interest rates are much 

rosier than either the forecasts of the Government of 

Saskatchewan or the forecasts of the private agencies upon 

which we based our budget. 

 

(1530) 

 

So what I would say to the member opposite is this. If in fact 

the federal government is right, and I hope they are, then our 

balanced budget plan released in March looks even more 

optimistic than it did when we introduced it. I guess I happen to 

be somewhat nervous because I think the federal government 

has been far too optimistic in making its assumptions. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well, Madam Minister, we aren't here today 

to worry about the level of optimism that you have or the level 

of optimism that Mr. Mazankowski has. 

 

What we're here today is granting you sums of money to spend, 

and those sums of money are predicated on a budget which you 

delivered in this House that said that the taxpayer of this 

province was going to have to come up with so much to give 

you. And the questions that we asked you last time were the 

fear of Saskatchewan taxpayers that you're going to be asking 

them for more because your assumptions weren't right. 

 

Now what I'm asking about is hard, cold data which evolves on 

Main Street, Saskatchewan, each and every day. And it's the 

volume of people who go in and out the front door and ring the 

cash register that I'm talking about. Now there is some data 

being released that says that those retail sales aren't meeting the 

mark for the first quarter, that they aren't meeting the mark for 

the second quarter, and they don't jibe with the predictions that 

you made, Madam Minister. 

 

Now if I'm wrong, if you're saying that retail sales in 

Saskatchewan are different than retail sales elsewhere in 

Canada, then I'm simply asking you to bring the information 

forward and table it here in the legislature so that the taxpayer 

can be assured that your numbers aren't all wet. That's all I'm 

asking for. And I know your department does that analysis. 

 

You say you take numbers from the Conference Board of 

Canada and you take numbers from the federal government and 

you take numbers from all sorts of places and then you do your 

analysis. You've had 

some time since your budget. I want to know what 

Saskatchewan's economy is doing in 1993 and how it is 

affecting the way that you spend taxpayers' money. 

 

Same questions we asked you last quarter. You said you 

couldn't provide them because you didn't have enough time. 

Well you've had some time now and you've had some data and 

you've had some results. We're going to be into the month of 

May and I'm just saying, would you please now inform the 

Assembly of what that data is? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, I would remind the 

member opposite, if he doesn't want to discuss the federal 

budget, don't raise it. And I'm not talking about thoughts about 

the federal budget; I'm talking about the basic numbers it was 

based on. They are wildly optimistic. 

 

Now with respect to some statistics to back that up, I would say 

this. In 1994 the federal government is assuming that real GDP 

(gross domestic product), that is, the growth in the economy, 

the rate of growth will be 4.6 per cent, whereas in our forecast, 

we have assumed growth within Saskatchewan at only 1.6 per 

cent. 

 

That number, federally, 4.6 per cent, relative to the economic 

forecasts of other independent agencies, is wildly optimistic. I 

hope it's true, but it's wildly optimistic. Ours of 1.6. per cent is 

very cautious. 

 

Now you asked for some indicators as to how well we are 

doing, and I would give you an important statistic here. Retail 

sales, seasonally adjusted, February '93, January-February '93 

relative to January and February '92, an increase of 5.3 per 

cent. What we assumed in our budget was an increase of 4 per 

cent for '93. So if this trend continues, our projected increase 

was cautious. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Are you saying then, Madam Minister, that 

your revenues are ahead of schedule by 1.3 per cent and 

correspondingly the pressure on the tax load on Saskatchewan 

citizens isn't as great as what it was before, that you have that 

extra money coming in and therefore would be showing a 

surplus over what you're projecting? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, we of course do not 

have the figures, because the sales tax is collected, but it takes 

a significant period of time before it's remitted to the 

government. So we have no sales tax revenue remitted from 

this budget year. All I'm saying is that there has been a 5 per 

cent increase in retail sales, over 5 per cent increase in retail 

sales thus far. If that trend continues, our projected increase of 

4 per cent will be cautious. There is no evidence to support the 

view that it is an optimistic assumption. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, just so I 

understand this. You know that retail sales have gone up 5 per 

cent, but you don't have any idea what sales tax revenue is . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well you broadened the base out 

considerably. And you went from 8 per cent to 9 per cent. So if 

you had a 



April 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1319 

retail sales increase of 5 per cent, and it was 8 per cent last 

year, and you've tacked another point on there, I would suggest 

you must have some knowledge of what those numbers are. 

There's some arithmetic there that I'm sure your officials are 

capable . . . 

 

You're telling me you're ahead of the game. Why don't you tell 

Saskatchewan taxpayers that? I mean I think they'd like to 

know that; they'd like to know that maybe there's some 

optimism that you're not going to tax them quite so heavy 

because you're ahead of yourself on what your predictions are. 

 

You're saying 5 per cent; 5 per cent has to equate into a 

corresponding amount of money, does it not? Because you've 

broadened the sales tax from where it was in 1992. You've got 

more items now being taxed, not less. You've got a higher 

percentage of tax than you had before, not less. So therefore 

there must be more money involved here somewhere, Madam 

Minister. And I think it's appropriate that you tell the Assembly 

how much more that is. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, two points. These 

statistics are not for this budget year. They're for last budget 

year. And the reason they're for last budget year is there's a 

delay. There's a delay in the collection of the statistics. And 

there's a delay in the collection of the tax. 

 

You asked for the most current information. I'm saying the 

most current information is that in January-February '93, 

relative to the previous year, there's been a 5.3 per cent increase 

in sales tax. 

 

So I mean . . . that's all I can tell you. I can't tell you what it's 

going to mean for this budget year, because we won't know 

until the money is actually collected and remitted to the 

Department of Finance. 

 

The member opposite knows that the tax rate is fixed. And so 

the level of money that we collect is not going to affect the tax 

rate. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well, Madam Minister, maybe you could tell 

me this. I'm sure that we're going to get to do interim supply 

again some time in this session. So how long does it take for 

your officials to get this information? Is it done on a quarterly 

basis? Is it done biannually? How often . . . when can we 

expect you to give the taxpayers of this province some 

information as to what your increased taxes are doing to the 

Saskatchewan economy? When can we expect an answer? Will 

it be when this House is in session, or will it be conveniently 

when this House is out of session? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, by late May we 

would be able to report on the April statistics. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — So I am to assume then, Madam Minister, 

that if we have interim supply in this House at the end of the 

month of May, when you come back for another nearly $800 

million as you've done this time, that you will be prepared at 

that time to tell Saskatchewan taxpayers how much your tax 

increases are taking out of the Saskatchewan economy. Is that 

right then? I hold you to that. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, what we would be 

prepared to tell you is the level of sales and the level of revenue 

being generated from those sales as soon as that information is 

available to the department. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Madam Minister. It will give the 

taxpayers some assurance, I think, that they will be able to get 

some type of an update when we do this again in a month's 

time, because there's an awful lot of people out there are telling 

us that they haven't seen their doors swinging more often and 

they haven't seen their cash register ringing more often; that in 

fact those sales projections aren't happening. 

 

And I would suggest to you, Madam Minister, as we did 

before, that if that combination is out of whack, then your 

budget is badly out of whack. And if that's the case, then we're 

going to have to look at some ways of doing some adjustments, 

and it's those adjustments that have people very frightened in 

this province, Madam Minister. 

 

Madam Minister, do you expect that the next interim supply 

motion will deal with the same volume of dollars as we're 

doing here; that when you have your non-budgetary items 

included in here that you are at 796.545 — that you're nearly 

$800 million — would you expect your next interim supply 

motion to be at that level? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, we'd have to assess 

it at that particular point in time. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, you said 

that sales were up 5 per cent in the province. Would you be 

able to tell me which of those commodities, which 

commodities — is it cars and trucks and hardware where the 

sales are up? 

 

As my colleague from Thunder Creek has just stated, when we 

go into the places of business, we don't find that that's what is 

happening there. And so we want to know from you for which 

period of time have you got the 5 per cent. Is it January 1 to . . . 

February to February? Could you tell me in which areas, 

Madam Minister, the sales are up? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, this is not 

information gathered by the Department of Finance. It's 

Statistics Canada information, and it's readily available in the 

library. So that breakdown is readily available to the members 

opposite. It's February '93 relative to February '92. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Is this information that is unique to 

Saskatchewan, this 5 per cent? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, I welcome that 

question because that was a point I should have made. For 

those who are pessimistic about the economy and the future of 

Saskatchewan, they should look very carefully at this statistic. 

Because what the 



1320 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1993 

statistic says is that February '93, retail sales in the province of 

Saskatchewan increased by 5.3 per cent. 

 

What the significance of this statistic is relative to what 

happened to the rest of Canada, the increase in Saskatchewan 

was higher than the national increase. The national increase 

was only 5 per cent. 

 

Mr. Martens: — So that this is February '92 to February '93. 

Since you have that information, would you be able to provide 

me with the information on which areas increased, Madam 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, as I said before, this 

is not information that is collected by the Department of 

Finance. It is information collected by Statistics Canada at the 

federal level and that information is readily available in the 

library. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Well, Madam Minister, if you've got it with 

you there, why don't you provide it to the committee? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, we do not have the 

detailed breakdown here right now. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Will you provide that, Madam Minister, to 

the committee? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, if the member seems 

to have a problem in getting it from the library himself, we 

certainly know the process to use the library. We will use the 

library and provide the information to you. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Well I thank the member for her 

benevolence. When would I be able to expect it, Madam 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, as soon as we are 

finished with interim supply. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Martens: — Very good. Your benevolence isn't as greatly 

appreciated as I thought it would be. Would you be able to 

provide it for us today? 

 

And I honestly believe that you've got it with you, and I believe 

that you could provide it to the committee at this point, Madam 

Minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, I can assure the 

member opposite I do not have it with me today. But I can 

assure the member opposite that for somebody who knows how 

to use the library, it is not a difficult task and we will get that at 

a future point. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Would you be able to comment on a statistic 

that I heard recently that car sales were down 1,900 for the 

month of February? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, I do not have any 

information to that effect. And all I can say is anecdotal stories 

are quite in the opposite direction. 

Mr. Martens: — Well, Madam Minister, I'll ask you some 

other question. How much did the trip to New York cost you 

then if you need recent history to remind you? How much was 

the cost of your trip to New York and how many people did 

you take along with you? Would you be able to provide that to 

the Assembly? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, the figures have not 

been compiled yet. The delegation included, from the point of 

view of Finance, it included the deputy minister and the 

associate deputy minister, Bill Jones. The Premier had along 

with him his staff, who was his deputy, his chief of staff, and 

his executive assistant. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Would the minister tell me how many 

meetings she had in New York with the various bond rating 

companies? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, this is not a 

complete list, but it is as complete as we can recall. Who we 

met with were Standard and Poor's, Moody's, DBRS 

(Dominion Bond Rating Service); we met with the investment 

dealers, which included meetings with First Boston, Salomon 

Brothers, Goldman Sachs, the American investment syndicate, 

the Canadian investment syndicate, Wood Gundy, Dominion 

Securities, ScotiaMacLeod, Burns Fry, Nesbitt Thomson. And 

then we also met with the people who buy our bonds 

themselves. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Going back to the paper that you gave us, the 

question I have is why would we be voting two-twelfths on this 

occasion rather than one-twelfth? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, this is quite standard 

procedure. I would recall the member's memory here. In 

1983-84 when the members opposite were government, they 

voted one-twelfth, then they voted two-twelfths. In 1984-85, 

when the members opposite were government, they voted 

one-twelfth, then they voted two-twelfths. In 1986-87, when 

the members opposite were government, they voted 

one-twelfth, they voted two-twelfths. 

 

This is standard procedure. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Well I'm not . . . I'm asking you why you 

made the decision, Madam Minister, to do two-twelfths. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, what I'm telling the 

member opposite is we're doing it because it is standard 

procedure to do so. And what we really want to assure is that 

the institutions in the province, such as our schools and our 

hospitals, have the capacity to continue to operation while the 

budget is still before the legislature. 

 

Mr. Martens: — You still haven't given me the reason, 

Madam Minister. Because you could come back to this 

Assembly for one-twelfth at the 



April 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1321 

end of May just as well as you could come back for one-twelfth 

at the end of June. And I want to know, Madam Minister. 

You've got to have some reason why you want to have 

two-twelfths instead of one-twelfth. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, it's better 

management because it allows these institutions to be assured 

of their funding for a period of time. It's better management 

because it allows this legislature . . . I assume, although 

considering their actions thus far in the session, maybe this isn't 

true. I assume the members opposite really do want to get into 

the estimates so they can ask the detailed questions that the 

public may have of what we're doing with the taxpayers' 

money. 

 

And again I return to the point that this is standard procedure 

done by governments for a significant period of time. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Madam Minister, I find it a little unusual. 

You ask for, in the first one-twelfth you asked for, let's take 

education for example, you asked for $72.591, now you're 

asking for $145 million, which is two-twelfths, and then on top 

of that you're asking for the money that would take them to the 

end of June. 

 

Why didn't you ask this Assembly for the money that was 

required for them? Why ask for every other department in the 

same fashion you ask for the schools and environment, for 

fighting fires, and all of those kinds of things. Why didn't you 

take one-twelfth and add on where it was necessary? I want to 

know what the reason was for two-twelfths rather than 

one-twelfth. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, again I will repeat 

the answer. It means that the institutions can be assured of 

funding. It means that we can move in this House onto 

estimates and it is standard practice. There is really no other 

answer. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Madam Minister, I'm glad my colleague 

from Morse . . . 

 

The Chair: — The Chair will recognize the Hon. Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just earlier on in 

our conversation today, you assured us that you would have the 

results of how certain portions of the Saskatchewan economy 

were performing by the end of May. 

 

And now it seems, Madam Minister, that because you have 

chosen this route of asking for two-twelfths, that we won't have 

the opportunity to ask you those questions, that you simply will 

be able to avoid telling Saskatchewan taxpayers how things are 

turning out as per your projections and how your taxes are 

affecting our economy. Because we could be into your 

estimates next week, Madam Minister, and you won't have time 

to have the data, and it'll be one excuse and run-around after 

another. You made a commitment in here that you're going to 

have those results here for Saskatchewan taxpayers to see at the 

end of May, and if we're doing interim supply we won't have 

an 

opportunity to question you. 

 

So I guess what we need from you, Madam Minister, is some 

assurance that come the end of May when you have those 

results, that you're going to make them public in this 

legislature. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, I'll give the member 

opposite that assurance. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I really don't 

believe that two-twelfths in this instance is here for any historic 

reason except that you personally don't want to be before the 

committee of this Assembly, in this forum, for the third time. 

That is what I believe, Madam Minister, is the reason why 

you're doing this. 

 

And I would suggest to you, Madam Minister, that you are . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . I don't need help from the Minister 

of Labour, and actually under his own admission, a toy 

minister at that on occasion. 

 

I believe, Madam Minister, that you personally don't want to be 

before the committee. You don't want to represent the 

Department of Finance in providing two-twelfths. You are 

going to say to this Assembly that without any regard for the 

kinds of things that are necessary to be done, you're going to 

flippantly go through this and just say that three-quarters of a 

billion dollars can be voted without explaining to us why you 

would want to have two-twelfths instead of one-twelfth. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, the member 

opposite is asking a question about a practice that his 

government, which he was a member of, engaged in regularly. 

If the member opposite wants answers with respect to the 

questions that he asked about the Department of Finance, its 

statistics, its reports, we would welcome the opportunity to do 

so when we get into the discussions of the estimates for the 

Department of Finance. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Well, Madam Minister, I really don't believe 

that that's the answer but I'll have to take it for what it's worth. 

And I'll say this, that we have had a certain degree of difficulty 

obtaining answers from the Minister of Finance because . . . 

and it's been this rule from the ministers of Finance throughout 

the sessions that I've been here, and typically we never got any 

answers from the Associate Minister of Finance either. And 

that is typical of what the ministers have done for us. 

 

And I will say this too that there is very serious concern on our 

part — and we will go into those matters when we deal with 

the Department of Health, Department of Agriculture, 

Department of Labour, and all of the various departments — 

but, Madam Minister, voting two-twelfths today, spending 

$796 million, and you don't have a reason why you should, 

why you should not be asking for one-twelfth rather than 

two-twelfths. 

 

Historical reasons have no reflection on what you should be 

doing. If you would have taken and done 



1322 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1993 

historically the things that were done in the past, you would 

have also said that harmonization was probably a good thing to 

do. And yet you took and deliberately decided that you didn't 

want to have anything to do with that, so you chose to alter the 

course. And so you, Madam Minister, have done that on your 

own volition, and I believe that that's your decision. 

 

Now you made a decision to ask for two-twelfths. And I 

believe, Madam Minister, that you should have been involved 

enough to make a decision on the basis, not of history, but you 

should have made the decision of whether it is good for the 

taxpayers to have those items. You could have exclusively 

listed, as you did Education and Health and fire fighting. 

 

And, Madam Minister, I don't believe that fire fighting is of 

significance at this point in time. And I really don't understand 

why you did that. I think there probably is a reason that is other 

than fire fighting. And that's the reason why you're moving 

more money into that area than there was already budgeted. 

 

You already have three-twelfths . . . if we conclude today, on 

the basis of what you have provided, you already have a 

quarter of the budget for fire fighting, and then you're going to 

add another significant amount to that amount of money. 

Therefore, Madam Minister, I don't understand why you would 

want to have two-twelfths taking it to the end of June — the 

volume of dollars that you would require for servicing the 

government — I don't understand that. 

 

And therefore, Madam Minister, I don't really believe that you 

have the matter in hand. You're just using that as an excuse. 

And I wonder if I could really get the real answer for your 

reason. 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, I don't know how 

long the member opposite wants to go through this process. I 

said there were several answers. One answer was that we 

wanted the various institutions involved — the educational 

institutions, the health care institutions — to be assured of 

funding. 

 

The second is management of the government and of the time 

of the legislature. Rather than coming back to this again, what 

we would like to do is to move on to estimates which is the 

detailed examination of the various departments' budgets. 

 

I'm not surprised that the member opposite admits to no regard 

for history or precedent or tradition. Because when the history 

is written of their time in government, one of the things that 

will come out of that history of the 1980s is exactly that — a 

lack of concern, a lack of respect for the history and the 

traditions of the parliamentary system. If we want to continue 

this debate, I will raise different examples of that lack of 

respect for history and for tradition. 

 

What I will end on is a listing of these sessions in which this 

particular practice was followed: 

1974-1975, 1973-1974, 1972-1973, 1971-1972 — and the list 

goes on. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman: 

 

 Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 

service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1994, the sum of 

$796,545,000 be granted out of the Consolidated Fund. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — By leave of the Assembly, I move: 

 

 That an Act for granting to Her Majesty certain sums of 

Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal Year ending on 

March 31, 1994, be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

The Chair: — I think I have to advise the minister I think 

you're a step ahead of us and I will ask that you will . . . It 

would be in order to move that the . . . Order . . . It would be in 

order to move the committee rise and report that the committee 

has agreed to certain resolutions and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I move that the resolutions be now 

read the first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the resolutions read a first and second 

time. 

 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — By leave of the Assembly, I move: 

 

 That Bill No. 57, An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain 

sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal Year 

ending on March 31, 1994 be now introduced and read the 

first time. 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 28 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lautermilch that Bill No. 28 — An 

Act to amend The Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation Act be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and 



April 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1323 

referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 37 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 37 — An Act to 

amend The Urban Municipality Act, 1984 be now read a 

second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 30 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 30 — An Act to 

amend The Local Government Election Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 31 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 31 — An Act to 

amend The Heritage Property Act be now read a second 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 34 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Anguish that Bill No. 34 — An Act to 

amend the SaskEnergy Act be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 44 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Anguish that Bill No. 44 — An Act 

respecting the Inspection of Gas Installations and Gas 

Equipment be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 45 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Anguish that Bill No. 45 — An Act 

respecting the Inspection of Electrical Equipment, 

Installations and Materials be now read a second time. 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 

government will be moving to Committee of the Whole, and 

we'll be dealing with An Act respecting Social Workers. And 

as that's progressing, we'll give the opposition a list of . . . 

perhaps work out with the opposition what we propose to do 

for the balance of the day. 

 

Work has moved a little quicker than what we had anticipated 

for which we are grateful but somewhat unprepared, if I may 

put it that way. 

 

(1615) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 7 — An Act respecting Social Workers 

 

Clause 1 

 

The Chair: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Martens: — Point of order, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The point of order is this. We have important questions to ask 

and we want to have the officials here as well as the minister. If 

all we do is waste our time in transferring an option on whether 

the minister will be able to answer the question until her 

officials get here, we might as well wait until her officials are 

officially here. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Just speaking to the point of order, Mr. 

Chairman. The officials are on the way and will be here 

shortly. 

 

The Chair: — The Chair has listened carefully to the point of 

order raised by the hon. member from Morse and also the input 

from the hon. member for Humboldt. It's not the role of the 

Chair to determine whether the minister has officials to answer 

questions or not, and therefore I find the point of order not in 

order. 

 

We will now deal with Bill No. 7, An Act respecting Social 

Workers. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Yes. We'll perhaps have the minister 

introduce her officials. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you for the question. My 

officials aren't yet here, but as the minister responsible for 

Social Services, as the minister who is familiar with this Bill, I 

am prepared in order to have the House proceed to proceed 

with any questions that you may have regarding this piece of 

legislation. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, that isn't 

the point. The point is that just the arrogance of this 

government. I understand that you can probably answer the 

questions, but that isn't the point. If you knew this was going to 

happen and if you were 



1324 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1993 

going to be prepared — I used to see officials sit out there and 

sit there and wait — why would you even want to ask? Why 

would you even be so arrogant . . . this government they want 

to even ask us to start without officials. Because probably the 

first question I ask, you'll just answer it and then you'll have to 

start over again when your officials get here. I'm not even . . . I 

don't think we should be . . . I don't understand why we have to 

start without officials. Normally we don't. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Deputy Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Easy on the deputies; there's only 

one of them. I think this is the opposition's call. If you prefer to 

wait for the officials — they'll be here in five minutes — then 

we'll do so. We thought you may have some questions of a 

general nature which wouldn't require the officials, but this is 

your call. If you want the officials here, we will adjourn and 

they'll be here in five minutes. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Now let's be fair here. Mr. Chairman, 

Madam Minister, we're not going to ask many questions, if any, 

on this Bill because we understand that the workers are quite 

satisfied. So if you haven't got them here, we might as well let 

it go because we'll just let the Bill go. We'll just let it go 

because if you people want to be that arrogant, you can't be 

ready, we'll just let the Bill go. We'll let it go like everything 

goes. We can sit here till 5 in the morning we don't get any 

answers anyway. 

 

Anyway to be fair there's nothing wrong with the Bill, and I 

understand when I wasn't here my colleague asked a few 

questions and let it go into committee. When the social workers 

are quite happy about it and we can't see any reason to be 

asking any questions anyways, so as far as I'm concerned as 

critic for Social Services, the Bill can go. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Some of our members may have 

questions. We let them go. And then by that time I think the 

officials will be here, and you can put any questions you want. 

Some of our members had some questions on this, I believe. So 

we'll perhaps wait a moment to see if those members who are 

interested are here. 

 

Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Minister, when I was 

working at the Faculty of Social Work at the University of 

Regina, we got some information that another province was 

planning on passing a similar Bill. And at that time I was 

somewhat concerned about it because I worked in non-profit 

organizations for a long time, and quite often in those kinds of 

organizations you have people working in them who are not 

having professional status. You know, they may be people who 

have experienced the problems of the people they're working 

with or people who have worked their way up through the 

system and have gained experience as they've gone along, but 

particularly in some areas where some groups of people may 

have not had as much opportunity to have training. For 

example, I worked up in northern Saskatchewan for a long 

time, and 

there weren't very many people there with social work training. 

 

Now what I really want to clarify for the record and for people 

like that who would be concerned about any kinds of 

limitations that this kind of Bill might present to their being 

able to work in those kinds of organizations, I'd like you to 

clarify for me, would it prevent non-government organizations 

from hiring people to do helping work, that weren't social 

workers designated under this Act? Or would it prevent them, 

or require them to pay the wages of professional social workers 

when in fact their budgets might not allow for that? 

 

I'd just like to get some clarification, because I know there will 

be some concern. Because I had those kind of concerns myself 

when I first heard about this type of legislation. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I want to thank the member for the 

question. First let me say this, that non-governmental 

organizations have been consulted on this legislation, and there 

were very, very few concerns. 

 

Non-governmental organizations will still be able to hire 

people in the helping profession. The people in the helping 

profession will however not be able to call themselves social 

workers or use the title social worker, unless they have been 

licensed by the Saskatchewan Association of Social Workers. 

 

In terms of whether or not they can pay people appropriate 

wages, it would be entirely up to the organization to determine 

a fair wage for the type of work done. We have many instances 

in non-governmental organizations where people are working 

who have qualifications in the helping profession whom are 

paid wages that would not be dissimilar to wages paid to social 

workers. 

 

But this legislation really is about professionalizing the 

profession and ensuring that anyone who calls themself a social 

worker is in fact qualified under the provisions of this 

legislation and who in fact would be licensed by the 

Saskatchewan Association of Social Workers. 

 

Ms. Crofford: — Okay. If I could just . . . I wanted to clarify 

whether people who are now working in jobs that are helping 

roles but may not be designated as social workers, how would 

they go about checking out whether they qualify under this new 

designation? How would they find out how they could be 

brought under the definition of social worker if they aren't 

presently decreed in that area? Because I do believe my 

recollection is that there's some provision for grandparenting 

but . . . Can you explain that to me so I can let people know 

what they have to do? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — People who are presently called social 

workers, who do not have a Bachelor of Social Work or a 

Master in Social Work, can apply to the Saskatchewan 

Association of Social Workers for licensing. And the 

association assures me that people 



April 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1325 

who have met the criteria and the qualifications as determined 

by the Saskatchewan Association of Social Workers will in fact 

be licensed and will be able to practise social work under the 

provisions of this legislation. 

 

Ms. Crofford: — If I've got time for just one more question, 

Mr. Chair. Minister, if a person is concerned about this Act, 

would their best avenue be to get in touch directly with the 

Association of Social Workers or with your department? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — People could do either. They could 

contact the Saskatchewan Association of Social Workers or 

they could contact the Department of Social Services, and we 

would be able to clarify any concerns that they may have or 

answer any questions they may have. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, 

Madam Minister, just a couple of short questions. And I'm 

sorry I wasn't here when second reading on the Bill . . . But I 

went through it and there's only a couple of questions that I 

wish to ask. 

 

You made the statement, Madam Minister, in order to prevent 

individuals who call themselves social workers from using the 

title to attract clients. I just wonder if you'd clarify what you 

mean by that. You had made that statement yourself: in order 

to prevent individuals who call themselves social workers from 

using the title to attract clients. I don't know what you mean by 

attracting clients. Either there's a problem and they come on 

their own. I don't know what you mean by attracting. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well as the member may know, that 

there could be people in the private sector who call themselves 

social workers, who charge fees, when in fact they do not have 

the qualifications and haven't been licensed under the 

provisions of this Act. 

 

What this Act will do is ensure that anybody in this province 

who uses the title social worker is in fact licensed under the 

provisions of this Act and does in fact meet the standards and 

qualifications of a person who is using the title. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, do I 

understand that you mean there's people doing social work has 

no connection with Social Services department? Is that what 

you're saying? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Yes. I mean obviously there are people 

in this province who are not employees of the Department of 

Social Services but are in fact social workers. We would find 

social workers in the Department of Health; we would find 

social workers in the non-governmental organization sector; we 

would also find social workers in private practice in the 

province. And we would find social workers in schools, social 

workers in long-term care facilities or rehab facilities. 

 

Social workers don't just work for the Department of Social 

Services; they work in many other areas of 

endeavour as well. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Madam Minister, I just picked this up too. 

You also said exceptions will be made for those with five years 

employment in the practice of social work. I'm interested in 

what definition of this area the work will be. What kind of 

work, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — That is the transition time, Mr. 

Member, where we are recognizing people who in fact have 

called themselves social workers, are recognized as social 

workers, but don't necessarily have the paper qualifications. 

 

And so what the Saskatchewan Association of Social Workers 

has said is that there will be a grandfathering clause for those 

people who in fact have all of the knowledge and capabilities, 

skill, and have met what in fact would be social work 

endeavours, but don't have the paper qualifications. So those 

folks will be grandfathered in if they meet the criteria. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, will this 

be the . . . what'll be the criteria surrounding people . . . the 

handicapped people then? Would that be the same criteria there 

— with the handicapped people? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The Act is not intended to cover all 

helping professions. But if a person is working in an activity 

centre — working with mentally challenged persons, for 

instance — and they are called social workers by their 

employer, which would be the activity centre, for example, and 

if they meet the criteria as set out by the Saskatchewan 

Association of Social Workers, they would in fact be a member 

of the association and would be licensed under the association 

and therefore would be able to use the title social worker. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Madam Minister, who is going to designate 

who will be allowed into the association, like who makes that 

decision? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — During the transition time period it 

will be the council of the association, and they will determine 

who in fact can become a member. If they don't have the 

qualifications after that transition time, the Act stipulates who 

will be a member of the Saskatchewan Association of Social 

Workers and who in fact can call themself a social worker. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, I wonder 

if I could just get your comments on the people that work in 

shelters for battered women and also the handicapped people. 

Are they going to be allowed exactly the same status and do the 

same work? Could you just maybe clarify that for me, just so I 

understand it. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I am not aware of any shelter for 

battered women who has anyone using the title 



1326 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1993 

social worker. Most non-governmental organizations, their 

present practice is that unless you have a Bachelor of Social 

Work or a Master in Social Work or those kinds of 

qualifications, you don't use the title. 

 

So what has developed is we will have other titles like family 

counsellor, family service worker, social service worker, 

maybe a parent aide or a family support worker. Very few 

non-governmental organizations have employees using that 

title unless in fact they do have the paper qualifications to use 

the title. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, you're 

saying that . . . like throughout Saskatchewan there's several 

homes where battered women go to. There's no association 

between the government and these homes then? They're 

completely private then, is that correct? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — All of the transition houses or houses 

that are serving battered women and their children are 

non-profit organizations or what's now called the 

non-governmental organizations. They would in fact receive 

funding from the provincial government, but they also raise 

private funds. They may receive funds from their municipality 

or their municipal government and funds from the United Way, 

but they are not . . . Services to battered women and their 

children are not direct services supplied by the province of 

Saskatchewan or the Government of Saskatchewan. They are 

provided by non-profit organizations which would have 

community-based boards. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, I 

understand that there's a five-year time limit here to be trained 

for a social service worker. Is that mandatory, or why is the 

five years . . . Could you explain your reasons why the five 

years? 

 

Is that a training process, or are they trained before they . . . Do 

you take trained people on to start with? When you hire 

someone through Social Services for this type of work, do they 

have some kind of training to start with, and why the five years 

afterwards before they're called a social worker? If you just 

could explain that, Madam Minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — At present in order to become, for 

instance, an employee of the Department of Social Services 

and to be called a social worker, you have to have the 

professional qualifications or what I will call the paper 

qualifications — a Bachelor of Social Work, a certificate in 

social work, a master's in social work. Employees that are 

being hired today have those qualifications in order to call 

themselves social workers. 

 

We do however hire social service workers who would be 

employees that would have other qualifications. They may 

have worked in an activity centre for mentally handicapped 

people. They may have worked in a transition home. They have 

worked in the helping profession; they just don't have the paper 

qualifications. 

The five-year transition period is to recognize those employees 

who have been long-time employees of the Department of 

Social Services or the Department of Health or other agencies, 

who have always used the title social worker. They have all the 

skills knowledge associated with using that title, but they don't 

have the paper qualifications. So the five-year period is a 

transition period for those people. 

 

And the other point I want to make is social service workers 

will not be licensed under this Act because they do not use the 

title nor do they have the qualifications, paper qualifications, 

that would allow them to call themselves social workers. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I said I didn't 

have many questions, but more questions keep coming to mind 

as we get into the . . . And don't get me wrong, I'm not 

opposing the Bill or whatever; just clarifying some things here 

because I think it's something that's very, very important. 

 

I've been a member for 15 years, and naturally through working 

with people in your constituency you have a lot of contact with 

social workers. And I think it's a profession where we have to 

have special people, that's for sure. 

 

And I'd want the government, as I think the governments 

through the years — I've watched the NDP from '78 and us 

through the years — I think there's been a pretty good handle 

on the type of people who are working there. And I'd just like 

to, you know, make my point that it's very important that 

somebody keeps a real good handle on the type of people. 

 

So you can't do enough. I'm not against the five years at all, 

just ask why. That's good. There's nothing you can't do to get 

better people to serve the people. 

 

Another question that comes to mind. I understand something 

about . . . Reading through the Hansard from before and the 

comments, something comes to mind about a fee. Could you 

explain what that fee and . . . what's it's about and how much? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I am advised by my official that the 

association is looking at a fee of 165 to $180 per year, and 

that's to cover the administrative costs of running the 

association, that they will have a generous fee schedule or 

payment schedule for those people who are unable to make 

payments. 

 

I would also like to advise the member that for employees who 

are members of the Government of Saskatchewan or the civil 

service, that their fees will be paid by the Government of 

Saskatchewan as we do for lawyers who work for the 

government in the Department of Justice who have to be a 

member of the Saskatchewan bar, as we do for registered 

nurses who have to be members of the Saskatchewan 

Registered Nurses' Association. Anybody in the province who 

works as a civil servant and because of their profession has to 

belong to a professional 



April 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1327 

organization, their fees are paid by the employer. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Madam Minister, say someone is just 

starting out and they've been approved and they've got 

qualifications but . . . Will they be denied if they can't raise that 

money? Is there some provisions to help them? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — As I understand it, the association will 

have a very generous payment schedule, which will mean that 

you won't have to pay the fees the minute you are licensed, but 

you can pay the fees over time. And for anybody who is 

starting out in the civil service as a social worker in 

government, their fees will be covered by the province. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Well that's fair enough. Mr. Chairman, 

that's all the questions I need to ask on item 1. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 14 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 15 

 

The Chair: — There is an amendment proposed by the 

minister for clause 15, and I'll ask the minister if she will move 

that amendment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I would move that amendment. 

 

The Chair: — I'll ask that you read it into the record, Madam 

Minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Chair, I would move an 

amendment to subsection 15(1) of the printed Bill: 

 

 By striking out "council" in the first line and substituting 

"association". 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, could you 

just explain why? Then we'll understand why you're doing this. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I will. This is an amendment that has 

been asked for by the Saskatchewan Association of Social 

Workers. The reason is that they want their by-laws to go 

before their association or their annual meeting and not just the 

council. It is to democratize the process, and it was an 

oversight in the drafting. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — That's fine, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 15 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 16 to 30 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 31 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — "The discipline committee may, by 

resolution, expel the member from the association . . . 

" It's from (a) to (d) there, it's spelled out. Just in your own 

words, would you explain that, Madam Minister, what that 

means . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh sorry, Mr. Chairman, 

Madam Minister, in section 31, "The discipline committee 

may, by resolution, expel the member from the association 

where:" and then there's four points there. Could you just 

explain that in your words, because it isn't just 100 per cent 

clear. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — In response to the member's question, 

this provision is here with regard to a member of the 

association — which would be a social worker — who had 

been convicted of an indictable offence or a criminal offence, 

would be subject to being expelled from the association and 

therefore would no longer be able to use the title, social 

worker. 

 

It is to provide protection to the public, so that the public would 

know that if you're coming in contact with a social worker, that 

anybody who uses that title has the qualifications necessary to 

practise social work, and that no one who'd been indicted for a 

criminal offence or had been convicted for a criminal offence 

could practice social work. It's clearly there to protect the 

public. 

 

Clause 31 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 32 to 39 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Chairman, there is an 

amendment to clause 14 which was passed over in some 

fashion. Perhaps we could ask for leave of the opposition to 

revert to it and we could move it, they could ask their 

questions, and then we could resume. So I guess I'm officially 

asking for leave of the opposition to revert to clause 14. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Clause 14 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I want to amend clause 14(4) of the 

printed Bill: 

 

 By striking out ", other than the power to make bylaws,". 

 

The Chair: — The minister has moved an amendment to 

clause 14. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam 

Minister, if you would just give an explanation of why. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, member. The Legislative 

Law Clerk has advised, in order to have clause 14(4) in sync 

with our amendment to clause 15, we have to strike out ", other 

than the power to make bylaws,". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 14 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 40 to 52 inclusive agreed to. 



1328 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1993 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Chairman, thank you. Yes, I'd just like 

to thank the government for bringing in a good Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — That's how good a man the member from 

Arm River is. When I see something good, I say so. But I'm 

sorry I can't say that about the other Bill that's gone through 

this House. I just wish all Bills in this session were as good and 

simple as this Bill to help people, instead of so many that 

hindered people. 

 

And, Madam Minister, I want to thank the officials for coming. 

And I just want to say to the House Leader and whoever the 

Acting House Leader is, that when we have Bills coming up or 

Committee of the Whole or whatever, have the officials ready, 

even if they have to wait. It's no way that it'll be the officials' 

fault. It'll be somebody that didn't warn them ahead of time to 

be here. But anyway, it all worked out fine. And I wish to again 

say thank you, and it's a good job well done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well since the member from Arm 

River is giving out compliments, I want to thank him for his 

cooperation and the members of the opposition for their 

cooperation in terms of this Bill. 

 

This Bill is an initiative of social workers in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Social workers are very interested in 

professionalizing the profession. As you may know, social 

workers have not yet reached the, I suppose, the public 

perception that we have towards teachers and nurses and other 

professions. And they are hopeful that the public will begin to 

recognize that social worker is a most honourable profession. 

And we are hopeful that with this legislation, along with the 

most honourable profession will come the most honourable 

pay. 

 

So I want to thank the member of the opposition for his 

cooperation. And I also want to thank Tara Truemner from the 

Department of Social Services for assisting me this afternoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair: — The Chair would simply like to remind 

members of the committee, including the opposition critic and 

the minister, that it's not usual to have statements of this length 

at the end. I think some of the handling of this Bill was a little 

bit unorthodox and so the Chair has allowed a little latitude, but 

I would ask that this not be considered precedent. 

 

It would be in order for the minister to move the Bill with 

amendment. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

Bill No. 26 — An Act to repeal The Saskatchewan 

Computer Utility Corporation Act 

 

Clause 1 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I'd like to introduce my official. No, 

there are . . . I wondered if that would startle the member from 

Redberry. 

 

We are in this Bill repealing a defunct corporation. It has not 

operated for some time. There are no assets and no officials 

actually. So there really are no officials for this one. I think I 

can answer any questions the members may have. 

 

We have someone here from CIC (Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan) which watches over the Crown 

corporations and there . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Right. 

And there's no need to introduce the person to them; I will  

_- Patti Beatch from CIC. And we'll take any questions you 

may have. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Bill 26 is the 

repeal of SaskCOMP Utility Corporation. What happened with 

this corporation was that it was turned into WESTBRIDGE by 

the previous government. WESTBRIDGE has in turn become a 

very successful corporation, part of the effects of this . . . 

 

The Chair: — Order, order. The Chair is having a difficult 

time hearing the member for Souris-Cannington, and I'll ask 

members to allow him to make his remarks. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Part of what 

has happened with WESTBRIDGE is that the employees have 

become part of that organization and that has proven to be a 

very successful enterprise, Mr. Chairman. 

 

I would just like to ask the minister what is going to happen . . . 

what assets does Sask Computer Utility Corporation presently 

have? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — There are no assets whatsoever. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Then I gather 

that there is really not a lot to do with this Bill even though 

we've had a serious discussion with the political implications of 

it prior to reaching Committee of the Whole. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we're prepared to allow this to proceed. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I would like to thank my official for 

a sudden but timely appearance, I guess one would say, and 

thank the opposition for the spirit of cooperation in which this 

was handled. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like 

to thank the minister's official for coming in today and 

providing us with the assistance, and I would also like to thank 

the minister for his cooperation. 



April 29, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 1329 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I don't know if the members want to 

do the next one before 5 or not. In the event that you think that 

might rush it a little, we'll call it 5 o'clock and come back at 7. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Well let's do it now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I think they'll have a few questions, 

yes. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 


