




















































Hansard: April 02, 1993


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 817 

 April 2, 1993 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my great pleasure 

today to introduce and through you to other members of the 

Legislative Assembly some 17 SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute 

of Applied Science and Technology) adult education program 

students seated in the west gallery. I will be meeting with this 

group after question period in the members' dining room. It will 

be tough to tear myself away from this Assembly to fill that 

duty, but I very much look forward to it. 

 

With the group is Ms. Dagenais and Mr. Danforth. I ask all 

members to join me in welcoming this group from SIAST. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to 

introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

Assembly 14 Grade 11 and 12 students from St. 

Isidore-de-Bellevue School in my constituency. Mr. Speaker, 

they are accompanied by their teachers Mr. Euclid Gareau, who 

is the principal of the school, Mrs. Andrea Gareau, and Mrs. 

Jennie Beaudais, who is a parent accompanying the group. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to introduce in 

particular this group because my children also attend this 

particular educational facility. Mr. Speaker, this is a French 

education school in Bellevue, and certainly we welcome them 

here to Regina. 

 

M. le président, je voudrais présenter à toi et à travers de toi 

tous mes homologues dans la Chambre ici aujourd'hui 14 

élèves dans les 11ème et 12ème grades de l'école de St. 

Isidore-de-Bellevue. M. le président, ils sont ici avec deux, 

enseignant et enseignante, M. Euclid Gareau, Mme. Andrea 

Gareau, et aussi un parent, Mme. Jennie Baudais. 

 

Je vous dire que c'est un grand plaisir pour moi de les recevoir 

ici dans la Chambre aujourd'hui parce que mes enfants sont 

aussi inscrits dans cette école à Bellevue. L'école de Bellevue 

est une école en français et certainement c'est important de 

réaliser que des écoles comme Bellevue sont importantes pour 

garder notre culture et notre langue dans la Saskatchewan. Je 

veux les accueillir chaleureusement ici à la Chambre 

aujourd'hui. Et je les souhaite une bonne journé ici à Régina. 

Merci M. le président. 

 

(Translation: Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and 

through you to all my colleagues in the Assembly here today 

14 students in grades 11 and 12 at St. Isidore School in 

Bellevue. Mr. Speaker, they are here with two teachers, Mr. 

Euclid Gareau, Mrs. Andrea Gareau, and one parent as well, 

Mrs. Jennie Baudais. 

It's a great pleasure to welcome them in the House today 

because my own children also attend this school in Bellevue . 

The school in Belleview is a French language school, and 

certainly it's important to recognize schools like Belleview are 

important to maintain our culture and language in 

Saskatchewan. I welcome them warmly here to the House 

today. And I hope you have a good day in Regina today. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker.) 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Purchase of VLTs 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday in the 

House the minister responsible for the Gaming Commission 

displayed an appalling level of arrogance not seen from a 

member and a minister in this Assembly since the former 

minister of Agriculture from Rosetown demonstrated that here 

last year. We are well aware of what happened to that member, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

Like the member from Rosetown, sir, you cannot hide behind 

your insolence and arrogance. You are hiding behind your 

suggestion to apply through the freedom of information for 

information that you should be supplying freely to this House 

and this Assembly here on behalf of the government to the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan who are paying your 

salary, Mr. Minister. 

 

You are the minister responsible for the Gaming Commission. I 

ask that you fulfil this responsibility, and will you provide this 

information: on what date was the original proposal or tender 

called for suppliers of video lottery terminals in the province of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd be 

pleased to respond once again to the member from Morse's 

question with respect to the process. 

 

I firstly want to deal with the freedom of information and the 

process that is available to the member. He clearly knows what 

the application form looks like. We sent one across. He knows 

that there is a commissioner in this province to whom this 

process can apply. He knows quite clearly that the Department 

of Justice has indicated that they don't believe that it would be 

appropriate for this information to be released. He knows that 

gaming associations in other jurisdictions who have provided 

information to Mr. Egan with which to do his investigation 

have asked that the information that they have provided remain 

confidential. He knows that there have been enforcement 

agencies in other jurisdictions who have asked that the 

information provided to Mr. Egan be confidential. 



818 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1993 

I've provided him with a freedom of information application 

form. I would ask him one more time to apply to the chairman 

of the Saskatchewan Gaming Commission for a release of the 

document that he refers to on a daily basis, and if he's not 

willing to go through that process, if he's not willing to 

understand that process that is available to him or any other 

member of this legislature or . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, the minister responsible for the 

Gaming Commission says that I cannot get the information 

through the freedom of information commissioner. You said 

yourself the other day, and you said today again, I cannot get 

the information from that source. You have the gall to come 

here and tell us that we should go through that process just to 

be stymied like we are in this Assembly every time we ask a 

question. There are 187 questions on the order paper that you 

haven't answered. 

 

Will you provide us the detail report, table it today, for the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan to see what you have 

directly done as trying to mislead the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I think we're at the 

point where it's clear that the member doesn't want to 

understand. I've indicated to him that Justice has indicated that 

it is in their opinion that this information would not be 

available. Now I have tabled that information for him. He 

knows the process. He understands quite clearly. I've indicated 

to him the role of the Saskatchewan Gaming Commission in 

that they are a quasi-judicial board that is set up to regulate and 

to control gaming in this province. He understands that. He 

knows what the process is with respect to freedom of 

information. And my question is to the member from Morse: 

why will he not follow the process and at least apply for the 

information so that he will know what the commissioner's 

decision will be? Why won't he do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Well, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, you've 

told me twice already that the commissioner would not provide 

it, nor would the Gaming Commission provide it. Therefore I'm 

asking you, on what date was that tender let? 

 

You should answer in this Assembly the questions that we are 

asking. What day was the tender let? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I have indicated to the member in 

previous questioning in here that two days after I was sworn in 

as the minister in charge of the Gaming Commission I brought 

to cabinet an information item from the Gaming Commission 

that indicated that they had short-listed two companies from the 

original short list of four and that they were 

going to sit down and negotiate . . . attempt to negotiate a 

contract to supply the VLTs (video lottery terminals) to the 

province of . . . or to the Gaming Commission and to the 

people of Saskatchewan through the Gaming Commission. 

 

You know that. You know all that quite clearly. As I believe 

the cabinet shuffle was two weeks from yesterday, so that 

would put it roughly Thursday, Monday — or Friday, Monday, 

the date that I presented that to cabinet. But I can get that 

specific information for him with respect to the date and I will 

pass that on to him either during question period or later today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, there are some very important 

facts for the minister to consider here. One, he has not read the 

report himself. He has told us that at least two times. He has 

not in any way described for the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan how he's going to spend the 20 million. 

 

On Friday, March 25 he decided that he was going to prepare a 

document for the press to see and the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan to see, that he had supplied the contract to two 

companies, and yet he is not prepared to provide the 

information to this Assembly. Why can't he provide the 

information to this Assembly? Is there a problem in the front 

row? Is that the reason why you can't provide the information 

to the Assembly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I'm going to go 

through this all again. First of all, he needs to understand that 

there has not been a contract signed; we're negotiating that. 

And I can't . . . I don't know how I can be any clearer than that. 

 

He knows the process by which he can obtain information 

through the freedom of information legislation that pertains to 

all of the people of this province, all of the members of this 

legislature, including the media. I indicated to him that Justice 

. . . was their opinion that because of the intricacies and the 

discussions with other gaming jurisdictions and other law 

enforcement agencies who had asked that the information that 

they gave to Mr. Egan be kept on a confidential basis, they 

believed that the commissioner wouldn't allow this information 

to be released. 

 

I don't know how much more precise I can be, but I can and 

I've had information brought to me by my staff that the date the 

member is asking for, the request for proposal, was on July 27 

of 1992. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Well, Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. 

Minister, we're starting to make some progress. Are you going 

to now say that in July of 1992 the proposal was presented to 

the Gaming Commission on . . . and when was the short list 

described to one of the members of the cabinet for providing 

information 



April 2, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 819 

from the Gaming Commission to the cabinet? When was that 

done? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well the questions are becoming 

not terribly coherent, and it's kind of difficult to understand 

what he's actually trying to get at here. But let me go back to 

. . . The Gaming Commission issued requests for proposals on 

July 27, 1992 where they invited people to make proposals to 

the Gaming Commission with respect to the equipment and the 

supplying of equipment. And so the date — so you will 

understand I'll repeat it again — was July 27, 1992 when the 

requests for proposals were issued by the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Commission. And I'm hoping that answers the 

member's question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, will the minister 

tell me on what date the security report was initiated and when 

did you receive it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I have indicated, and I'll repeat this 

again to the minister, I have not received the security report. I 

have not read it nor do I intend to read it. That is the business 

of the Saskatchewan Gaming Commission. I have no reason to 

read it other than I have had assurance from Mr. Egan, the 

former chief superintendent of the RCMP (Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police) in Saskatchewan, who is responsible for 

criminal investigations, that there are no problems with 

entering into negotiations to finalize, if they can, a contract 

with these two companies. And I'm hoping that that once again 

answers the member's question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, in this paper that 

you gave me the other day, there is information from South 

Dakota, Montana, Nevada, Oregon, Rhode Island, New Jersey, 

Alberta, Atlantic, Manitoba, western Canadian lotteries, West 

Virginia, New Jersey state. I'd like to know whether you 

inquired from the FBI (Federal Bureau of Investigation) in the 

United States about some of the investigations that they're 

going on. 

 

And surely you should be able to take into consideration that 

you are closing hospitals in the province of Saskatchewan and 

you're investing $20 million in lotteries in people that have 

sordid reputations all over the United States, and you're asking 

this Assembly to approve it. That's the question the people of 

the province are asking and that's the question I'm asking you. 

Why don't you show us that you legitimately have done your 

due diligence in relation to awarding these contracts to these 

people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, again I'll respond, 

much of the information was obtained from the jurisdictions 

that the member opposite has referred to — information that 

was asked to be used in a confidential basis, and I think for 

obvious reasons. 

So what I'm saying is, if the member from Morse would quit 

playing politics and if he would understand that there are, in 

fact, some issues that enforcement agencies would want to 

have remain confidential . . . I mean, he brings before this 

House two-year-old information, half-truths, and innuendo. 

And I want to say to the member from Morse one more time, 

the credibility problem here, sir, is with the past performance 

of you and the front-benchers here and the record that you have 

left over the last 10 years in this province. That's the problem. 

 

People have faith in Mr. Egan and they have faith in the people 

of this . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister. The problem 

that we see in this case is as evident to us as it is to the people 

of Saskatchewan, as is evident to the people who are doing the 

investigations in every one of those jurisdictions that I 

mentioned. 

 

And what we're asking you is to provide a detailed analysis, 

and that in that report we're suspecting that that report has 

information that could incriminate the people down there, and 

that's why it's being held back. That's the kind of thing that 

we're asking you to show us and the people in the province of 

Saskatchewan, why you don't have the freedom to provide that 

information. 

 

Why is the Department of Justice saying no, you can't have that 

information? Is there incriminating evidence provided to you 

from those jurisdictions that is going to seriously jeopardize the 

decision and the function of the very fact of the mandate these 

people were given to investigate, that they would provide an 

embarrassment and reflect poorly on the government? That's 

the question. And is it going to reflect poorly on the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don't know 

how I'm ever going to get this member to understand that, first 

of all, Justice did not say that the information couldn't be 

released. It was their opinion that the information . . . that the 

commissioner would not release the information because of the 

jurisdictions who had asked, the enforcement agencies who had 

asked that the information remain confidential. And that was 

the opinion of Justice. 

 

I want to say to the member from Morse one more time, that 

the people who we put in place to scrutinize the operations and 

the activities and the ability to perform in terms of delivering 

these VLTs to the people of Saskatchewan was a very lengthy 

process; it was an in-depth process. Mr. Egan indicated to the 

then chair of the Gaming Commission that he felt that it was 

appropriate to enter into negotiations, and the end result of 

which would be hopefully a contract to 



820 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1993 

deliver these VLTs, that there would be no problem with that. 

 

I don't know how many times or how many more times I can 

explain to the member from Morse that that was the process. If 

he's interested . . . And I ask you one more time: have you 

applied under the freedom of information Act? Have you 

applied? My guess is — and I asked the press if you've applied 

— my guess is you haven't even applied. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, what better 

forum for the people of the province of Saskatchewan to see 

than in this Assembly you providing the information to the 

people of Saskatchewan? 

 

My question to you: if you haven't read it, why are you relying 

on the opinion of the Justice department of the province of 

Saskatchewan in relation to this, for not tabling the document 

here in this Assembly? 

 

The people in the States, all through the United States, have 

over and over and over again said to you and to us that there is 

legitimate reason for concern for improprieties south of the 

border — all over the place. That is a fact, Mr. Minister, and 

we are concerned that there may be improprieties here too. Can 

you give us the assurance that there are not? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 

from Morse: I guess in part I'm relying on the judgement of the 

Gaming Commission in Alberta who is dealing with the same 

companies. I guess I'm relying on the integrity of the Gaming 

Commission in Manitoba who is dealing with the same 

companies. I guess I'm relying on the integrity of the Western 

Canada Lottery foundation who has dealt with GTECH for 10 

years. 

 

But I say ultimately, Mr. Speaker, I'm relying on the integrity 

of Mr. Egan and the people who did the inspection and the 

investigation — Mr. Egan, who has a reputation that I believe 

is unparalleled with respect to law enforcement officers who 

have been in this province with the RCMP, who have been in 

the past and who will be in the future. 

 

And I want to say to the member opposite: why don't you 

understand the process? And if you're interested in the FOI 

(freedom of information), why don't you apply for it? You 

haven't even applied for it, would be my guess. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hospital Closures 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question is going to be to the minister responsible for the death 

of rural health care in this province, the Minister of Health. 

Madam Minister, last Saturday 300 people gathered in Prince 

Albert to rally against your government's forced closure of the 

Holy Family Hospital in that city. And, Madam Minister, those 

same 300 people saw the member from Prince Albert Carlton 

turn their back on them. In fact I saw that too. It was a clip on 

the TV showing him turn his back. They saw him turn his back 

on their concerns about their hospital and their health care 

system. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, my question is a very simple one. Are 

you going to also turn your back on the people of Prince 

Albert? Will the family of the Holy Family Hospital be another 

casualty of your so-called wellness plan? Yes or no, Madam 

Minister, do you plan to close that facility? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — I don't think I should be answering this 

question, Mr. Speaker, since he didn't address it to the proper 

individual. 

 

In any case, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the P.A. (Prince 

Albert) situation . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Let the minister answer the 

question. Order, order. The question period, if the government 

doesn't wish to answer the question, they don't have to answer 

it. But if a minister gets up to answer, then I think she has an 

obligation to answer the question. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the Prince 

Albert situation . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Will you keep 

quiet and let me answer the question. You don't even get the 

first sentence out and they start chirping from their seats. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to the Prince Albert situation, the 

Prince Albert board has had a review and study done of where 

they want to move in the direction of health care services in 

their area. Like Moose Jaw, they have determined that they are 

going to move from two acute care facilities to one acute care 

facility. They have done a study that indicates, according to 

them, that Victoria Union Hospital is the best place to have the 

acute care services. They are now looking at alternatives and 

how the Catholic community and Holy Family can be involved 

in the delivery of health care services in that area. 

 

The P.A. district board is having further consultations to 

determine, with the community, exactly what health care 

services will look like in that community. They will be having 

discussions with the Catholic community and Holy Family, and 

it's my understanding that some time in the near future there 

will be further conclusions coming out of their process. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Madam Minister, I was not asking a question 



April 2, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 821 

about Moose Jaw, I was asking a question about Prince Albert. 

And that warm applause that your colleagues are giving you in 

support of that — from that stand — I'm going to suggest to 

you I don't think that you are getting that kind of warm 

reception in the communities all over this province, Madam 

Minister. And that's why you're ducking and that's why you're 

hiding. 

 

I don't think, for example, Madam Minister, that you would 

have gotten that warm reception in Eatonia yesterday where 

over 500 people from that one community came out to take a 

look and discuss their concerns. They had a lot of questions for 

you, Madam Minister, but you ducked. You did not show up. 

The member from Kindersley invited you, and when the people 

of Eatonia heard that you were refusing his invitation they 

faxed you, yesterday afternoon, a special invitation: Madam 

Minister, will you attend? So, Madam Minister, you didn't 

attend, not one government official attended that meeting of 

500 people. Madam Minister, I ask you this question: do you 

intend to close the hospital in Eatonia? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, the invitation they're 

referring to came to me at 4 o'clock yesterday afternoon. And 

on this invitation they also indicated this: I realize that this is 

rather late notice but we would be pleased to have you attend if 

you could. 

 

This is the first invitation I got other than from the member 

from Kindersley and there's nowhere that I'm going to go that 

he's asking me to go. And the fact of the matter is this came in 

at 4 o'clock to my office. And they recognize it's late. And the 

lateness of this invitation, which almost makes it impossible for 

us to get an official out there, makes me wonder with respect to 

what is going on and who's organizing it. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, my information from that meeting is that 

the member from Kindersley was out there trying to whip up 

the forces, spreading all kinds of misinformation about massive 

closures of hospitals throughout the province. It's the old KOD 

(Keep Our Doctors), Mr. Speaker, out there trying to scare 

people using scare tactics, spreading misinformation. 

 

And I want to bring to the member's attention, Mr. Speaker, I 

want to bring to the member's attention the fact that there are 

places in this province — and I'm not going to name names nor 

am I going to name localities because I'm concerned about the 

tactics they're using over there — there are communities . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — You gave us false information, Madam 

Minister. John Brock, your axeman, was given an invitation 

over a week ago and you decided not to have any department 

official there. If you're accusing the member of Kindersley of 

spreading misinformation, why are you not out there defending 

your ill-informed program, Madam Minister? Why 

were you not there? 

 

And I'm going to make a suggestion to you, Madam Minister. 

On Monday, on Monday, there is a meeting in Brock. You are 

being invited to attend that meeting. On Tuesday, there's a 

meeting in Weyburn. You have already got official invitation 

to attend that meeting. Will you be there, Madam Minister? 

 

On Tuesday in Eston, on the 13th, there is another meeting that 

the citizens are orchestrating. Will you be there? On the 21st — 

is this enough notice for you? — there's another meeting in 

Kindersley on the same concern, Madam Minister. You are 

invited to be there. Will you take the time to be at those 

meetings, Madam Minister? 

 

That is the question that I'm going to be asking, and I want you 

to answer that now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, I was saying in the 

conclusion of my last answer that there are communities in this 

province that are looking at role changes for their facilities and 

are . . . and these individuals are pointing to the fact that they 

are undergoing a role change that is resulting in some very 

positive programing for their community. 

 

Some of the workers are telling us, for example, that a 

chiropodist has been invited to their facility; that the board is 

looking at implementing CPR (cardiopulmonary resuscitation) 

and first aid; that public health will be asked to provide a 

monthly or bimonthly service. 

 

They are exploring options. They are exploring expanded 

programs. They are looking at ways that they can make the role 

change of their facility a positive for their community, where 

health care needs will be met and there will be expanded health 

care promotion and prevention services in their communities. 

That's what they're looking at. 

 

Those communities, Mr. Speaker, are positive. They're taking 

the health reform, the opportunities in it, to benefit their 

citizens instead of going out and trying to scare the population 

and destroy what is a positive move . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Upshall: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 

today to introduce 14 grade 8 students from 



822 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1993 

Bruno and to help my colleague introduce 22 students from 

Cudworth in your gallery today, just before they rush away for 

their tour of the building which I'm sure they will enjoy. Their 

teachers, Mr. Jake Jmoeff from Bruno and Mr. Jim Bridgeman 

from Cudworth. I would ask all members of the Assembly to 

help me welcome the students here today and wish them a good 

trip to Regina, a good tour, and a safe trip home. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Roy: — Mr. Speaker, I ask as well to have leave to 

introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Roy: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and 

through you to the members of the legislature and I'd like to 

add my voice to my colleague from Humboldt, in welcoming 

students from Cudworth and Bruno schools, 35 grade 8 

students and their teachers, Mr. Jake Jmoeff and Mr. Jim 

Bridgeman. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and fellow MLAs (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly), the Cudworth School of course is right in the 

middle of my riding. Cudworth is a beautiful community close 

to Wakaw. Bruno however is in my colleague's constituency. 

However there is many of the students, I believe, that go to 

Bruno School that come from my constituency. And it's a 

pleasure to see young students coming to the legislature to 

learn a little bit more about our democratic process. And I look 

forward to meeting with all of them in a few minutes, Mr. 

Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Interim Supply 

 

The Chair: — Order. The business before the committee is the 

motion moved by the Minister of Finance: 

 

 Resolved that a sum not exceeding $340,881,000 be granted 

to Her Majesty on account for the twelve months ending 

March 31, 1994. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The 

government has increased the sales tax up to 9 per cent now. 

That's had a major impact in my constituency. And the business 

in my constituency would like to have some answers on how 

that's going to impact in their area, because they're dealing with 

the cross-border shopping problem into the U.S. (United 

States) and into Manitoba. Even though Manitoba has a sales 

tax about 7 per cent, what happens is when people go to 

Manitoba to shop, if they have the product shipped back into 

Saskatchewan or . . . it works the same as mail order; they don't 

have to pay the provincial sales tax in the location where they 

were making the purchases. Even though they're supposed to 

make a contribution to the province's Consolidated Fund when 

they make those purchases, I don't believe many people do. 

 

I'm just wondering what kind of an impact this kind of a sales 

tax increase will have in this one-month period that you're 

asking for interim supply for. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, yes, thanks for that 

question. We will be introducing legislation this session 

regarding an agreement with the federal government to begin to 

collect some of the provincial taxes at the border. You 

mentioned specifically mail-order purchases. There is an article 

today in The Globe and Mail which talks about the drastic 

decline in mail-order purchases. 

 

You would also probably know that Canada Post has changed 

its policy with respect to those sorts of purchases and now has 

established a $5 charge which should discourage purchases of 

that kind. 

 

And I guess the final point I would make is that the value of the 

Canadian dollar is a major disincentive to cross-border 

shopping. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, while people 

are making purchases in the U.S., the exchange rate does have 

an impact, most definitely. But when people are making 

purchases in Manitoba or in the rest of Canada, the exchange 

rate has no impact. What kind of analysis have you done, 

dealing with the cross-border shopping problems from 

Manitoba? And if people can save 7 per cent, or 9 per cent in 

the case of Saskatchewan, on a product that they mail order, the 

$5 charge is going to be immaterial. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, yes, thanks very 

much for that question. As budgets are pouring in, you will see 

that taxes are being increased dramatically in other provinces. I 

would just say to the member opposite, the Manitoba budget 

has yet to be received. 

 

With respect to competitiveness, restaurant meals are not taxed 

in Saskatchewan. Restaurant meals are taxed in Manitoba. 

 

As I mentioned several times to other members on the opposite 

side of the House, we did not do specific studies on parts of the 

budget. That is we didn't say, what would happen if we taxed 

hair cuts, what would happen if we did this. Because if we 

wanted to do those sorts of studies, we would have to 

dramatically increase the budget for the Department of 

Finance. 

 

What we did is an overall framework study of the implications 

of this particular budget on growth in the province, on 

employment, inflation, etc. 

 

And I said again and again, this government has come out with 

the most comprehensive plan, with more 



April 2, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 823 

information laid before the public than ever before in the 

history of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, when people 

are looking at the ideas of cross-border shopping and the 

opportunities that presents to them, or when they're looking at 

mail-order shopping, specifically with mail 

_order shopping, they're not concerned about the fact that in 

one province meals are taxed and in another province they 

aren't. If you're getting on the phone and phoning an order in 

some place, you're eating at home, you're not eating in that 

other province wherever you're phoning to, so your statement 

on restaurants is immaterial, Madam Minister. 

 

I'm very disappointed in the fact that you did not do any studies 

on the impacts of this sales tax increase will have on 

cross-border shopping, because you already know that 

cross-border shopping is a major problem right across Canada. 

Not just in Saskatchewan, but right across Canada. And it's 

particularly bothersome along the borders. 

 

It's a well-known fact. If you didn't know it, Madam Minister, 

you're failing in your duties as Finance minister in trying to 

gain the maximum amount of tax dollars available in this 

province. 

 

Madam Minister, would you explain why you did not do any 

studies dealing with cross-border shopping and the impact that 

your sales tax increase will have. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, if I could go through 

this again. First of all, cross-border shopping is a declining 

phenomenon across Canada. Yes. So what we would be doing 

then is to be studying a problem that was a major problem . . . I 

don't know if the member from Morse wants to talk or listen to 

the answer. 

 

It's a declining phenomenon. But what I said again and again, 

what we did in this budget was we did an assessment of the 

impact of the budget as a whole. We did not take individual 

parts, or individual parts of the budget that we rejected, and 

study them separately. 

 

We said, lay it out for the people of Saskatchewan what the 

projections for growth are over a four-year period: laid out the 

projections with inflation; laid out our projections with respect 

to the deficit; and they have before them more information than 

they have ever had in the history of this province. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, you may be 

trying to snow them on this, but the people in my area are 

already seeing more vehicles going across the border again to 

purchase gasoline. Farmers are already phoning up the dealers 

across the border looking for bulk deliveries of fuel because of 

the tax increases that you imposed, and you didn't even bother 

doing a study on it. 

 

What do you say to the bulk dealers along the U.S. border 

when their sales are heading south? Oh well sorry, we didn't 

have time to do a study. We just stuck 

a tax on here but we really don't care how that affects you. 

 

Madam Minister, will you do a study on the impacts that your 

sales tax increases, your fuel tax increases, will have on 

cross-border shopping? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, what you're talking 

about is illegal activity. 

 

An Hon. Member: — It's not illegal. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — It most certainly is. 

 

I would remind the member opposite that the President of the 

United States has talked about increasing taxes on energy, so it 

would be very interesting for us to do a study today. Would we 

put into the equation his increases on taxes of energy before 

they hit Congress, assuming they would pass Congress, or 

would we leave out those particular assumptions? 

 

The members opposite are always talking about keeping 

control of the costs of government, yet they come back and 

they want us to study this and they want us to study that, and 

they want us to study things we did in the budget and they want 

us to study things that we didn't do in the budget. 

 

What we did is what was responsible. We did an overall 

assessment of what the impacts of this budget would be on 

different parts of the economy and we've laid it out for the 

people of Saskatchewan. We've also laid out our projections 

about the deficit. 

 

So as I say, they have more information in this province than 

they have ever had in the past. 

 

(1045) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, you know very 

well it's not illegal to buy bulk fuel in the U.S. There are forms 

to fill out, the taxes are paid at the border, and it's a lot less in 

some cases to buy across the U.S. border than it is to buy in 

Saskatchewan. And that causes a great deal of harm to the bulk 

agents along the border. 

 

You talked about should we include in any studies the impact 

that Bill Clinton has said he's going to impose taxes on energy. 

Well, Madam Minister, I'm sure you would ignore whatever 

was said across the border because you won't even do studies in 

Canada. So why would you include what anybody else said? 

 

Madam Minister, will you clarify for the people of 

Saskatchewan whether or not it is legal or illegal to import fuel 

from the U.S. into Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, it is legal only if all 

laws are obeyed at the border and taxes are paid. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Madam Minister, that's a big difference 

to what you said before. You said it was 



824 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1993 

illegal to import fuel, and that is not the case; it is legal. You go 

to your customs officer, your broker, and you do the forms and 

you pay the taxes, and it's still cheaper. 

 

Madam Minister, is it legal or illegal to import fuel from 

Manitoba or Alberta? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, it's legal as long as 

all laws are obeyed and all taxes are paid. But your point is that 

there's a discrepancy in the tax level. The assumption then is 

that people are bringing the fuel in without paying the 

appropriate taxes. If the laws are obeyed and the taxes are paid, 

obviously it's legal. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Madam Minister, that was not my 

assumption at all. That was your assumption. I understand 

what's going on because I've been there. I've seen the trucks 

come across the border with the fuel. You hide in Regina. 

 

Madam Minister, if all the taxes are paid, you say it's legal to 

import fuel from Manitoba and Alberta. What process do you 

have to observe that fuel to regulate it? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, the revenue division 

of the Department of Finance has post-audit capacities to audit, 

to find out if taxes have been paid, and penalties are in place if 

the taxes are not paid. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — And how do you find out whether 

someone has purchased bulk fuel in another province? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, through a desk and a 

field audit procedure. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — So your only mechanism, Madam 

Minister, to find out whether or not somebody has purchased 

fuel outside of the province is by doing an individual tax audit 

on every individual purchaser? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, that's correct. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Madam Minister, then what would you 

estimate would be the losses you could be suffering from 

importation of fuels from outside of the province? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, we obviously don't 

have that information. You're talking about illegal activity. 

 

I would point out two things to the member opposite, and I 

would point out first of all: procedures are exactly the same as 

when the members opposite were in government. If they had so 

many different ideas about how they could have been 

improved, they had nine years to do so. 

 

And I would also point out to the members opposite that they 

obviously do not want the people of Saskatchewan to get the 

kind of detailed information about this budget that they require, 

because they were 

unprepared to move into the estimates. They want to stay on 

interim supply, which is fine with me. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, yesterday a 

number of times we tried to move into estimates to study 

various departments, but it was the government members who 

refused to allow that to happen, not the opposition side. We 

were perfectly prepared to go and discuss estimates in 

departments. We wanted to discuss the estimates in 

Agriculture, but no, government members wouldn't allow it. 

And we did that the same for another department, and again no, 

the government members would not allow it. 

 

If the minister is prepared to answer some questions, I'll ask her 

some questions concerning environment and resource 

management. We have a paper here on how much money is 

being asked for in this interim supply — just over $8 million. 

Madam Minister, of this $8 million for the one month that 

you're asking for it, is there any monies in that allocation for 

mitigations for wildlife depredations? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, perhaps I should 

clarify the procedure. What we're doing now is interim supply 

which is a standard procedure in the parliamentary system 

when a budget is before the legislature but the budget has yet to 

be passed, yet the people of the province want the operations of 

the government to continue until the budget is passed. That's 

what this procedure is about. 

 

An entirely different procedure is the next one we move on to, 

which is estimates. And that is the time in which the opposition 

has the opportunity to ask the sort of detailed questions you are 

now asking. 

 

So if you want to get answers to those questions, what you 

need to do is move through interim supply; then we will go on 

to estimates. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Madam Minister, indeed the people of 

Saskatchewan want to know what the government is going to 

spend their money on. And that is one of the duties of the 

official opposition, is to find out exactly what the government 

is spending their money on. 

 

You wish to spend one-twelfth of the budget of Saskatchewan 

and yet you don't want us to ask you any questions on what 

you're going to spend it on. The people of Saskatchewan want 

to know what you're going to spend this money on. 

 

And, Madam Minister, there's an old saying, parliamentary 

form: grievance before supply. Well the people of 

Saskatchewan, Madam Minister, have a lot of grievances with 

the government right now, and they want some of those 

grievances answered before there is supply. 

 

Madam Minister, again I ask you: is there any money in the 

one-twelfth for the Department of Environment and Resource 

Management for wildlife mitigation, for deer depredation 

damages? 



April 2, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 825 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to go through the 

procedure again. This is the second day of April. We've asked 

for one-twelfth of the expenditures. As you can imagine, in one 

day we've spent very little of that money. 

 

If you really want more details before significant parts of that 

money is spent, it's very simple; it's very simple — pass interim 

supply and then we will get onto questions like that. And you 

have every right to ask the appropriate officials and the 

Minister of Environment exactly where the money is being 

spent. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Madam Minister, you're saying that 

we're only into the second day of April and that we should rush 

out and just pass this Bill and give you supply. And yet the 

other day you said you've allocated 10 days — 10 days — for 

this debate. So why all of a sudden the rush to get on with it? 

You're the one who said we have 10 days to talk about it. 

 

Madam Minister, you're suggesting we should move to 

estimates to discuss this matter on the environment. So I will. I 

move, Mr. Chairman: 

 

 That the committee move directly to the estimates on 

Education, Training and Employment, vote no. 5. 

 

The division bells rang from 10:55 a.m. until 11:05 a.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson D'Autremont 

Devine Goohsen 

Martens t  

— 5 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Upshall 

Wiens Hagel 

Simard Lyons 

Tchorzewski Murray 

Lingenfelter Sonntag 

Teichrob Roy 

Koskie Scott 

Solomon McPherson 

Kowalsky Wormsbecker 

Carson Crofford 

Mitchell Knezacek 

MacKinnon Carlson 

Penner Renaud 

Cunningham t  

— 27 

Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Question two to the 

minister with respect to this motion for interim supply. 

 

I noticed, Madam Minister, that you're charging people a lot 

more for health care — various kinds of services in health care 

— funding for chiropractic care, funding for optometric care, 

insulin, funding for . . . although you don't include funding for 

abortion 

procedures you're not charging for it, but children's dental care. 

 

On the changes that you have made in charging for health care, 

like changes you've made in other tax increases, the associate 

minister yesterday told us that you have research on what tax 

changes rates will provide. That is the federal government 

collects information, other institutions collect information, and 

you get an analysis of this. 

 

In other words, you get various kinds of information that will 

tell you, well, when we're now charging for chiropractic care, 

this is the kind of money we can expect to come into the 

province, into the coffers. If we're charging for insulin, this is 

the kind of money we could expect here. If we charge another 

10 per cent in sales tax, this is the kind of money we could 

have. 

 

Could you tell us, how much is this . . . in this motion for 

interim supply, how much does the motion include for funding 

of chiropractic care? How much money, additional money, is 

going to come in as a result of you charging for this service? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, first of all, I would 

like to correct the member opposite. My colleague, the 

Associate Minister of Finance, did not say that we did studies 

of that particular kind. 

 

I would also like to point out to the member . . . I don't know if 

the member from Thunder Creek wants to talk or listen to the 

answer but . . . okay. I would also point out to the member 

from Estevan that what we are asking approval for today is 

one-twelfth of the health care budget. 

 

If he wants to get into detailed questions like that, this 

government would be more than willing to answer. But I want 

to point out to the member opposite, the procedure. First of all, 

the House passes interim supply; then we move on to detailed 

estimates. And we would be delighted to move on to the 

estimates as soon as interim supply is passed. 

 

Mr. Devine: — But, Madam Minister, I'm quite familiar with 

the procedure and what we have here is grievance before 

supply. People get to ask you questions before we give you 

interim supply; so the public, nor me or my colleagues, need a 

lecture from you on rules and procedures. 

 

What we're asking you about is that you are charging people 

new fees. Could you please give us your best analysis on how 

much you're going to make from charging people for, for 

example, chiropractic care. You didn't used to charge, or you 

didn't use to charge as much. You're charging more. What's 

your estimate and we can divide by one-twelfth to see if you 

have got reasonable analysis. 

 

How much money are you going to make off the people by 

charging for chiropractic care? Can't you give us an estimate of 

that? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, there are 



826 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1993 

about 50 different government agencies here. To believe, for 

the people of the province to believe, that it's reasonable for us 

in interim supply to have detailed information about 50 

different government departments or agencies would mean that 

we would have files stacked up — I'm not sure the members 

opposite want to hear the answers — but we would have files 

stacked up all around us here. 

 

This is why we have a process called estimates, in which you 

can ask those sorts of detailed questions of the Department of 

Health. We would be more than willing to give you those 

answers as soon as interim supply is passed. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Madam Minister, this again, I remind you, is 

grievance before supply. Before we grant you and the people 

grant you the right to spend this one-twelfth, they need to know 

and deserve to know where you're getting your money from 

and where you're spending it. 

 

I don't think, Madam Minister, that your estimates of how 

much money you're taking from people will be accurate. In 

other words, people are saying, I think you're gouging them. 

You're taking a lot more out of fees than you're telling people. 

And if you're not, we'd like to know. 

 

And your analysis will tell you . . . And I've sat in the treasury 

benches long enough for you to know and for anybody to know 

that when you raise a rate or you charge a new fee, you have an 

estimate of what you're going to make from that. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, if you don't want to get into it by 

chiropractic care and insulin for diabetics, you could give me 

an overall estimate of how much your increase in health fees is 

going to raise for the Government of Saskatchewan. Now that 

isn't 15 different volumes. That is in one category, which is the 

largest category in the Saskatchewan budget — health care. 

 

What will you generate in new revenue this year as a result of 

your increase in fees? That's a fair question. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, there's a very easy 

answer to that: we haven't increased any fees in health so the 

amount of money to be gained is zero. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Madam Minister, you are charging people for 

services that you weren't charging before. Would you please 

explain to people why the prescription drug program is costing 

them more and why that is not an increase in fees? 

 

You're charging them for chiropractic care and you weren't 

before. You're charging them for insulin and you weren't 

before. You're charging them for optometric care. How much 

money are you going to make? 

 

So if you look at the increase in fees, whether it's prescription 

drugs or whether it's for services, you are charging people for 

more and more fees. Now what 

we want is an estimate of how much money you're going to 

make off the backs of people by charging them for that. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, we don't charge 

people fees. We don't charge people for the drug plan. We have 

not increased chiropractic fees in this budget. 

 

But I go back to my main point. The member opposite 

professes a desire to lay before the public of Saskatchewan the 

details of this budget. I say to him, that's exactly what we 

would like to do as well. We would like you to be able to ask 

the questions that you want to ask of the Department of Health. 

But if you want to do that, then you have to move the process 

along. You have to pass interim supply; then we will move on 

to estimates and we will deal with your question. 

 

(1115) 

 

Mr. Devine: — Madam Minister, you're not going to get out of 

here with that attitude, because the people in terms of grievance 

before supply have very simple questions that they want 

answers to. You are charging them now a great deal of money 

for prescription drugs; they have to pay, where before they 

didn't. Now that generates some revenue for the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Can you tell the people, in the prescription drug program, how 

much money you are putting into the coffers of your treasury as 

a result of the fact that you changed the prescription drug 

program so that they have less protection and now they have to 

pay? 

 

I mean they'd just like to know that. Before they grant you this 

money, they'd say, well how much are you taking out of our 

pocket on prescription drugs? And you should be able to 

answer that. It's a major category — hundreds of millions of 

dollars. It isn't nickels and dimes; it's a major category. 

 

Can you tell the people of Saskatchewan — if you want 

one-twelfth here today — ballpark, how much money are you 

getting out of the prescription drug program because you're 

now asking the people to pay? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, you know, when I 

listen to the questions from the member opposite, I come to 

understand why we're in the present financial situation that 

we're in. I mean these questions are really incredible. 

 

What we do is we subsidize drugs in the province. We 

subsidize drugs. We don't charge people for drugs; we 

subsidize the purchase of drugs by individuals. I know, as I 

say, one comes to understand why we have the financial 

problems that we do, and the subsidization level is $57 million. 

But that information is open to the member in the budget 

address. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Madam Minister, would you tell the 



April 2, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 827 

people of Saskatchewan how much support you provided them 

before you charged and asked them to pay, so that we can 

compare the differences? 

 

We're not going to get into . . . if you want to get into 

semantics, now you don't protect them. If they can go to 

Alberta, they can go to other jurisdictions, you can find better 

protection. What they're asking is saying, I now have to pay; 

somebody is getting the money. How much is the Government 

of Saskatchewan reaping in terms of benefits as the result of 

your decision that the taxpayer and the users of health care now 

have to pay for prescription drugs? 

 

It used to be, for example, a $50 deductible for a senior citizen. 

Now it's something like $800 every second quarter. So 

somebody's picking up $750. And obviously the consumer of 

health care in this province wants to know, where is the money 

going. How much did the treasury of Saskatchewan benefit as a 

result of your change in policy? Can you answer that question? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, I really do 

understand why we have the problems that we do in this 

province. What happens is the government subsidizes the 

purchase of drugs by individuals in the province. 

 

If the member wants information, he's already had it given to 

him. Saskatchewan Estimates, page 66, gives him exactly the 

information that he requires with respect to the drug plan. It 

says: 1993-94, $57 million subsidy; 1992-93, $67.7 million in 

subsidy. 

 

But I think the people of Saskatchewan expect the opposition 

to be responsible, to look through the information they have 

and to digest it, and to follow the procedures of the House and 

say: yes, this is interim supply; we understand what that is and 

we understand what estimates are, and they're separate 

procedures. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Well, Madam Minister, all I'm asking you is to 

give the public the information. So that if you are getting more 

revenue coming into the province of Saskatchewan, or there's a 

benefit, put it in your . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . If the 

benefit to the people . . . to the Government of Saskatchewan as 

a result of your changes, then we want them documented . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . The hon. Health minister, if she 

wants . . . If the Health minister, Mr. Chairman, wants to 

respond, we'll be glad to get her into this. 

 

She's been invited across the province to explain her position to 

hospitals and to people all over Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . and she says, a few Tory ridings. I'll tell you 

Prince Albert doesn't exactly happen to be a Tory riding. And 

there's 300 people came out the other day to kick your health 

care policy all over the place because they don't like what 

you're doing. And you wouldn't even allow them to be elected 

to a board before you've made these decisions. 

 

And the health care minister is now invited to Weyburn. She's 

invited to 

Kindersley. She's invited to Eatonia and to Leader and to 

Prince Albert and to Melfort and to Nipawin and she won't 

show up. She won't show up because she's afraid to show up, 

because 500 people come there because they are worried and 

they don't like the wellness model. 

 

And don't look at the chairman. You asked for this. So you can 

sit there and find out what the people of Saskatchewan think. 

They think you're arrogant. Your wellness model is not 

wellness at all. It hurts rural Saskatchewan. And if the Minister 

of Finance can't give answers, then you can stand in your place 

and you can give the answers if you think that it's such a smart 

thing to do to hurt rural people. 

 

You're sitting beside a former Minister of Agriculture who 

went through the very same thing. People rallied across 

Saskatchewan because they didn't believe him and he lost his 

job as a result of it. And I'll tell you what you saw in 

agriculture is going to happen in health care in this province. 

People are fed right up with what you're doing. You promised 

not to. No, no, no, no, you said you wouldn't do this and you 

said that you would look after people. You would put more 

money in health, more money in education, that you would cut 

taxes. 

 

And what have you got? You've done exactly the opposite. You 

didn't tell them the truth. You campaigned that you wouldn't 

have to do any of this and people are saying, for . . . Today 

back-benchers in the Alberta legislature said, for heaven sakes 

we might as well annex Alberta, the rate the Saskatchewan 

people are going to the province of Alberta. 

 

They're going over there for better health care, lower taxes, 

better protection for seniors, better environment for business, 

and they're much more optimistic about their future. It's not 

doom and gloom all over the . . . you don't see thousands of 

farmers rallying in Alberta. You don't see thousands of people 

rallying in health care and a Conservative government in 

Manitoba or Alberta, only in Saskatchewan. 

 

And the member says, and there's not deficits. There's deficits 

in Alberta and there's deficit in Manitoba. Yes they are. And 

they know and we know what they found here in Saskatchewan 

is, every once in a while they believe the untruth of the NDP 

(New Democratic Party), elect them and then you get this kind 

of stuff. 

 

And then comes the arrogance, Mr. Chairman, the arrogance of 

the members who sit together here and complain, hide in the 

House, hide in the weeds. They lie in the weeds here trying to 

get away from all of the people. They won't go out and meet 

the public. And then the Minister of Finance has to have help 

from her seat mates here who chirp away and tell the public 

how smart they are, but they won't leave town. They won't 

leave this building. Well you're going to be a long time in 

interim supply if you're going to hide in here and chirp from 

your seats and not give us answers. 

 

You are charging for health care; you're putting people through 

a great deal of pain; thousands of 



828 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1993 

people across the province are upset, and you won't answer any 

questions. 

 

And we went through this last year when you said, well there 

will never be any new kinds of funding here. We wouldn't get 

into interim supplies; we wouldn't get into special warrants. 

You're into special warrants twice now and you said you'd 

never, ever do it. No talk, nothing opening, behind closed doors 

you went into special warrants, and you've now got one and a 

half billion dollars added to the deficit and the debt. 

 

And we have some questions that we'd like you to answer. And 

last time when we said, we'll move along on interim supply; 

we'll answer them in estimates, you didn't answer zero in 

estimates. You didn't answer anything. It's the same thing. 

You're on record now, Madam Minister, that you will give 

these answers in estimates and we're going to hold you to that. 

 

But this is grievance before supply. And you can tell people in 

this legislature and to the people of Saskatchewan why you 

have decided to put money into the coffers of your treasury on 

an item basis, on the broad scale, from your changes in health 

care policy. And the prescription drug program, you said that 

you were going to add more to your coffers as a result of your 

change. Can you give us, in terms of the changes in cost that 

people have to pay in health care, the total benefit to your 

treasury as a result of the increase that the consumer has to pay 

for health care services in this province? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, I would say again to 

the member opposite, if we want to get into the past, we'll have 

a very interesting time in this legislature talking about the past. 

 

In the whole annals of Canadian history, it's hard to find 

instances in which a government brings a budget before a 

legislature, proceeds to spend and tax on the basis of that 

budget, dissolves the legislature, and yet doesn't even have the 

budget passed through the due process — imagine that process, 

imagine that process. 

 

So what I would remind the people of Saskatchewan of . . . I 

would remind the people of Saskatchewan . . . 

 

The Chair: — Order. Order, order. Order! I'm having 

difficulty hearing the minister because of the interruptions. 

We've had interruptions coming from the opposition benches, 

and when the opposition members come up, government 

members have been interrupting the opposition members. 

 

I don't think that the committee will proceed very well if we 

continue to interrupt each other. There's lots of opportunity for 

members to ask questions, to stand up and to ask questions. All 

they have to do is stand to be recognized, and there's lots of 

opportunity for the government members to answer those 

questions. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My 

point is a simple one. This government respects 

the processes. The processes are that this is interim supply. We 

understand fully the people of Saskatchewan would like to 

have detailed questions asked and answered about all aspects of 

the budget — health care and other areas — and we will move 

into that process once interim supply is passed. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Madam Minister, grievance before supply; 

people want a general idea that you have some analysis of how 

you're going to get your money. And what we're trying to find 

out from you is that, have you done any research at all that can 

explain to people or justify the fact that you have targeted so 

much additional money coming into the treasury or benefit to 

the treasury as a result of your health care policies? 

 

Can you give us any indication at all, in terms of your research, 

why you think that kind of money is going to be in the treasury 

as a result of your changes? Some indication, some analysis 

that would show that your changes that will result in a benefit 

to the treasury are accurate. Can you tell us and tell the people 

of Saskatchewan that you are going to get X amount of money 

coming to the treasury, of benefit to the treasury as a result of 

your tax changes, or your changes in charging? 

 

For example, did you have any analysis that says, yes, the 

treasury will benefit this amount — let's say that it is on drugs 

and medicine — $16.9 million? Is it going to benefit as a result 

of the changes in the policy where now people have to pay a lot 

more than they used to? Do you have any analysis to show that 

that's going to be an accurate estimate? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, when the 

Department of Health appears in estimates, you can ask them 

that question. What we did was we restructured things like the 

prescription drug plan because the cost of the prescription drug 

plan was increasing dramatically because of the changes made 

in Ottawa to legislation. We've laid out the projected savings in 

the Estimates. 

 

I'm not sure why the member opposite believes that we have 

increased fees to health care. Unlike the province of Alberta, 

which he tends to be so praiseworthy of, we do not have 

premiums. They have premiums of over $600 a month*. So we 

do not have premiums here. 

 

Again, that's the general answer. The more specific answer can 

be acquired when we move into the estimates on Health. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Madam Minister, you can't fool the public. If a 

senior citizen had a $50 protective mechanism and now it's up 

to $800, somebody's paying $750. Right? And that's the senior 

citizen. That's the senior citizen. 

 

It used to be 150 for a family, then it went to 375, and now it's 

virtually eliminated. Now can't you acknowledge — be honest 

with the people — can't you acknowledge that it's a major cost 

increase, a 



April 2, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 829 

major tax burden, for people who are buying prescription 

drugs? You pick up the benefit because you don't provide the 

protection any more. Now won't you admit that? 

 

You admit that there's an increased cost to the people of 

Saskatchewan because of your changes and you pick up the 

benefit. Will you admit that? 

 

(1130) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, again I would refer 

the member opposite to page 66 of the Estimates in which we 

talk about the level of subsidization that this government 

provides for prescription drugs. 

 

There are several provinces in Canada in which non-seniors get 

no subsidization for prescription drugs. What this table on page 

66 tells you is the level of subsidization last year was $67.7 

million. The level of subsidization from the Government of 

Saskatchewan to individuals in the province is projected to be 

$57 million for this year. 

 

Mr. Devine: — So you're saying to the people of 

Saskatchewan, the government will receive the benefit of $10.7 

million because you have no longer decided to protect 

Saskatchewan family against the very high costs of drugs in the 

province of Saskatchewan. And you say no, we can't do 

anything about that. We're going to pick up $10.7 million that 

will go right from the taxpayer right into your pocket. 

 

Now, now that you've admitted that, Madam Minister, do you 

have any research to show that people will consume the same 

level of drugs, that they will get the same level of protection, 

the same attitudinal behaviour with respect to prescription 

drugs as a result of the fact that you've picked their pockets for 

$10.7 million. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, again to clarify the 

member opposite's statements. This government, despite its 

difficult financial position, is going to continue to subsidize the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan's purchase of drugs to the tune of 

$57 million in this coming year. With respect to the studies, I'm 

not aware of such studies. 

 

Mr. Devine: — In other words, you're saying to the people of 

Saskatchewan: we've just hit you with hundreds of dollars in 

increased expenses, we've done no studies, no research to show 

if you're protected, if you'll have to give up food or clothing or 

any other decisions you might have to make because of your 

changes. You have no analysis. It's just a cold, hard fact that 

you will now ask families to live without a deductible; you'll 

have seniors that'll go from 50 deductible to $800. No analysis 

— this is a good, new, brand-new, socialist policy. No research 

— we'll just pick your pockets for $10.7 million. Would you 

please pass interim supply so that we can get on and close 

some more hospitals. Is that what you're saying? 

 

You have no research, no idea at all what this will do 

to Saskatchewan people or their families, or if they can cope 

with it, or if indeed you're going to make this kind of money, or 

if they're going to back and off and say, to heck with you, I 

can't afford these prescription drugs, I'll do without. Do you 

have any analysis at all to say that your 10.7 is accurate? And 

number two, that people will be able to cope with this $10.7 

million that you're picking out of their pockets? 

 

The Chair: — Why is the member for Prince Albert Carlton 

on his feet? 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Chair: — Point of order. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, it's my understanding that 

we're into interim supply where questions relating to interim 

supply should be dealing with the one-twelfth, dealing with the 

one-twelfth of the requisition . . . one-twelfth of the annual 

supply required in the entire budget, and that questions put in 

this legislature should be with respect to the one-twelfth and 

not with the detail analysis of any specific program but only 

how it applies to a one 

_twelfth requisition. That is the purpose of this motion, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Quite frankly, I feel that the member opposite is out of order on 

it, and I would ask for your ruling on that. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, just responding to the member from 

Prince Albert Carlton, I would just like to remind the member 

and bring to the attention of the chairman — pardon me, Mr. 

Chairman — the fact that in interim supply we realize, yes, it's 

called for one-twelfth of the expenditure of this year's budget. 

 

But also when you're looking at a call for the expenditure of the 

one-twelfth of the funds, there's also a need for the government 

to disclose how it arrived at where it's going to find the money 

to give it the ability to disclose . . . or to expend these funds. 

 

And I think it's imperative that the people of Saskatchewan 

know where the government . . . what process the government 

used to determine whether there would be enough funds to 

even allow it to make even a twelfth of the expenditure. 

 

And I think if we got into detail, we could look back at a lot of 

the debate that took place on other occasions, certainly, Mr. 

Chairman, where debate got even broad ranging. And I 

remember one member discussing the fact of how the budget 

was going to affect bus service in the city of Regina. And I 

believe the minister of the day even gave a response to that 

question. 

 

So I just want to remind, Mr. Chairman, that yes, we are 

talking about one-twelfth, but there is opportunity for some 

discussion to bring out the whole avenue of the financial 

expenditures that we're discussing here today. 

 

The Chair: — I want to thank the member from Prince 



830 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1993 

Albert Carlton and the member from Moosomin for their 

comments. 

 

And I should like to rule as follows: the purpose of interim 

supply is to grant money for the operation of government 

departments and programs on an interim basis while reserving 

to the Legislative Assembly the right to complete the detailed 

review of estimates at a later time. For this reason members 

must reserve their detailed questions on estimates and 

government financial policy for the regular review of the main 

estimates. 

 

So the point of order is well taken. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, when you have the one-twelfth, 

you cannot hide behind either where you're getting the money 

or how you're going to spend it, in a general sense. So if in fact 

we have in the province of Saskatchewan, and I quote, Mr. 

Speaker . . . Mr. Chairman: a tide of fear and resentment 

growing against the provincial government's plans for health 

care and the future of town hospitals, then . . . end of quote. 

 

What we're worried about is do you really have any research or 

analysis to show that you can generate the kind of money that 

you're talking about so the one-twelfth will be there. Because 

over the year, it will be twelve-twelfths. And we'll add it up. 

But we want to know if you've done any general analysis on 

your health care part of the revenue that shows you're either 

going to generate the income, or indeed whether there will be 

just generally enough protection for people given the very, very 

negative attitude. 

 

And I could go on to quote, Mr. Chairman: 

 

 People worried about losing their hospitals are banding 

together in a loose coalition aimed at maintaining existing 

levels of hospital beds. 

 

 Public meetings in west-central and southwest Saskatchewan 

over the past few days have attracted hundreds of people. 

More are scheduled over the next week. 

 

 "People are pretty hot under the collar over this," said Leader 

Mayor Marlyn Clary. 

 

What it's saying, Madam Minister, is that people have 

grievances. They are worried. You are charging more for 

health; you are closing hospitals; you are taxing them so 

heavily they're going to Alberta; and you're asking for 

generally one-twelfth. 

 

I don't need detailed analysis. I don't need detailed analysis. I 

need general analysis. Give me a broad-brush analysis of how 

much money you expect to go into the coffers, benefit of the 

coffers, as a result of your change in health care policy. And 

then I'd like you to explain that forecast in a general way — not 

detailed — a general way and why you think people can afford 

to pay it. Fair questions. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, if I can 

attempt a general answer to the member opposite's question. 

Let me first of all say that his reading of responses to the 

budget in Saskatchewan is, as usual, selective. I would read 

from the editorial of the Leader-Post, March 19: ". . . the 

province is doing what is necessary to create better times 

ahead." 

 

He talks about our projections, and I've said again and again to 

the members opposite that in compiling the budget, what we 

did was we did an overall assessment of the impact of the 

budget on the Saskatchewan economy, and all of that 

information is laid out in the appendices to the budget address. 

 

If he's concerned, if he is truly concerned about the revenue 

projections of the province and the capacity of the province to 

meet those projections, I would read to him from information 

which was tabled with the Speaker two days ago. This is from 

Wood Gundy, and it's an analysis of Saskatchewan's budget: 

 

 Saskatchewan's Balanced Budget Plan is a credible effort to 

come to grips with its rising debt problem. The Province's 

strategy of constraining expenditure growth over the next 

two years until revenue growth catches up makes fiscal 

sense. 

 

Then they go on and say: 

 

 The success of Saskatchewan's medium-term strategy hinges 

on its ability to generate sufficient revenues over the next 

3-4 years. The Province's forecast of reasonably strong 

growth . . . should be enough to generate the necessary 

revenues. The underlying C$ and interest rate assumptions 

for their 1993 economic forecast are similar to our own . . . 

Saskatchewan's Balanced Budget efforts send a strong 

positive signal to financial market participants. 

 

What they're saying is they've looked at our assumptions with 

respect to revenue, and that the whole fiscal plan that we laid 

before the province, they find it credible; they actually find it 

positive. I wish the member opposite would get out of the 

gloom-and-doom scenario and see some of the positive that 

other people are seeing. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Madam Minister, if you are saying and Wood 

Gundy is saying that they agreed with your analysis, I'm just 

asking you for your analysis. I did yesterday. You've raised 

sales tax now from 7 per cent to 9 per cent, a 29 per cent 

increase. Can you show us any analysis that says that you're 

going to generate the revenue that you forecast? 

 

What will businesses do and what will consumers do with a 29 

per cent increase in sales tax? Particularly when there's a 

decision now in Alberta not to have any . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — There's too many variables to forecast. 

 

Mr. Devine: — And an hon. member from his seat 



April 2, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 831 

said, there's too many variables to forecast. I'll tell you, a lot of 

people are saying that you didn't do your analysis, and if you 

did you're not sharing it. And probably you haven't done it 

accurately because they are rioting and banding together across 

the province, saying we don't like your assumptions on health 

care; we don't like your assumptions on the prescription drug; 

we don't like your assumptions on the pension plan; and we 

certainly don't believe in your assumptions with respect to sales 

tax increases and the kind of revenue you're going to get. 

 

So again I ask, if we're to approve one-twelfth of your 

estimates for revenue on sales taxes, can you give me any 

assurance, any confidence, any level of research, analytical 

studies, that show that we will get one-twelfth of what you're 

forecasting? Have you studied the reaction of the business 

community and the consumer in terms of spending, to a 29 per 

cent increase in sales tax from 7 to 9 and this year from 8 to 9? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, what I would say to 

the member opposite is that we have laid out before the people 

of Saskatchewan the economic analysis that we have done. I 

would also say that there have been at least five financial 

agencies, respected agencies, outside the province who have 

been given exactly the information that the members opposite 

have been given. They've analysed the information. We have 

yet to come back with one of them saying that you haven't done 

enough study. And then they've looked at our information and 

they've said, we agree with your analysis. 

 

We'll have an interesting day because I have lots of reading to 

do here. I would read into the record . . . this material was 

given to the Speaker as part of a package previously. Burns Fry 

says this — and this is very interesting words for members of 

the financial establishment to use these words. I would direct 

the member opposite's attention to these words very carefully. 

 

 The Romanow government has taken aggressive steps to 

deal with the budget mess which it inherited. 

 

"Which it inherited" — Burns Fry, the financial establishment 

saying, the budget mess which this government inherited. 

Budget mess, not just a problem, but a mess which this 

government inherited. 

 

 The spending cuts and tax increases represent tough 

medicine . . . (but) the province has little choice but to 

practice austerity given its total debt . . . The deficit 

reduction program appears attainable . . . and gives the 

province a good chance of retaining its current credit 

ratings. 

 

(1145) 

 

Mr. Devine: — Well, Madam Minister, what you're saying is 

that outsiders are saying, well it's really nice that you're going 

to put more money into your coffers by taxing your own people 

and by cutting the support. 

And they say, well way to go, Madam Minister. 

 

But what I want to say to you is that you have choices and you 

have alternatives. What people are saying is they don't like 

your choices. And I'm trying to get some analysis, some 

research out of you. Because if you want one-twelfth of this . . . 

Maybe there was an easier way, Madam Minister. Maybe 

there's a smarter way. Why do we just have to agree with your 

way when there are hundreds and hundreds and thousands of 

people across the province saying, I don't like your way? 

 

Maybe somebody down East in New York or Toronto says, 

way to go, you've hit people hard; you've raised the taxes a 

whole bunch — oh that's a good idea. You'll probably be able 

to balance the budget in four years. 

 

Well lookit, you've added to the deficit; your credit rating is 

down to BBB; you're driving people out of the province; 

they're rallying all over the place because they don't like your 

cuts, and you're saying, way to go. 

 

Lookit, this is what it says in Saskatchewan, Madam Minister. 

Budget has few fans. Critics are calling the NDP's budget a 

monster. That's what the local people are saying. They're 

calling your budget a monster. 

 

Now if we have grievance before supply . . . This isn't in front 

of the New York bankers here, this is not in front of Toronto 

bankers, this isn't in front of the rating institutions, this is in 

front of the people of Saskatchewan who are paying through 

the nose because of your choices, your choices which are very 

unfair. 

 

You've taken away support in health care. You've taken away 

support in pensions. You've taken away farm support. You've 

taxed business and now you're taxing the consumers so they're 

going to the United States and they're going to Alberta. And 

you're standing up there saying, well the rating institutions 

really like us; we're down to a BBB. We've added a billion and 

a half to the debt, and on this one-twelfth you want us to keep it 

up. That's what you're saying. Could we get encouragement to 

keep doing what we're doing and maybe in four years, if our 

estimates are right, the lines will cross. 

 

I want to know, if you want one-twelfth support here, have you 

got any research to show that you are going to generate your 

tax revenue because of your health care cuts and costs that 

you've laid off to people and in terms of taxes? I don't want 

somebody's review, well it's nice they raised taxes; way to go 

folks. I want to know if you have any analysis to give us any 

confidence, as a result of you raising your taxes from 7 to 9 and 

because of your health care changes where you're charging 

people, that you will get that money and people will respond as 

you said. That's what the people want to know. 

 

Because I can read you all kinds of columns and headlines here 

that are very unfavourable. Very unfavourable. They didn't like 

what you're doing. 



832 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1993 

They don't like it today; they didn't like it yesterday. And if you 

want to get into trading headlines here, we can do that, and we 

won't get to the analysis of the one-twelfth. 

 

So I don't need a lecture and the public out there doesn't need a 

lecture of how fine you are in New York because New York 

just dropped your credit rating to BBB. 

 

An Hon. Member: — On account of you. 

 

Mr. Devine: — And then the Attorney General pipes up and 

says it's because of me. Yes, all right. If that's the case, Mr. 

Minister, then if you want to campaign and show me your 

choices, you want to see . . . look at the choices, then lay them 

out here today. You can speak up all you like. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Fifteen billion reasons. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Now he's got it up to 15, eh. Why don't you 

tell the truth? Why don't you tell the truth? 

 

Mr. Chairman, the members opposite don't like to hear the truth 

and that's why they chirp from their seat, as the Minister of 

Health did, the former minister of Agriculture they've now 

kicked out of cabinet, and now the Attorney General chirps 

from his seat. Because he knows this is very unpopular and it's 

wrong-headed. It's the wrong thing to do. 

 

I can read you headlines that said harmonizing the sales tax and 

balancing the budget, the rating institution said it's exactly the 

thing to do. The business community said it's exactly the thing 

to do. And people said they wanted health care protection, they 

wanted a pension plan, they wanted protection in agriculture, 

and they said: I would like to have that. And the Attorney 

General . . . and then they went and voted NDP because you 

promised them less taxes and lots of health care and lots of 

education. And I can give you quotes here from the university 

who are sick of what you're doing to them. And you didn't tell 

them the truth. You campaigned on the $14 billion deficit, and 

then when you got in you did exactly the opposite to what you 

said you'd do. 

 

You wouldn't take this to the people for one-twelfth, 

one-twentieth, or one-hundredth. So if he's going to chirp from 

his seat about how he's got the answers to this, Mr. Chairman, 

you can let him provide the answers to this session and to the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

This is grievance before supply. You have attacked the health 

care system. You've hit . . . 

 

The Chair: — Order. I will ask for the cooperation of the 

House from members on both sides of the House to allow the 

member from Estevan to put his question consistent with the 

rulings of the Chair, given that interim supply is before the 

House. And I'll also ask the member of Estevan not to include 

the Chair in his debate before the committee. 

Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 

again I would ask you in a very general sense, do you have any 

research or any analysis, other than newspaper headlines, that 

you know what you're doing by cutting health care support and 

the benefits of going into the coffers here; and by raising taxes 

the rate you have, do you have any analysis to show with 

confidence that you're going to generate the kind of revenue 

that you have in this budget that you're asking for one-twelfth 

of today? Can you give us any more indication of confidence in 

terms of the research that you have done? 

 

And if you haven't done any research, then at least the public 

will know that you just decided to cut and tax without research. 

And you're asking for one-twelfth of this based on your best 

political guess, not any economic analysis. And that's all we're 

after. If this is a political document, fair enough. But if it's an 

economic document you must have research, and in a general 

way — not in detail by detail — but generally could you tell us 

why you're confident that your tax increases will generate this 

revenue and why your cuts to health care will help your budget 

this month? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, I would invite the 

member opposite to read the budget address and the 

appendices. He will find the information that he requires there. 

 

I would like to make some remarks though. This is absolutely 

instructive. The past is becoming so clear to me. I now 

understand why we're in, to quote Burns Fry, a financial mess 

inherited by the members opposite. 

 

He says, well those people in New York — you know, the 

people that you don't have to listen to — those people, they say 

that we have to do these things. We don't listen to them. 

 

Of course you never listen to them. You never listen to the 

people who said, we're the people who decide whether you can 

borrow money or not and we say that you're running the 

province in the wrong way. Of course you didn't listen to them. 

It was patently obvious that you didn't listen to them. 

 

But what is absolutely amazing to me is that having brought the 

province to the brink that it is — your administration having 

done that — you're still saying the same things: don't worry 

about what the people who have to decide whether they're 

going to lend you money or not have to say. They're irrelevant. 

They don't live in Estevan. And if they don't live in Estevan, 

what do they know? 

 

Well let me tell you what some of the people who live in 

communities around this province are saying about this budget. 

This is from the Herald, Herbert, Saskatchewan, Tuesday, 

March 23: 

 

 (This) is probably the most sensible budget of recent history. 

 

The Weyburn Review, March 24: 



April 2, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 833 

As a matter of fact, both Ms. MacKinnon and her 

government might be surprised at the extent of support 

among what may be a majority of citizens for the decision of 

this and several other provincial governments to say 

"Enough is enough!" to deficit financing that is pushing us 

all toward bankruptcy. 

 

A conclusion with respect to this budget from the Weyburn 

Review: 

 

 The government probably has earned an "A" for overall 

effort. As to the details, we all have our own choices and 

priorities. 

 

The Leader-Post, March 19, again: 

 

 One need look no farther than the budget's debt-repayment 

figures to realize the province had little choice but to raise 

taxes and cut spending. Interest payments alone account for 

the government's third-largest expenditure behind health 

and education and Saskatchewan's debt per capita remains 

far too high. 

 

 . . . the province is doing what is necessary to create better 

times ahead. 

 

You know, when I look back at some of the decisions taken in 

the 1980s and you add them up and the incredible losses that 

were not necessary. Let me go through some of these: selling 

Potash Corporation for a loss, $361 million; SEDCO losses, 

$118 million; GigaText, investment loss of $4 million. 

Obviously I'm striking some chords over there and waking 

people up. NewGrade write-off, $232 million of taxpayers' 

money — thrown to the wind. And the list goes on. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what we're trying to do in this budget is we're 

trying to say that is part of the past, it's part of the past we'd 

like to turn our backs on, and we have a budget which looks 

toward the future. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Madam Speaker . . . or Mr. Chairman, a 

question to the minister, just a point here. The NDP, if she 

wants to get into it, borrowed money at very high interest rates 

from Americans to buy all kinds of things and they paid too 

much for it, from potash mines to land. 

 

Here's an example. This is Saskatchewan Mining and 

Development Corporation under the NDP, purchased mines for 

$250 million U.S., operating funds of $200 million U.S., 

money borrowed in New York in 1971, terms were — now 

listen to this — sixteen and two-thirds per cent for 16 years 

locked in, one year buy-out, finished paying it off in 1986. At 

16 per cent locked in, and you paid money at the top and you 

borrowed money to buy something that was already here, paid 

way too much for it. When we took it to the private sector with 

Eldorado Nuclear and marketed it, they said, I don't know who 

speculated and paid this too much. 

It's just like farm land; you paid a thousand dollars an acre for 

farm land and today you turn around and it's worth $400. And 

you expect the taxpayers to play with your speculation. That's 

what you did for potash mines, for PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp 

Company) $150 million, $93,000 a day. We inherited that, 

three and a half billion dollars in debt at 22 per cent interest 

rates, and we carried it through the 1980s. And now you're 

coming back and saying to the people of Saskatchewan, oh 

we've really got a nice plan here. Well I'll tell you about your 

nice plan. 

 

In 1991, Madam Minister, just for the record — because you 

were going on the record — here's what was said about 

harmonization and balancing the budget by '93-94. This is the 

investment outlook, Canada-Saskatchewan, May '91: 

Saskatchewan will be one of the few provinces to reduce it's 

budget deficit this year (this is 1991). The budget deficit for the 

fiscal '91-92 is projected at 265 million or a 1.2 per cent GDP 

(gross domestic product), down 100 million or nearly one-third 

from last year's level. And the year before, Madam Minister, 

was 365 and we met the target. 

 

Restraint initiatives, which reduce total expenditures by 4 per 

cent this year, more than offset the negative impact of slower 

economic growth and reduced federal transfer payments on 

provincial finances. The consistent application of fiscal 

restraint, the hallmark of fiscal policy for the past five years — 

that is the past five years in Saskatchewan — will lead to steep 

declines in the budget deficit over the next several years as the 

economic recovery takes hold. This fiscal discipline also 

underlines the government's commitment to meet its target of a 

balanced budget in '93-94. End of quote. 

 

That's what it said, Madam Minister. You campaigned against 

that, which is a balanced budget '93-94, saying you had a new 

way to do it. 

 

Madam Minister, here: Saskatchewan gets an A for economic 

growth. That is the 1990 budget where we had 365. We went 

on for a 265 and then a balanced budget. And you campaign 

and say no, we won't let you do it; we'll do it our way. 

 

Now what have you got? You've got higher taxes. You've got 

more deficit. You've added a 1.5 billion to the debt that we had; 

you've added debt. You've got a lower credit rating. And you're 

saying, well aren't we very nice because we've raised taxes and 

we've cut health care and support to education and to farmers 

and to seniors, and you're very proud of that. 

 

I can read you all kinds of analysis that says harmonization at 7 

cents across the province makes much more sense than what 

you're doing, for both economic activity and for the consumer. 

 

So I'm asking you for an analysis. Do you have anything at all 

that would prove that your economic forecasts for this 

one-twelfth are right in terms of revenue from taxes or from 

money that you are going 



834 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1993 

to benefit by in terms of your health care changes? And if you 

don't, then just say no, I don't have it. This is a political 

document. It has nothing to do with economic forecasts 

because we have no economic analysis to back it up. 

 

(1200) 

 

Now if that's the case, if you don't have any economic analysis 

to back it up, why don't you just come clean with the public 

and say this is a political document. We're just going to raise 

taxes and cut here. We don't really know how it's going to turn 

out. I hope you support this one-twelfth because we think that 

we're on the right track. 

 

Will the minister provide any new or existing or past analysis 

to show and to prove to the public that your forecasts for 

revenue have some justification and economic theory? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, the budget address 

has all of that information at the back. Never before in the 

history of Saskatchewan have the people of Saskatchewan been 

given so much information projected so far forward into the 

future. 

 

You know I'm not going to bother getting into it with the 

member opposite except to say this. If there is a person in 

Saskatchewan who does not believe that the financial mess we 

inherited was created by the members opposite, that person 

also believes Elvis Presley is still alive. The people of 

Saskatchewan know how we got here. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 

while you were out at your political meeting in Weyburn last 

night fighting off the demonstrators, the Associate Minister of 

Finance and I had a very good discussion about certain things. 

And we went through a number of areas in your budget that I 

think were very relevant to understanding the budget and 

understanding how we are giving you $340 million here on 

interim supply. 

 

And one of the crucial things that we talked about was the fact 

that your department has budgeted $4.3 million for analytical 

research on how your budget performs. And I was assured by 

the Associate Minister of Finance that indeed that one-twelfth 

of that was being asked for, that you have several hundreds of 

thousands of dollars in this particular supply motion allocated 

to that research. 

 

And he talked about the process of how StatsCanada gathered 

information for you and how the federal Department of 

Revenue collected funds on your behalf and then rebated them 

on various programs. We went through quite a lengthy process 

that involved some of the projections that you make on page 40 

in your budget, and then we went to page 57, 58, and 59, and 

we went through some of these details. 

 

Now my colleague a little earlier, Madam Minister, was asking 

you some questions pertaining to the 

health care field. And in questions in this Assembly a couple of 

days ago, you assured me that there was funds allocated by this 

interim supply motion in a number of health care areas. I asked 

you for yes-and-no answers, and you gave me a yes in each and 

every one of these instances. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, what I would like to know, very similar 

to the conversations that I had with the member from Weyburn 

last night, is that given the research component that we are 

funding in here, that you're asking taxpayers to come up with, 

one-twelfth of in this interim supply motion, exactly what the 

changes are now that these health care areas are no longer paid 

for by the taxpayer as a whole, that you are now charging fees 

for a whole range of health care areas? 

 

I would like to know, Madam Minister, if those projections 

which you've outlined in the budget document in a number of 

areas — given that your department and the minister assured 

me last night that your people were monitoring all across the 

piece, that there was no hop, skipping, and jumping around 

here, that you were covering the waterfront on this stuff, given 

that there are several hundreds of thousands of dollars allocated 

in this interim supply motion for that research — I'd like to 

know from you what that research is showing as far as the flow 

of dollars that Saskatchewan taxpayers are now paying directly, 

paying directly for health care rather than having those funds 

paid for on their behalf by all of the taxpayers of the province. 

 

Now if StatsCanada is doing that research for you, fine. But I'd 

like you to explain that process to me, how you're tracking that 

and how that information is being correlated so that it meshes 

with the projections being made in here. And I think, Madam 

Minister, given that health is such a sensitive issue today, that 

it'd be something that your people would be vitally interested in 

because all of those monies end up coming out of the 

Consolidated Fund and that there are projections that need to 

be met. Could you enlighten me, Madam Minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, yes, I gather that 

you had a very interesting dialogue with the Associate Minister 

of Finance. 

 

With respect to the Department of Finance last night, I would 

point out the 4.3 million is for a whole department, not just 

analysis of the budget, but analysis of other statistics as they 

pertain to the Department of Finance. 

 

What you're asking me today is analysis that is done by the 

Department of Health. And what I'm saying to you is, that 

question we would be most pleased to answer, and there is an 

appropriate time within the procedural process for that question 

to be answered, and that is when the Department of Health is 

here to give its estimates. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — No, it doesn't work that way, Madam 

Minister. The Department of Health isn't the 



April 2, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 835 

department in charge of revenue in this province. The 

Department of Health gets revenue from you, and they in turn 

expend that revenue with their third parties and with other 

people. 

 

Now if you're trying to tell me that we've got two departments 

of Finance in this province, then we've got a real problem, and 

the Minister of Health better get in here and start handling the 

interim supply motion. It don't work that way, Madam 

Minister. 

 

Your associate minister assured me last night, that your 

department dealt with the analysis of all budgetary 

considerations. And what they couldn't handle themselves, they 

had the federal people do on their behalf for minimal amounts  

_- for minimal amounts; that they didn't have to pay for a lot of 

the analysis that was done. That they then garnered that 

analysis and they put their own interpretation on it, as they do 

the budgets of other provinces, as they do the rating agencies, 

as they do lots of things. 

 

There are revenue streams, Madam Minister, back to your 

department concerning health and the fact that people no longer 

are having those benefits paid for by the taxpayer, but are 

paying them themselves. 

 

What I want to know from you, Madam Minister, in a whole 

realm of streams here, what those revenue implications are. 

You told me chiropractic, optometric, insulin, abortion, 

children's dental care, that all of those things were in this 

supply motion. And you told me that on Wednesday. Now I 

think it's only proper that you go through there and identify 

those revenue streams and how and what is happening there. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, I must clarify what 

my colleague said and did not say last night. What he said is 

that Ottawa collects data on behalf of the province. The data is 

then sent to the province in many cases, not to the Department 

of Finance necessarily. If it's data with respect to health, it 

would be sent to the Department of Health. 

 

My colleague was of course quite willing to answer questions 

that were with respect to the Department of Finance. The 

Department of Health has its own unit that does policy 

development. Page 64 of the Estimates you'll find a line: 

"Health Planning and Policy Development." And what I would 

suggest to the member opposite is when the Department of 

Health is here, you ask them those questions. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Madam Minister, you're absolutely right. 

The Department of Health has a policy branch. There are 

people all over this province feeling the impact of that policy 

branch today. They get together by the hundreds now to discuss 

that policy branch. And I suspect that before they're done they 

just might implement a little change in that policy branch of the 

Department of Health. There might be a few people there that 

might be looking for work even or something like that, if folks 

out there have their way with the policy branch of the 

Department of Health. I understand that very clearly. 

But what the minister said was that there is ongoing analysis in 

conjunction with a whole bunch of people that allow you to 

meet the projections in your budget. And those projections 

have to come true for your story to come true. Okay? 

 

By charging Saskatchewan people health fees where they 

previously didn't have health fees, that is no different, Madam 

Minister, than a tax. Okay? It's no different than a rise in the 

sales tax from 8 to 9 per cent. It's no different than raising the 

gasoline tax from 7 to 10. It's no different than increasing 

personal income tax, Madam Minister. You are directly 

charging Saskatchewan taxpayers a fee, a fee. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, that fee is taxation. Your department is 

in charge of tracking taxation. You have allocated large sums 

of money to track it, because that tracking, in conjunction with 

other governments, makes your budget projections come true 

or false. Now there are a whole range of new taxes, Madam 

Minister. You're the minister in charge of taxes. In the case of 

the issue before us is that it is now taxing health care. Okay? 

You're taxing. 

 

What I want to know is if your folks aren't doing it, are you 

getting the federal department or are you getting StatsCanada 

. . . who are you getting to track this whole new range of 

taxation which you've told to me is being allocated one-twelfth 

in this budget. Okay? It's not difficult, Madam Minister. It's not 

the policy branch of the Department of Health that's in charge 

of taxation. You're in charge of taxation. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, the logic here is 

quite incredible. I finally am seeing what the member is trying 

to argue which is an incredible argument. He's saying the 

Department of Finance is in charge of taxation. Right, we are. 

He is trying to interpret the health care changes as taxation so 

that they'll be the responsibility of the Department of Finance. 

As I say, I'm incredulous at the leap in logic. 

 

We're not taxing health care. What we're doing is we are 

reducing our level of subsidization. We do not charge fees. The 

province of Alberta charges health care premiums; the province 

of Saskatchewan doesn't. There is no sense in which we are 

taxing health care and nobody who was a reasonable person out 

there who is watching this or will read this will say that 

because of the changes made in health care, these are now 

taxes and therefore health care should come under the 

Department of Finance. That is simply not a reasonable 

argument. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — When we get into leaps of faith here, Mr. 

Chairman, we just saw one. Unless I've missed something, I 

understand here that when I go to the chiropractor, before or 

after, at some place in there, the guy says get this out. You've 

got to dig in here. I want some of that green stuff, Madam 

Minister, before you're going to get the service. Now I can't 

just walk in there and say well the Minister of Health said or 

the Minister of Finance says that this is just a reduction in our 

fee schedule or something like that. I mean when 



836 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1993 

my kid goes to the dentist, Madam Minister, I don't get out of 

the place without digging in here. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Isn't that an exhibit, Mr. Chairman? 

 

Mr. Swenson: — It's a diminishing exhibit. The member is 

right. My wallet and my bank . . . 

 

The Chair: — Order, order. Order. Will the member for 

Thunder Creek please come to order. I think members on both 

sides of the House understand the rules regarding exhibits in 

the House and the member for Thunder Creek I'm sure will 

respect that and proceed without an exhibit. 

 

(1215) 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The point is that 

there's a law of diminishing returns here for the average 

taxpayer. The taxpayer is now paying where he didn't pay 

before, okay? Money each and every time. Now, Madam 

Minister, if you're telling me that that isn't some form of 

taxation, I don't know what it is. It used to be that I as a 

taxpayer paid my income tax and then I didn't have to do that. 

Now I have to do that, okay? 

 

Now, Madam Minister, those revenue streams . . . when the 

chiropractor or the dentist takes the money from me, that goes 

against the global projection that you have made by decreasing 

the allocation from the Department of Finance to that particular 

department. Right? You're saying that in dental care here in the 

province of Saskatchewan that it now drops from ten million 

three four eight to four million two hundred, that your funding 

level has dropped by that amount and I'm picking that up. I'm 

making up the difference, okay? Now that projection, Madam 

Minister, has to come true or the $430 million that you come in 

here and ask for in interim supply, one-twelfth, doesn't wash, 

okay? Because if that's not running true, then the projection 

isn't running true. 

 

Somebody, Madam Minister, and I'd suspect that it's the 

minister in charge of money, is checking to make sure that that 

in fact is happening. That the thousands of people walking in 

and paying the dentist and paying the chiropractor and paying 

the optometrist and paying in the health care system, are paying 

enough that your projection's right on. Because if they're not 

paying enough there, they're going to have to pay enough 

somewhere else. 

 

And you're going to have to make a mid-course correction like 

your predecessor did last fall when he said, oop, it ain't 517 any 

more; she's a lot closer to 600. That mid-course correction, 

Madam Minister, affects all of us. And given what I've seen of 

some of your projections, I'm scared that we're in for a 

mid-course correction, because the chart on page 40 has some 

very optimistic numbers in it. And that mid-course correction's 

going to have to get sucked up somewhere else. 

 

Now I want you to tell me the process that's in place 

with this $4.3 million of research that your people do in 

Finance to make sure that that health thing is tracking along. 

There's got to be a way for you to determine the volume of 

dollars that people are now paying in a whole lot of situations. 

And if you're going to tell me, Madam Minister, that there's no 

way to determine what that volume is, then you better stand up 

and say we're in for a mid-course correction. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, it's difficult to figure 

out what the question was there, but there are a number of areas 

that the member opposite appeared to touch on. What is very 

interesting is his concept of the role of government in a society. 

I find this absolutely fascinating. Because what he is saying to 

me is that everything with respect to health care should be paid 

for by the government, and if it isn't it's a tax on him. 

 

Well I'll tell you, that's big government with a vengeance. 

Because what he's really saying to me then is every time he 

goes to his dentist and he has to pay, we're taxing him. Every 

time he goes to a health centre so he's in good shape to preserve 

his health and the government isn't paying, we're taxing him. I 

suppose if he cut himself shaving and had to get a band-aid and 

he had to pay, we're taxing him. That's what his whole 

approach to health care, if you take the logic through, is about. 

 

Now with respect to projections and mid-term adjustments, 

there's no doubt that a mid-term adjustment had to be made this 

year. And I'll just read briefly from a document here: 

 

 Expenditures by government are continuing to exceed our 

revenues and the deficit now is projected to be over $2.7 

billion. The Canadian economy's performance has fallen far 

short of what was expected last spring. This has had a 

major impact on the fiscal position of all governments. 

 

 Fewer Canadians are employed in paying taxes. This means 

lower personal income tax receipts. In November the 

federal government advised the provinces that it had 

significantly overestimated national tax revenue for the 

1991-92 and 1993 calendar years. 

 

What's interesting about this document, in which a government 

is saying: you're absolutely right; our projections were totally 

off the mark here, is this is from the province of Alberta. And if 

you want to know how much they were off the mark: 

 

 The lower federal estimates mean that personal income tax 

payments to Alberta for 1992 and 1993 will be lower than 

budgeted. Alberta will also have to repay the federal 

government over $100 million for excess advances received 

last year on 1991 taxes. In total, this year's personal income 

tax revenue is expected to be about $475 million less than 

estimated. 

 

So in this past year there were mid-course adjustments 



April 2, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 837 

made by all provinces, including our neighbouring province of 

Alberta. What we're saying is we have laid before the people 

Saskatchewan the information upon which our budget is based, 

the assumptions, the projections, and never before in the 

history of this province have the people had so much 

information laid out openly by the government. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well, Madam Minister, I appreciate that and 

I hope you'll share that information that you just read from with 

the Assembly. I mean that is the usual procedure, Mr. 

Chairman, when a minister quotes from a document, that they 

share it with the Assembly. 

 

But I'm not concerned, Madam Minister, with the province of 

Alberta because there are enough Saskatchewan dollars and 

people flowing over there lately that they'll probably rectify 

their economic problems that they might have there. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, what I was talking about was the 

individual contributions made by Saskatchewan taxpayers in 

regards to many components of the health care system. And I 

understand the problem that Madam Minister has in talking 

about taxing health care. Because I was treated to the spectacle 

in this Assembly through my entire legislative career of 

members of the New Democratic Party standing up and talking 

about how you're taxing the sick, and you're taxing the health 

care system, and you're trying to destroy it, and it should be 

universal and you awful, awful Tories are going to tear that 

health care system down just as sure as nails because you're 

going to get rid of universality. 

 

And the member from Lakeview there, she talked about people 

making choices between drugs and food and that there was 

going to be deaths occurring because of these types of things. 

And she said, you know, if you'd just elect us the government, 

you don't have a thing to worry about. Universality will be 

enshrined in heaven forever. The New Democrats, the people 

that care, will always make sure that there is enough money for 

these areas and that you won't have taxes on the health care 

system. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, I don't have time to pore through the 

volumes of Hansard to read you back probably 10,000 quotes 

from members of your political party on how you would handle 

health care; it's there for the record. Okay? 

 

What I'm talking about today is just simple reality. You are 

asking for interim supply of $430 million which is one-twelfth 

the total budget. Included in there is $4.3 million for your 

department to do the research that ensures that your numbers 

are on the money. 

 

Part of that process now is charging people for a whole lot of 

components in health care. And somebody, Madam Minister, 

has got to be checking out the revenue streams. The money is 

changing hands. Okay? The money is changing hands. 

Somebody's got to be watching that because you have laid out 

– as 

you point to me on pages 66 and 67 and 65, a whole 64, 63 — 

a whole bunch of commitments in the area of health. 

 

And you've told me that you've ratcheted back the funding in a 

whole host of areas. Okay? And when you ratcheted that back, 

you've asked the individual taxpayers to pick up the slack. 

Okay? So what I'm asking you, Madam Minister, and what 

we're allocating money to your department for, is the 

verification procedure of how well that process is going so that 

we don't have mid-course corrections that blow the numbers 

out of the water. 

 

I mean last year you went through the same process and you 

gave us charts and graphs and you said the Canadian economy 

is going to grow at these things. Well it didn't happen. And 

you've got a whole bunch of qualifiers in here again saying, 

well if this happens or that happens then naturally my numbers 

aren't on the money. 

 

But one of the things that's absolutely crucial because health is 

such a big component of the total budget of the province — it's 

one-third of the total budget — that if the revenue streams 

inside Health, which I'm now picking up as the individual 

taxpayer because you've changed the way that health care is 

delivered, means that those revenue streams have to be on the 

ball. 

 

And as I said, I don't view it any different, Madam Minister, 

than paying more sales tax and paying more gasoline tax and 

paying more personal income tax, paying higher utility rates. I 

mean you can call them utility rates. You're taxing the use of 

power to get more money. 

 

Madam Minister, you've made significant changes to health 

care. People are paying. Tell me how that process of 

verification, which your departments had allocated for, is going 

to take place. Is it the federal government? Is it your 

government? Who's doing it? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, the government will 

monitor the revenue stream and the expenditure stream of the 

government. But I would remind the member opposite that 

there are 365 days in the year. We're now on day 2. We're now 

on day 2, and as my deputy minister just commented to me, if 

you would let him out of this room so he could go back to his 

office, he would continue to monitor the process and tell you 

how the first two days have gone. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Well, Madam Minister, you have a very 

competent deputy minister. He's got more stuff in his head than 

you and I will probably ever get there in our entire lifetimes. I 

mean we're talking about a very competent individual here, 

okay. 

 

Madam Minister, he can spout you numbers that will go on and 

on and on for days because, being competent, he keeps track of 

these things. Now those revenue streams that are changing out 

there, I suspect there's been some analysis done and it's been 

some projections and you got . . . 



838 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1993 

What have you got going to a doctor in this province? I don't 

know. I'm told that we had one million tests done for thyroid 

last year. That's one of the things that happens in the province 

in the medical system. You've got some pretty good idea of 

how many people tramped through the door of the dentist or 

the doctor or the optometrist or go in and apply for insulin. 

 

That's the kind of tracking that gets done in order to come up 

with the number. Okay? 

 

Now because that analysis was done, you're saying that X 

thousands of people are going to troop through the dentist's 

office and plunk down an average fee of X — my guess. I want 

to know, Madam Minister — because we're allocating you 

money here in interim supply to do that process — I want to 

know what your projections are and I want to know who's 

doing that and I want to know if we're on the target. 

 

And your budget didn't come down two days ago. Are you 

telling me that people aren't using the health care facilities any 

more? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, seeing as you have 

such a high regard for the deputy, he will give you his personal 

assurance that on day two we're on target. 

 

I would also say that the Department of Finance, as you can 

imagine, does not keep track of how many people go in to get 

tests for thyroid, same as we do not keep track of how many 

people end up before the courts in Saskatchewan. This is done 

by the individual departments. 

 

And so if you want to know how many people go in for tests 

for thyroids and what the implications of that are, you will have 

an opportunity when we go through estimates to get those 

details. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Yesterday I was 

just about to begin to ask a few questions of the associate 

minister with regards to a question, when I had to go and do 

some other things, and my colleagues took over for the rest of 

the afternoon. So I want to pursue that with you, Madam 

Minister. 

 

I'll just ask the original question that I'd asked, just to bring you 

back up to speed where we were at here. My question at that 

time was: what is the total dollar amount spent on paying off 

the legal bills of the Tetzlaff brothers, and is any of this money 

going towards this cause? And the answer that was given, as 

your assistants will point out, the answer I think that was given 

was that yes, that would be paid out of this one-twelfth under 

the Saskatchewan Water Corporation, 514 something or other 

here. 

 

And I wonder . . . first of all, I guess I should say: can you 

confirm the answer that the minister gave . . . or the associate 

minister gave me? Was that . . . 

 

(1230) 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, what I can confirm 

to the member opposite is that that is the responsibility of the 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation and the Department of 

Justice and when you get into the detailed estimates of those 

two entities, then you will have the precise figures that you 

need. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Madam Minister, your associate 

minister did in fact say that that money would be coming out of 

this one-twelfth and that it would be coming out of that portion. 

It is extremely important to a couple of people in this province 

to know how this process is going to work and how it's going to 

be paid off. 

 

And it's important to me to know how you're going to do this 

because under interim supply, you have $514,000 going to the 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation. If you're going to pay off 

two and a half million dollars or 250,000 or whatever it is, it 

makes quite a difference. We have to know if there is any 

rational reason to believe that you've allocated enough money 

to be able to pay off that bill. It just about sounds like to me 

like maybe you don't have enough allocated here to keep the 

Water Corporation going. 

 

In other words I'm saying that this particular one-twelfth 

portion for the Saskatchewan Water Corporation should have 

been more than a one-twelfth share for this one period of time 

because you're spending more perhaps of the budget in this one 

month than a twelfth share of the whole proportion. You may 

have erred in not allotting say, two portions or perhaps 

two-twelfths for this particular department in order to be able 

to cover the bills, because you have one big bill coming in that 

won't probably show up in all the rest of the months. 

 

Now is it not a fact then, that if you have erred, you will put 

this department into a deficit. So would you like to explain how 

this is going to work if you have one big expenditure coming? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, if I could clarify the 

Associate Minister of Finance's response. What he said is that 

we have allocated to Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

one-twelfth of its budget. He did not confirm the details about 

how that budget would be spent and he said to the members 

opposite if they wanted those details they could wait until 

estimates and those details would be provided. 

 

He said the one-twelfth is allocated to pay bills within the 

department. He did not provide details as to which bills will be 

paid. That is a matter for estimates. We have no concerns about 

the capacity of the Saskatchewan Water Corporation to pay its 

bills. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Well you weren't here and I was and I'm 

telling you, you don't tell the story straight here. The fact of the 

matter is that the Associate Minister said that the money to pay 

the Tetzlaff brothers would be paid out of the Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation money and that it would be paid out of this 



April 2, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 839 

one-twelfth portion, the $514,000. 

 

Now I don't know how much money for sure the Tetzlaff 

brothers are going to get but I know that it is a very sizeable 

and significant amount of money. And it looks to me like if you 

just took a one-twelfth portion, you can't possibly make this 

work. There isn't enough money in there to pay off a very big, 

one-time payment. And if now is the time that that's due, you're 

going to run short in all of the rest of the departments. Because 

if it takes a one-twelfth amount to run the normal operations of 

that department for the whole year each month, then if you're 

paying a massive amount of money to one thing on a special 

occasion, you haven't allotted properly to cover that. 

 

And I'm saying to you that the associate minister already 

committed to this Assembly that that's what's going to happen, 

and I'm asking you how you're going to cover this. Where are 

you going to get the money from if they go into deficit? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, again I would 

clarify for the record and to the member opposite, that the 

Associate Minister of Finance did not give any details about 

how the money would be spent within individual departments 

or agencies, because that is not his job. 

 

What the government does is it allocates one-twelfth of the 

budget, total budget allocation, to the particular departments 

and agencies. They pay the bills that they have to pay in the 

time frame that is allowed. 

 

The procedure is absolutely standard. It's a procedure followed 

by the member opposite when they were in the government and 

it's very simple. We have a budget before the legislature. The 

budget has yet to be passed but the government has to continue 

to operate the affairs of the province and therefore we need 

interim supply. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Madam Minister, I've got until next 

fall to stand here and talk to you. And if you want to beat 

around the bush, we'll just keep beating around until we come 

around and we will find out the answers. We'll just take our 

time. 

 

I've got a whole list of things I want to talk to you about. We'll 

talk about the Water Corporation and the Tetzlaff brothers' deal 

and all those things quite a few more times because I noted in 

the little notes that I've got here about the rules of this process, 

that there's no limit to the number of times that I can ask a 

question. So we'll just keep coming around to it and gradually 

you'll either answer it or we'll stay here until it starts to snow 

next fall. 

 

I'd like to know, now that you've amalgamated the municipal 

governments, and now that you've amalgamated these two 

branches and there's no longer a Department of Rural 

Development, I'd like to know how much of the one-twelfth 

allocation goes to the rural municipalities. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, with respect 

to time, the members opposite will decide how the legislature 

spends its time. They will also be accountable to the people of 

Saskatchewan about how that time is spent . . . 

 

 

An Hon. Member: — But, Madam Minister, we're trying to 

hold you accountable. That's what we're trying to do. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Yes, and if in fact you want to 

spend your time on interim supply, in which nothing but very 

general questions can be asked from the point of view of the 

order of the legislature, the procedures, that's your choice. But 

you have to answer to the people of Saskatchewan as to 

whether that's the responsible thing to do with your time. 

 

So you can say glibly you'll stay here till the snow flies talking 

about the generalities of the budget. But the people of 

Saskatchewan will hold you accountable if you in fact show no 

interest in moving on to the more detailed procedure in which 

they can get perhaps the answers that they have about the 

estimates. 

 

An Hon. Member: — We made three motions yesterday to go 

to detailed procedures. You're the one that refused. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — The member opposite knows the 

procedure. You do interim supply, the general discussion, and 

then you get into the detailed discussion. 

 

And I'm sure that the members opposite are quite right when 

they say the people of Saskatchewan have a number of 

questions that they would like to have asked about this budget. 

And I'm sure there are details that they would like to have 

clarified. But I'll tell you, the members opposite are not 

facilitating that. 

 

With respect to the question asked, that question he knows is 

appropriately asked when we get to the estimates. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — So you're refusing then, Madam Minister, to 

tell the rural municipalities what share of the one-twelfth 

allocation they can expect to get from your government. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, what I'm saying is 

this. There's a budget before the legislature; the budget has yet 

to be passed, but the affairs of the government have to continue 

in the interim. So the standard procedure is for the government 

to come before the legislature and to pass an interim supply 

Bill. The rules and the regulations about this particular phase of 

the legislature's activities is that only general questions can be 

asked, not detailed questions about departments. I don't run the 

Department of Municipal Affairs. 

 

And once that particular process, the general questions of 

interim supply are over, then the opposition is free to ask 

exactly those detailed questions that they want to ask. But it's 

the members opposite who are quite openly saying to the 

people of 



840 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1993 

Saskatchewan they're willing to delay this process for an 

endless period of time. That's fine, but that's their choice. 

They're choosing to only talk about the generalities. They're 

saying to the people of Saskatchewan, we do not want the 

opportunity to legitimately get into the details of this budget. 

As I say, that's your choice, but you'll be held accountable for 

that choice. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Well I'm quite prepared to go to an election 

tomorrow if you'd like to call one. I don't mind being 

accountable. But you're the government and you're accountable 

for the taxpayer's dollar. You're accountable for the public's 

purse. You're the one that's holding all of the money of all of 

the province and you're the one that has to explain to the 

people. I don't think they're going to stand and judge me for 

being accountable for where the money's going; they're going 

to judge you on that. 

 

So let's play our roles correctly here and get them in order. 

What you've just done is said that you're allowing your 

government to amalgamate two branches of government. 

You've eliminated the Department of Rural Development; you 

now have one, Municipal Government, which serves both 

urban and rural interests. And what I'm saying to you is that we 

believed for a long time and now it is reinforced in our minds 

that this was a conspiracy from the beginning to amalgamate 

these two departments so that you could camouflage where the 

money would go, so that in fact you would not have to meet 

your projections of the minimal cut-backs to rural 

municipalities that were projected last year and we were able to 

prove were wrong. You projected a very small decrease again 

for this year and for next year, and those remain to be seen, 

whether they were accurate or not. 

 

But you have combined these two branches of government in 

order so that you could lose in the mix the figures, because you 

were not ever planning on sticking to that plan of giving those 

dollars to rural municipalities. You will now manipulate things 

so that in those departments those monies will drift to the 

priorities in the bigger urban centres where you have political 

support. And you will not give this money fairly to individual 

rural municipalities throughout the province under the 

programs that had been laid into place before and which you 

had committed yourself to through your government last year 

through the budget and again this year. 

 

And so what I'm saying to you is that by refusing to tell us 

what you're giving you are confirming our suspicions that there 

is a conspiracy against rural Saskatchewan. And now it goes 

even deeper. That conspiracy is against rural municipalities in 

certain parts of the province. You are going to manipulate the 

way the monies are divvied out so that only those people that 

supported you in the election will get funding and nobody will 

be able to track it down and pin you down and show this to be a 

fact. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, I note here that for the first time . . . 

and I asked a few people about this so I could 

be wrong; I haven't had a whole bunch of research. But I'm told 

that . . . I noted that the agricultural portion seems to be 

dropping. Then I got to the bottom of the page and I noted that 

Social Services seems to have gotten bigger. When you look at 

the two, you find that Agriculture has now significantly less 

money than Social Services. I'm told this is the first time in the 

history of the province of Saskatchewan that the most 

important industry in the province, the industry of agriculture, 

has less funding than social services. 

 

Now that could be for two reasons. Either again it's your 

revenge on rural people, taking away financing to the most 

important industry in the province, or else on the other hand, 

we have got a very serious, serious problem here in that instead 

of using money to create jobs for people, you are simply 

accepting the fact that you're going to just put people on 

welfare and let them sort of drift into oblivion. And that's a sad 

scenario when you see the monies for social services getting 

higher than the monies that go into the industries that could 

provide jobs. 

 

Madam Minister, I'll give you a chance to defend yourself. Can 

you tell the people of this province that what I have surmised is 

not true, that you are not just simply laying down and quitting 

on them; that you're not just simply saying we're going to 

throw money to welfare and let people sit around idly doing 

nothing while you do nothing to create jobs and provide some 

kind of alternative for them? 

 

(1245) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, I would be delighted 

to answer that question. The member opposite has his facts 

dead-off here. His allegation is this is the first time in the 

history of Saskatchewan that more money has been spent on 

Social Services than on the Department of Agriculture and 

Food. 

 

What I would like to read into the record — because there is so 

much disinformation coming from the members opposite that 

we have to begin to correct some of the worst of it — I would 

like to read into the record the budget expenditures for the year 

1986 when the members opposite were the government. In the 

year 1986, the members opposite, as government, spent $340.5 

million on Social Services; 220.3 million on Agriculture and 

Food. Social Services was significantly higher. In 1987, the 

members opposite, again being the government: $355.6 million 

was spent on Social Services; 298.4 was spent on Agriculture 

and Food. Again Social Services was significantly higher. 

 

A very interesting year is 1988. In that year 378.4 million was 

spent on Social Services; 165.2 was spent on Agriculture — an 

even greater gap in terms of Social Services being allocated 

more money than the Department of Agriculture and Food. 

And I could go on to read into the record the reality. 

 

The members opposite simply have to work to get their facts 

straight. 



April 2, 1993 Saskatchewan Hansard 841 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — So now we've proved another important 

point. I had to let you hammer on us a little bit in order to get 

you to do that, but I did prove my point. You do know how to 

answer questions. You have the ability to answer questions and 

you have the knowledge to be able to answer questions. You 

have to be trapped though, into thinking that you're being 

politically sneaky and smart here, in order to draw you into the 

debate so that you will actually answer some questions. 

 

So now that we know that you can answer questions, have the 

ability to answer questions and even have the background 

material to give facts and figures, perhaps we should go on to 

some more important questions like: how much money will the 

Tetzlaff brothers be getting out of this one-twelfth share? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, I would remind the 

members opposite again of the procedure that we're involved 

in. The procedure we're involved in is interim supply. It is a 

procedure in which only general aspects of the budget are to be 

discussed, general principles. 

 

When the members opposite decide that they want more detail 

about the budget, such as who allocated money to whom in a 

particular department, then the procedure is that the department 

comes in here, and under the . . . in the process of estimates, 

answers those detailed questions. 

 

And again I would just ask the members opposite — it's going 

to be their choice — do they want the people of Saskatchewan 

to continue to watch the debates or read the debates in the 

legislature, and have us talking all over the map about 

generalities? Because that's what this procedure is about. Or do 

they want details, do they want details about this budget and 

how the money is going to be spent? 

 

And I guess I might ask a further question. What is the 

particular political agenda that is leading the members opposite 

to decide to delay this procedure, spend House time on this 

particular procedure, rather than on the more informative, 

detailed look at the budget? 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to answer 

the minister's question. The answer of course is yes, we do 

want to get some details from you. That's why we're standing 

here. 

 

It's just amazing though, how your mind seemed to go blank 

when I ask a question that might lead, might lead us to some 

conclusions about how you have presented this interim supply 

Bill with a very serious flaw in it. And that very serious flaw 

that I'm going to point out to you is simply this: in order for the 

expediency of not having to face the wrath of the people, you 

simply took an interim supply of one-twelfth of every category 

throughout the entire page here of every department in 

government. One-twelfth will not serve the needs of many 

departments on a particular month. 

 

It is very clear that the bills for one month in some departments 

are maybe even a third of the total annual budget. It depends on 

what you're talking about. If you've let out road contracts for 

the Department of Highways that need to be paid for, they 

might all come due in the month of July. That means that you 

may have to have, in one month, three month's allocation. 

 

You can't possibly guarantee to the people of this province that 

you have allocated the proper amounts of money unless you do 

in fact go into some detail in those areas where there's a good 

chance that you have erred. And I say to you that in the 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation you have erred or you would 

answer our questions. And you know you're in error and that's 

why you're dodging. 

 

You're ducking because you know you're wrong and you know 

the people of Saskatchewan will judge you harshly if you open 

up your mouth and tell the truth here. It's better to be silent than 

to tell the people and let them find out. They'll think that you're 

not doing a good job, but it's better to be quiet and let them 

think that than to remove all doubt, I suppose. 

 

Well let's carry on. Mr. Chairman, I'll try again. In the 

Department of Highways which I was just referring to, Madam 

Minister, you have $124,665,000 allocated. People have told 

me they've seen stakes up around the province on . . . along 

different highways here and there. Other people say that there 

are signs of activity in gravel crushing in different areas and 

those kinds of things. 

 

And what I'm wondering: has the Department of Highways, 

seeing as how they've done some bragging and advertising 

about expanded works, has the Department of Highways 

budget this year significantly higher than last year? And are 

there contracts being let at the present time? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, again I don't know 

whether the member opposite sincerely doesn't understand the 

procedure or whether he's trying to just deceive people with 

respect to the procedure. But again what I'll say is this: this is a 

procedure that has been in place in this province for over 20 

years. 

 

When a budget's been introduced into the legislature but it has 

yet to pass, governments traditionally come forward and 

one-twelfth of the budget is allocated and is allocated for a very 

simple reason — so that the affairs of the government can 

continue to operate; so hospitals can be paid; so schools can be 

paid; all of the necessary things that occur in this province. 

And it has been absolutely standard procedure for a one-twelfth 

allocation across the piece. 

 

And as I say, I'm not sure whether the member opposite 

sincerely doesn't understand that this is the procedure or 

whether he is playing a particular game about it. 



842 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1993 

Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm just totally, totally 

beside myself. I sit here trying to ask questions on behalf of the 

public of this province to try to get some simple answers, some 

simple answers to where millions, millions of dollars are going 

to be spent, and all I get is a lecture about the low grade of my 

intelligence. Well my intelligence isn't on trial here. 

 

Madam Minister, your ability to run the finances of this 

province is on stake here, and it's about time you took your job 

seriously and started to talk to the people of this province about 

where you're spending the money. Because we have had it with 

you. There's no way that this opposition will stand in this 

House and tolerate the way that you treat the public purse. It is 

unconscionable the way you throw away money, thousands of 

dollars here, millions of dollars there, and give no report to 

anybody. 

 

And you have the nerve to sit in this House and criticize the 

way the last government ran things? I can't believe my ears. 

This is totally ridiculous and we'll have no further part of it. I 

tell you, we'll turn this matter over to your House Leader; 

maybe he can run this thing better than you can. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 12:55 p.m. 

 


