




















































Hansard: May 25, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2567 

 May 25, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a new 

petition to present today, so I'll read it to the Assembly. 

 

To the Hon. Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in 

legislature assembled, the petition of the undersigned 

citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 

 

That the Saskatchewan businesses are already facing great 

challenges as a result of government action, including 

increased costs because of increased taxation, utility rate 

increases, increased fees and rates, and changes to The 

Workers' Compensation and Occupational Health and 

Safety Acts; and are facing losses to sales as a result of an 

increased sales tax and a declining population; and 

whereas the proposed changes to The Labour Standards 

Act, Bill 32, and The Trade Union Act, Bill 54, would 

greatly increase the cost to businesses and taxpayers and 

decrease employment opportunities for those who seek to 

work in the province. 

 

Wherefore, your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to delay passage of the 

proposed amendments, Bill 32 and 54, until further 

amendments can be made and until all final regulations 

and policies made pursuant to these Acts are also fully 

detailed as a result of proper consultation with the business 

community. 

 

And as in duty, bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And I'm happy to present these and lay them on the Table for 

the business community today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

Special Committee on Regulations 

 

Clerk: -- The Special Committee on Regulations, chaired by 

Mr. Toth, presents its third report of the committee which is 

hereby tabled and will be printed in today's Votes and 

Proceedings. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, before I 

move that the third report of the Special Committee on 

Regulations be concurred in, I'd like to make a few comments.  

I'd like to let the Assembly know that since its last report on 

June 15, 1993, your committee has held meetings on February 

1, '94 and May 17, '94, and hereby submits its third report. 

Mr. Speaker, your committee examined all regulations and 

amendments to regulations made in 1993 to determine whether 

they should be brought to the attention of the Assembly on any 

of the following grounds: (a) that it imposes a charge on the 

public revenues or prescribes a payment to be made to any 

public authority not specifically provided for by the statute; (b) 

that it is excluded from challenge in the courts; (c) that it makes 

unusual or unexpected use of powers conferred by statute; (d) 

that it purports to have retrospective effect where the parent 

statute confers no express authority so to provide; (e) that it has 

been insufficiently promulgated; and (f) that it is not clear in 

meaning. 

 

Your committee is pleased to note that the outstanding issues 

and concerns pertaining to the following regulations have been 

resolved to your committee's satisfaction and, Mr. Speaker, I 

just bring to your attention regulations of 1991 and 1993 

regulations.  There's a number, and I won't take the time of the 

Assembly to read through them all. 

 

Your committee continues to seek satisfactory resolution to its 

concerns with respect to issues relating to the following 

regulations: 1986, the regulations on mental health; '88 

regulations, water power amendment and real estate brokers; 

and 1990 regulations, '91 regulations, and '93 regulations. 

 

Your committee has reviewed all the by-laws and amendments 

to by-laws of professional associations tabled in the Assembly 

to ensure that each has proper legislative authority and is in the 

public interest. 

 

Your committee is pleased to note that the issues and concerns 

pertaining to the following by-laws have been resolved to your 

committee's satisfaction.  Your committee as well continues to 

seek satisfactory resolution on some matters of concern with 

respect to the following by-laws.  And there are three by-laws 

here that we're following up on and will continue to monitor. 

 

Your committee is pleased to note that the following by-laws 

have been enacted to the satisfaction of the committee and are 

hereby ratified and confirmed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we want to acknowledge the assistance of the 

Clerk's office and legal counsel in our deliberations, and we 

express our gratitude and thanks to these offices.  And I want to 

express my appreciation to all committee members for their due 

diligence and hard work. 

 

And therefore I move, seconded by the member from Prince 

Albert Carlton: 

 

 That the third report of the Special Committee on Regulations 

be concurred in. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to. 



2568 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1994 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure 

this afternoon to introduce to you and through you to members 

of the Assembly, 27 grade 4 students from W.F. Ready School 

in the constituency of Wascana Plains.  They're in your gallery, 

Mr. Speaker, and I'm looking forward to meeting with them on 

the steps for a picture and room 218 for questions and a drink.  

Accompanied by their teacher, Ms. Ready, and chaperons Mrs. 

Klein and Mrs. Sawchyn. 

 

I'd ask all members to join with me in giving them a warm 

welcome to the Legislative Assembly this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'd 

like to introduce to you and through you to members of the 

Assembly today a very special group of people in your gallery.  

They are known as Women of the Dawn because they believe 

that it is time to wake up and deal with today's very serious 

problems. 

 

They have enjoined in membership with some, I think 

approximately 200, other women to battle poverty in their 

Regina neighbourhood.  And these women are working to 

establish a community centre for women and children living in 

poverty. 

 

The Women of the Dawn present today, would you please 

stand and be recognized by members of the Legislative 

Assembly.  Thank you for coming. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce on 

behalf of the member from Nipawin some students and 

chaperons from Shoal Lake School in the Nipawin 

constituency.  Mr. Speaker, along with the 10 students are the 

teacher, Daryl Steward, and chaperons, Lora Wakefield and 

Eric and Laura Lathlin and Steven Head. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like to say a few words in our language. 

 

(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like the House to welcome them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Science Fair Winners 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I'm pleased to 

inform the House about the success that some Saskatchewan 

students achieved at the Canada-wide science fair this past 

weekend in Guelph, Ontario. 

Three Saskatchewan students won honourable mentions; seven 

won bronze; four won silver; and six won various special 

awards.  This amount of success has never before been 

achieved by Saskatchewan students at the fair. 

 

Provincially Saskatchewan did well but it was the region of 

Saskatoon that did exceptionally well.  Three outstanding 

projects by students from Saskatoon region received 

recognition at the Canada-wide science fair.  Ian Thompson, a 

student at Caswell School, won a bronze medal for a display on 

the effects of water on seedling survival and seed germination.  

Justin Potter, a student from Rocanville, also won a bronze 

medal for an exhibit on environmentally-friendly road salt.  

Amit Gupta and Bahrad Sokhansanj, students from Marion 

Graham School, won a silver medal for a computer model of 

the human ear.  A student from my constituency, Mr. Speaker, 

in Bruno, Jason Leuschen, was chosen to be part of team 

Canada along with 25 to 30 other students; Jason experimented 

with artificial intelligence. 

 

These students from Saskatchewan that went to this 

competition all won their regional science fairs before going to 

Guelph.  They were competing against 400 other projects and 

over 500 other students from across Canada.  Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to congratulate the winners and all the other 

contestants from Saskatchewan for their fine showing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, success is an attitude, and our students have again 

proven that Saskatchewan produces top-quality personnel, and 

that this is the attitude and the talent that will carry 

Saskatchewan to a successful future.  Thank you very much. 

 

National Missing Children's Day 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, today -- 

May 25 -- marks the third annual green ribbon of hope 

campaign commemorating National Missing Children's Day.  

I'm proud to take part in the green ribbon campaign and 

commend Child Find Saskatchewan for again participating in 

this national program.  And my heart goes out to those parents 

with missing children. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that was brought home very vividly to us in 

recent months with the Leier family from Sedley and their son 

being missing.  And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, they did locate 

their son; however their son had already been deceased.  But 

they at least knew and know where their son is.  Many people 

and many parents don't have that privilege and continue to 

suffer.  The suffering never ends for these parents, their family, 

and their friends, and our hearts go out to them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is important that despair does not overtake 

hope.  Green is the colour of hope, and the ribbons that we 

wear epitomize the pursuit for missing children and their safe 

return to the arms of their family.  On behalf of the official 

opposition, I wish Child Find Saskatchewan the very best today 

on 



May 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2569 

Missing Children's Day.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Missing Children's Month 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the 

green ribbon of hope represents a missing child in Canada.  It is 

the symbol for National Missing Children's Day and for 

Missing Children's Month.  They bring attention to a tragic fact 

of Canadian life. 

 

In 1993, Mr. Speaker, there were 55,000 cases of missing 

children reported to law enforcement agencies in Canada: 

runaways, parental abductions, and other lost children.  

Fortunately most of these children are recovered quickly and 

without harm.  Unfortunately some are not.  It is for those that 

we observe this day. 

 

It also allows us the opportunity to acknowledge and commend 

the work of Child Find Canada and Child Find Saskatchewan, 

the voluntary organizations that are most closely associated 

with missing children.  We are all familiar with the pictures of 

children placed in public places; that is part of their work.  

Child Find also works closely with law enforcement and other 

agencies throughout the world to find and return missing 

children.  And it gives awareness and education programs 

which alert parents and helps streetproof children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are some facts we would rather hide from.  I 

congratulate Child Find for its work in not letting us forget 

there are children still missing from home.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Visit From Organization of Economic Co-operation and 

Development 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Yesterday we 

were honoured to be introduced to members of the international 

Organization of Economic Co-operation and Development.  

This world-renowned organization has recognized the 

province's efforts in support of children at risk, and we are 

pleased to welcome them. 

 

Today they are in Saskatoon.  Tomorrow the team of Jennifer 

Evans and Josette Combes will visit a unique community in 

Prince Albert which is in the forefront on our attempt to 

improve the lives of children at risk.  The West Flat area is 

grappling with the challenges of low income, transient 

population and very high enrolments at the elementary school 

level. 

 

Tomorrow our visitors from Europe will be shown how, rather 

than submit to these issues as problems of urban living, the 

West Flat Citizens Group has come together with the school 

and with government departments to improve the life of the 

community for both students and parents.  Involving all 

residents in the planning, the West Flat Citizens Group has 

developed a series of initiatives which involve a 

housing program, day care and preschool programs, parent 

support groups, supervision programs and education programs 

for both children and adults. 

 

Sask Housing, the city of Prince Albert, the departments of 

Education, Training, and Employment; Health, and Social 

Services have all been cooperating with the local citizens 

group.  The West Flat Citizens Group and their activities are 

worthy of study by the OECD and they deserve praise and 

congratulation from all of us for being selected for observation 

by this international Organization of Economic Co-operation 

and Development. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 500 

business people from the Saskatoon area gathered last night to 

protest the provincial government's Draconian labour 

legislation.  This kind of event just doesn't happen all that 

often, Mr. Speaker.  In fact one spokesman called this meeting 

a first in history. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are successful business people who pay 

attention to their environment and follow the government very 

closely.  Last night they listened intently to several speakers, 

including a respected labour lawyer who briefed them on the 

contents and the effects of The Labour Standards Act and The 

Trade Union Act.  Think of it, Mr. Speaker: 500 business 

people in one room, fully briefed on the government's labour 

laws, the Labour minister's worst nightmare. 

 

And yes, Mr. Speaker, my question is to the member from 

Churchill Downs.  Mr. Minister, you are quite fond of claiming 

that businesses will fully support your government once they 

understand the contents of your Bills.  Well it appears that once 

again you're wrong, dead wrong.  Mr. Minister, Saskatchewan 

businesses and employers from around this province said no to 

you and to your Bills.  And there are no further excuses . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Does the member have a 

question?  Would the member put his question, please. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker.  There are no further 

excuses for you, none.  Will you now admit that the 

Saskatchewan small-business and employers' community do 

not support your initiatives? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- As a group, I don't think I ever 

claimed that the small-business community did support these 

amendments.  That I think would be an unrealistic expectation, 

particularly given the misinformation which members opposite 

convey and some of the misinformation they had last night.  I'm 

not suggesting anyone was being dishonest, but some of 



2570 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1994 

the comments I heard about the legislation clearly are simply 

not factual. 

 

We continue to believe, Mr. Speaker, that once the Bills are in 

operation, once the effect and the detail of the legislation is 

known, it will be about as controversial next year at this time as 

workers' compensation and occupational health and safety are 

this year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- There were a number of resolutions passed 

last night, and I'd like to read you one: 

 

 Be it resolved that the Saskatchewan government delay 

passage of Bills 32 and 54 until further amendments can be 

made and until all final regulations and policies made 

pursuant to these Acts are fully detailed as a result of proper 

consultation with the business community. 

 

This resolution, Mr. Minister, was passed unanimously.  Mr. 

Minister, very simply: would you adhere to the wishes of the 

business and employer community, the very people who create 

the jobs that you were elected to protect?  Will you delay 

passage of Bill 32 and 54 until all final regulations and policies 

made pursuant to these Acts are fully detailed as a result of 

proper consultation with the business community? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- To delay passage until there is 

complete agreement on something this controversial is a 

prescription for doing nothing, and I think that is probably 

realized by some of the people who put that comment forward. 

That in fact is what they hope to see accomplished. 

 

Some of the people who were there clearly do not support the 

legislation.  It is the role of paid lobbyists to extract every 

concession they can.  And some of the people who were there 

at the meeting last night are doing exactly that; they are 

extracting every conceivable concession.  And that's fair 

enough.  That's their role. 

 

One should keep in mind what they say after the legislation is 

passed.  What they said last year after workers' compensation 

and occupational health and safety were passed is: we didn't do 

too bad a job.  And that's what they said. 

 

One should understand what some of the people who were 

there are doing -- the paid lobbyists.  They're trying to extract 

every conceivable concession they can.  They are countered by 

people on the other side in the labour movement who are doing 

the same thing. 

 

It is our goal, as we have done, to try to define what is the 

policy which is in the best interests of the public of 

Saskatchewan.  That's what we're doing and that's where we 

think we are. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Again to the 

Minister of Labour: Mr. Minister, your reaction to the business 

community has been nothing short of appalling.  Your first 

reaction to their concerns was ridicule.  In feigned disbelief you 

said, show me the proof that these Bills will hurt business and 

job creation.  So the business community responded.  They 

faxed and wrote you directly showing you in no uncertain 

terms how jobs and businesses would be lost in this province.  

Your reaction to this was equally ridiculous.  They must not 

understand the Act, you said. 

 

Well again the business community responded to your 

challenge.  Last night they got a full briefing, discussed the 

issues for nearly three hours, Minister, and then passed a 

unanimous resolution asking you to stop these Bills.  And what 

is your reaction?  Well the reality comes too late, the Labour 

minister says.  It read that in the headlines of the Star-Phoenix.  

Must have come too late. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, that is absolute garbage.  It's another lame 

excuse from a lame minister.  It is never too late to change 

these Bills.  There is absolutely no reason for you to ram these 

Bills through the House.  All you have to do today is stand up 

in your place and withdraw this offensive legislation and bring 

it back next year after you've done the job right. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Far from ramming the legislation 

through, it has been here for several weeks.  It has been called 

whenever the opposition indicated they're interested in talking 

on it.  And I understand if the agenda is followed you'll have an 

opportunity later on today.  This has not been rammed through. 

 

We continue to believe that once members opposite and paid 

lobbyists with whom you work in tandem lose the opportunity 

to make mischief by spreading misinformation, the legislation 

itself will achieve a degree of acceptance.  As have the 

legislation which we passed last year, which you opposed with 

the same vehemence that you opposed this legislation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Speaker, 

it is apparent that the Minister of Labour is on a philosophical 

union agenda, so I will direct my next question to the Minister 

of Economic Development. 

 

Mr. Minister, you were appointed to the cabinet as the 

representative of business and economic development in 

Saskatchewan.  The business community has sent you petitions, 

has faxed you hundreds of letters, has conducted surveys and 

studies which show significant costs and job losses in our 

province and has now passed a unanimous resolution calling on 

you to withdraw these Bills. 



May 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2571 

Isn't it time, Minister, that you admit that you are wrong, admit 

that you went too far, admit that the business community is 

right, back off, pull these Bills?  Mr. Minister, will you do that 

today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I 

have had an opportunity to meet with literally hundreds of 

business people as well as many hundreds of working people as 

we've gone through the process of consultation on the two Bills 

that the member from Maple Creek is mentioning.  And I want 

to say that it's our belief that we have found a balance in the 

Bill in both Labour Standards and The Trade Union Act, and in 

fact the vast majority of the public in Saskatchewan, I think, 

believe that we have reached a balance. 

 

I say again and I want to back up the words of the Minister of 

Labour in the fact that we have not met all the needs of every 

person in Saskatchewan.  It's my feeling that the president of 

the SFL (Saskatchewan Federation of Labour) is not satisfied 

that we've gone far enough in moving the legislation to the side 

of labour.  It's my view that Dale Botting, paid lobbyist for 

business organizations, is not satisfied that we have gone far 

enough in the interest of business. 

 

I understand where the polarized area of the province is at.  

They are not terribly pleased that we have gone far enough in 

either direction.  But I want to say when it comes to people like 

Ross Rigney from Sears Canada, he says that, talking about the 

labour Bills:  I deal with a lot of governments across the 

country and I'd rather take a leap of faith with that government 

-- referring to the government of Saskatchewan -- than a lot of 

others.  That's in reference to the labour Bills here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

To Fred Mitchell, he's quoted as saying there must be ways 

these differences can be resolved.  It can be a win-win situation 

-- not make Saskatchewan look bad, but make it look like a 

place where people want to come, unlike the members opposite 

who want to make Saskatchewan look bad. 

 

That's what you're trying to do here today.  And for what 

purpose?  The purpose is to make yourselves look better, or try 

to look better, in the eyes of the public.  And that will be very, 

very difficult after nine years of waste and mismanagement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Minister, I 

may have bad hearing in one ear but you have a severe case of 

selective hearing in both ears.  Five hundred business people 

speak out against you and you hear only the voice of the one 

who is sympathetic to your government.  The kind of response 

that you give is typical of your entire government -- listen only 

to those that agree with you and disagree with all of the rest.  

Selective democracy at its worst. 

Mr. Minister, it is painfully evident that this government is only 

open to those who support yourselves politically and deaf to all 

of those who oppose your will.  We want you to do the 

economic and job creation that you were elected to do. 

 

Since the Minister of Economic Development, Mr. Speaker, 

doesn't have the guts to stand up to the union leaders and 

defend his own portfolio, I will ask the next question to the 

Deputy Premier.  Mr. Minister, your own polling shows that 

the people are most concerned about the deficits and taxes and 

the economy and job creation.  Hundreds and thousands of tax 

dollars have gone into opinion research, so you know the whole 

story.  Nowhere does the need for more power to the unions 

and more strict labour laws appear.  Nowhere. 

 

It has been demonstrated time and time again that these Bills 

will increase the deficit through higher cost to government and 

encourage disinvestment and job loss and likely higher taxes.  

Will you listen, Mr. Minister?  Will anyone in your government 

listen to the voices of the very people who create the jobs in 

this province?  Will you act?  Will you delay passage of these 

Bills until you have met with the coalition, and embark on a 

real and meaningful consultation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, this is going to take a 

little bit of time; I think there were about 10 questions in the 

question posed by the member.  But I want to say to the 

member opposite, that in dealing with . . . I want to use the 

example of oil and gas companies from Saskatchewan and from 

Alberta.  They clearly indicate that their portfolio for drilling in 

western Canada is weighted largely to Saskatchewan for the 

reason that this is the better place to do business in all of the 

provinces in western Canada. 

 

Why?  Because the regulations in Saskatchewan are much less 

stringent when it comes to hooking up natural gas lines and oil 

lines than they are in Alberta.  And far from what you're 

saying, and you should know better, coming from an area near 

the Alberta border, that the drilling programs in Saskatchewan 

which were up significantly last year are up already this year by 

30 or 40 per cent.  That's not an indication of a lack of 

confidence.  That's not an indication of a lack of confidence. 

 

Ross Rigney of Sears Canada, who established 800 new jobs 

here in Regina last year, says even with, even with the labour 

laws that we're introducing, that this is one of the best 

provinces to do business in. 

 

When you say that there are 500 people opposed to the labour 

Bills, 500 people . . . when there was a campaign across the 

province to get people to come to a rally, there's 500 people 

opposed to the legislation.  I understand that.  And I'm sure if 

the president of the SFL tried to get 500 people out to oppose 

the Bills because they don't go far enough to labour side, you 

could get 500 labour people who didn't support the Bills either. 



2572 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1994 

Our job in government is not to be able to satisfy every interest 

group to a person, nor should that be the interest of government 

nor should it be the interest of the opposition.  Our job is to 

satisfy the needs of the public at large. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question as 

well is directed to the Minister of Labour today.  Mr. Minister, 

on the petitions signed at the business rally last evening there 

were employers -- not paid lobbyists but employers -- from 

Saskatoon, Regina, Canora, Rosthern, and Warman. 

 

These people have a lot better things to do with their time than 

to join protest movements against government legislation.  And 

many are community leaders who do not only operate 

businesses and create jobs, they volunteer their time to make 

their communities better.  And indeed they make generous 

contributions in order to support a better quality of life for 

people in Saskatchewan. 

 

All of these individuals are asking for the opportunity to be 

able to deal with this legislation in a businesslike manner.  

Employers want to see the whole deal.  They want to be able to 

measure the costs.  And they want -- and I believe they deserve 

-- an opportunity to respond to what the final offer looks like 

before it is passed.  What will it cost the province to wait, Mr. 

Minister, to give these employers the time and the information 

that they are asking for? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- To the member who has consistently 

voted against any legislation for working people, let me offer 

you some -- persistently and consistently -- let me offer you 

some statistics on the economy.  There is clearly a recovery 

under way, as my colleague from Regina Elphinstone said.  I 

point out that corporate profits are up by 38 per cent in the two 

years which we've taken office.  Bankruptcies are down by 32 

per cent.  Retail sales are up 6.7 per cent this year, highest in 

the prairie basin. 

 

I don't know whether or not the member from Greystone is 

anxious for some statistics on Liberal provinces, but it is very, 

very, very different.  In Liberal provinces, unemployment in 

Newfoundland -- let's just take them from east to west to make 

it simple for the member from Greystone -- in Newfoundland 

the unemployment rate is at 23 per cent; P.E.I. (Prince Edward 

Island), 22 per cent; Nova Scotia, 15 per cent; New Brunswick, 

15 per cent; Quebec, 13 per cent.  Ah yes, but Quebec has 

progressive labour law.  Perhaps that accounts for that 

relatively low unemployment rate.  Almost all of those are 

twice ours. 

 

Progressive labour legislation, I say to the member from 

Greystone, is an essential part of an economic restructuring.  

The economic restructuring is under way, and this province 

isn't just going to survive, it's going to thrive. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I'm 

sure that people will call in to question your accuracy on what 

it is you've just discussed in this legislature because indeed, I 

voted in favour of occupational health and safety legislation. 

 

And would you like to know, sir, that last evening one of the 

people who have been referred to you as a lobbyist was one 

Mike Carr, who worked on that very legislation and said that 

occupational health and safety was able to be a success because 

of the consensus reached through business and labour, which 

he proclaims is something that is problematic with both of 

these pieces of legislation. 

 

Mr. Minister, one employee in a room, generally represents one 

job.  One employer in a room can represent dozens of jobs.  

Hundreds of employers in a room represent the future of job 

creation, investment, and economic development in this 

province.  The employers who gathered last night, they were 

not asking for money; they weren't asking for hand-outs; they 

were asking for something very simple that you can provide, 

and that is time. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you show some respect for the Saskatchewan 

economy and allow business time to deal with your labour 

legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I am very reluctant to turn this 

question period into something that may sound like a personal 

attack on the member from Greystone, but I find your 

comments offensive. 

 

When you say that each worker represents one job but every 

employer represents many jobs, you therefore suggest that 

employers count for a lot and workers don't count for much.  

That's what you say and that's how you vote in this House. 

 

You have voted against the changes to Workers' Compensation 

Board; you've voted against The Labour Standards Act; and if 

you'd had the opportunity, I have no doubt that the member 

from Greystone would have voted against the abolition of child 

labour in the cotton factories in England.  I have no doubt you'd 

say there what they said there, and cotton won't be produced in 

England if you abolish child labour.  But it still is. 

 

And the economy will go on.  And the economy will thrive 

hereafter, notwithstanding the dire prediction of the member 

from Saskatoon Greystone and her style of thinking, which is a 

good century out of date. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I'm 

not going to be satisfied until you actually answer the question.  

And the employers who spoke last night gave a very loud and 

clear message for all of Saskatchewan. They're asking you not 

to proceed with Bills 32 and 54 until they've seen the 

regulations and the proposed amended legislation together. 



May 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2573 

Mr. Minister, evolution takes time; revolution is faster.  And 

nobody in Saskatchewan wants a revolution.  Business doesn't 

want one; labour doesn't want one; and certainly your 

government does not want one.  Why are you in such a 

desperate hurry to keep up with what everyone sees as a 

political agenda that you would deny the little extra time to 

those people who hold the key to our economic growth?  The 

Premier of this province calls employers job creators . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  Would the member put 

her question, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Little point in asking her to give a 

question -- she had none anyway.  Let me just say to the 

member opposite, you said that evolution takes time; revolution 

is quicker.  Well all I can say about Liberals is that Liberals are 

incapable of any motion at all -- any motion at all. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- This government is not capable of 

motion.  This government is reforming our labour laws because 

we believe that that is an essential part of the economic 

restructuring which is already under way as I pointed out from 

the statistics.  This province is going to be returned to a 

prosperous, a fair, and a compassionate society, 

notwithstanding the best efforts of the members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the Minister of Labour as well. 

 

Mr. Minister, the business people generally don't attend 

meetings like the one that was taking place in Saskatoon last 

night.  The number of business people who took time out of 

their busy schedules to attend last night's rally and to sign a 

petition is very significant.  They felt it was time to stand and 

be counted, Mr. Minister.  Unfortunately there will always be 

those who will not sign a petition for fear of being singled out. 

 

Mr. Minister, there were four MLAs (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly) present at the meeting last night.  Two 

members signed the petition, and two members did not sign the 

petition.  One was the NDP (New Democratic Party) member 

for Saskatoon Wildwood -- did not sign.  And the other 

member was the Liberal member from Saskatoon Greystone -- 

did not sign the petition.  And here we see today her standing 

and asking for help for the business community in this 

province, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, we know that the member 

from Greystone refused to sign the petition when offered 

because she said she did not want to appear to be biased.  I'm 

wondering, Mr. Minister, why did your member not sign the 

petition? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I suspect the member from Saskatoon 

who sits on this side of the House didn't 

sign the petition because she didn't agree with the contents of it 

although I have not talked to her about it. 

 

When I hear of the member from Saskatoon Greystone going to 

the rally and then not signing the petition, I'm reminded of 

something Mr. Douglas said when he sat two seats from here a 

quarter of a century ago.  He was once accused of being a 

Liberal in a hurry.  His response was:  any Liberal in motion 

would look like a Liberal in a hurry.  And that's what I say to 

the member opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- If you go to a rally opposing the 

legislation and you don't want to sign the petition, one might 

ask what you bothered to go for. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Minister of Economic Development.  Mr. Minister, there's a 

lot of people in this province that wish that you would be in a 

little bit of a hurry.  What we've seen here today is a collective 

Alice in Wonderland sort of response from your government.  

You all collectively drop down the rabbit hole and deny that 

there's any problems out there. 

 

Well I remind you, Mr. Minister, that there are 82,000 people 

on welfare in this province.  There are 16,000 fewer jobs than 

when you took office.  You have the lowest number of people 

working in our economy in the last 10 years, and out-migration 

continues to other provinces in Canada.  Now, Mr. Minister of 

Economic Development, who won't stand up for the 500 in 

Saskatoon last night who booed your friend: are you only going 

to make deals with a few big people, or are you going to stand 

up for all of the little people in this province that employ the 

people and take the folks off welfare and make the jobs?  When 

are you going to stand up and defend instead of deny, deny, 

deny, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The words of the member, I say, are 

close to libellous as it would refer to a great business person in 

Saskatchewan, Fred Mitchell.  And I challenge you to go and 

visit Mr. Mitchell and tell him that to his face and make those 

kinds of comments about an important business person in this 

province. 

 

And you can say that about Ross Rigney of Sears Canada who 

says this is a good place to do business.  You can say it about 

Roger Phillips who thinks this is a good place to do business.  

You can say it about Chuck Childers with Potash Corporation 

who told me a week ago that he thinks this is a good place to do 

business.  Or you can say it to Terry Summach from Flexi-Coil 

who denies the words of Dale Botting that he's thinking about 

moving out of the province.  So you can insult people who are 

working with the government all you want -- the chamber of 

commerce who was not involved in the rally last night. 



2574 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1994 

You can rule all those people out.  And you can go through 

your political organization between the Liberal and the 

Conservative, and you can go to the rally and try to get your 

troops going in order to get some politics rolling. 

 

But I say the comments about the Liberal leader, that she 

wouldn't sign the petition, speak volumes about the 

commitment to what is really going on here; that is the act of 

governance and creating legislation that's in the best interests of 

the majority of the people of the province.  That's what this is 

all about and that's what we're doing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 70 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lautermilch that  Bill No. 70 -- An Act 

to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act 

(No. 6)  be now read a second time. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I am 

pleased to take this opportunity to speak to the amendments 

contained in Bill 70, An Act to amend the Legislative 

Assembly and Executive Council Act. 

 

For months we have waited for the government to address the 

deficiencies in this legislation, especially how it outlines the 

duties and the powers of the Board of Internal Economy.  

While this legislation before us for debate amends how that 

body functions, it is far from the panacea in terms of removing 

all the ambiguity that surrounds the issues of, for example, the 

partisan use of communications allowance.  It is still the duty 

of the Board of Internal Economy to lay down the rules 

governing the use of allowances. 

 

Although the Speaker is charged with determining if an 

expense has been correctly made, he makes that determination 

based largely on the guidelines of the Board of Internal 

Economy and how the board has laid them out for him. 

 

I know that this issue alone will provide much interesting 

debate in the upcoming meetings of the Board of Internal 

Economy.  This Bill, Mr. Speaker, is best viewed presently as a 

band-aid solution, and there needs to be considerable debate 

about some of the implications contained in it before it is 

passed. 

 

It is interesting however that the minister, speaking to second 

reading of this Bill, somehow believes that he created an 

independent commission to review all aspects of MLA pay.  In 

fact provision for that 

commission was created by Bill 99, which was passed by the 

previous legislature on November 5, 1987.  All that the current 

government can take credit for is adding one more section, 

which is section 50, for review of the commission. 

 

While this Bill may appear simple and straightforward, there 

are many questions that I know that my caucus and myself need 

answered, and assurances that I want given before I can 

completely support its content. 

 

One question that will need to be answered is, are the 

provisions for a review of MLA expenditures by the Speaker 

retroactive?  We need to know how far back these expenditures 

will be subject to review. 

 

There is no time provision within which the Speaker must 

commence his investigation of an alleged misuse of funds.  

And we are all aware of the cloud that hangs over members of 

this Assembly, both past and present, as a result of inexplicable 

delays in proceedings with investigations into past spending 

practices of individual members and caucuses.  I believe that to 

strengthen the intent of this Bill and to remove potential doubts 

surrounding these kinds of matters in the future, we should put 

some time for commencement of the Speaker's review in the 

legislation. 

 

I'm pleased to see in this Bill, an appeal mechanism whereby a 

member can appeal the Speaker's review outcome to the 

Conflict of Interest Commissioner.  However, I am 

disappointed that the Bill does not then conclude logically to 

state that the opinion of the commissioner shall be final.  

Again, I want some additional clarification from the minister 

and the legislation drafting officials about this section. 

 

(1415) 

 

I do know, Mr. Speaker, that there should be members of this 

legislature who are indeed interested in, and committed to, 

seeing these changes.  Obviously it's not something they would 

like to participate in in any thoughtful manner since they 

continue to do what they generally do, and that's not listen. 

 

As I understand the amendments before us, the Speaker can 

order a member to repay an allowance.  But the way this 

section is drafted makes it seem that we're only dealing with 

current sitting members.  What is the authority of the Speaker 

or the commissioner in retrieving monies paid to a member if 

the member no longer exists in office? 

 

There are several other similar sections which I do look 

forward to reviewing in detail with the minister and the Leader 

of the Official Opposition.  Perhaps my concerns may sound 

like semantics, but in legislation, semantics can mean a great 

deal.  I believe that there are some real problem areas that could 

arise if we do not specify as succinctly as possible our 

intentions regarding the scope and the intent of this Bill, or any 

other for that matter, before we rush to pass it. 



May 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2575 

We waited 72 days, Mr. Speaker -- 72 days of this session -- for 

the government to produce this long-awaited Bill, so a few 

more hours of debate is not too much to ask when we are 

dealing with an issue that is so critical to each of us.  Again I 

do look forward to meeting with representatives of the other 

two parties to address several minor deficiencies in this Bill 

and I hope that we can bring to Committee of the Whole our 

efforts as a package of unanimous House amendments. 

 

Until we can have our meeting and do so, I will adjourn debate 

at this time. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Finance 

Vote 18 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  What I 

want to do with you today, Madam Minister, is go back to 

March 2 in Hansard when I asked you some questions at that 

time in question period regarding the federal budget. 

 

And the issue that we were discussing was the changes 

contemplated in section 80 dealing with write-downs, and not 

the farm bankruptcy that you were referring to at that time 

which I believe was section 79.  It is section 80 that is being 

contemplated as being changed, and some of the potential 

impact that that could have on the farmers of Saskatchewan in 

particular.  And if it was section 79 then we would have the 

same concern for small business. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, at that time I raised the potential of 

problems for farmers and businesses that were experiencing 

financial difficulties, not in bankruptcy situations, but still 

having to face the reality of coping with their financial stress.  

And at the time, Madam Minister, it appeared to us that 

because of the federal Liberal budget, there was the potential in 

the ways and means supplementary to the Income Tax Act that 

there would be changes there that would consider any 

write-downs that farmers might be able to negotiate with their 

lenders, be it FCC (Farm Credit Corporation), be it ACS 

(Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan), be it a 

credit union, be it a bank -- whatever lending institution it may 

be -- that that particular write-down would now have the 

potential of being perceived as income and therefore being 

taxable. 

 

And I think at that stage, Madam Minister, you were telling me 

that it was premature at that time because no change had yet 

been implemented and that they were only being contemplated 

and that the federal minister had given you his assurance that if 

there was any change of any significance whatsoever, you 

would be forthrightly apprised thereof. 

 

And so I want to ask you now, Madam Minister, is 

there the potential for this damaging legislation and these 

damaging changes to come to fruition so that our hard-pressed 

businesses and farming enterprises could see their future in 

jeopardy because they would then be forced to borrow money 

to pay income tax on that portion of that write-down that would 

be affecting them.  Could you respond to that at this time, 

Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite:  yes, I recall the questions being asked in the House 

and I recall the responses.  I think what I was saying at the time 

is if there was a tax change which would have significant 

implications for Saskatchewan, it was my view that the federal 

Finance minister would have informed us of those changes 

because he did call all Finance ministers hours before he 

released the budget, and told us of the tax changes.  This one 

wasn't flagged at that time.  It doesn't mean though that there 

isn't a possibility of a change, that is not intended to affect 

farmers, in fact having that result. 

 

So after you flagged the issue with me in the House -- and I 

appreciate the fact that you did that -- we have been in touch 

with the federal Department of Finance; we have raised the 

concern with them.  They have not drafted, at least as of our 

last discussions with them, they had not drafted the final 

legislation. 

 

So they were not aware of the issue from the point of view of 

Saskatchewan, so we've raised the concern.  We've actually 

gone so far as to have a meeting between officials on that issue, 

and we will continue to ensure that the legislation doesn't even 

inadvertently -- even if it's intention was to not effect farmers -- 

it doesn't even inadvertently have a negative impact. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- As of what date is that correspondence that 

you're talking about, Madam Minister?  Because on March 3 

you told me in one of your responses that legislation has to be 

drafted yet and that the explanatory notes for the legislation 

have to be approved.  So you were saying then that on March 3 

it was at a preliminary stage.  The response that you got from 

the minister now, and his department, was subsequent to this 

date?  What was the date of that correspondence? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

member's question, we have not got formal correspondence of 

recent date.  The most recent discussions were . . . our officials 

actually went to Ottawa and sat down with the Finance 

officials. 

 

So as I say, what we're doing is we're keeping on top of it.  We 

have no reason to believe that this legislation is necessarily 

going to proceed this session.  When you say it was at a 

preliminary stage, you know what you're saying -- if it was at a 

preliminary stage in March, wouldn't it be at a pretty advanced 

stage right now? 

 

Unfortunately, one of the problems we're having with the 

federal government is that there are changes that 



2576 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1994 

we want made, like changes to help us enforce the tobacco 

legislation, which we believe are not going this session.  So 

there will be a lot of legislation that will not go this session and 

it doesn't necessarily mean that this will be proceeded with this 

session. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well I appreciate that answer, Madam 

Minister.  And I appreciate your concern and your commitment 

that you'll continue to look out for Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

Could you confirm that whatever income tax becomes payable 

on this let down, or write-down, pardon me, that in fact the 

Government of Saskatchewan would then also reap the benefits 

of that type of tax, according to your percentage, which is 

what? -- 52 per cent now of the federal tax, that that individual 

then also would be paying a provincial tax? 

 

And I appreciate the concern that you're showing me now, but 

if that is the case, that the Saskatchewan government would 

then reap the benefit -- and I'm saying "if", and you can 

confirm whether or not that is the case -- would you be then 

prepared to bite the bullet as far as the Saskatchewan 

legislation and the income tax department would be concerned, 

that you would bite the bullet and show leadership to the 

federal government by not then ascribing that tax to have to be 

paid by the individual concerned, at least to the provincial 

government? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 

raises an important point.  The way the tax system is structured 

right now, we would benefit from the change. Because we feel, 

from what we've seen so far, the number of people affected 

would be very small, the amount that we would benefit would 

be small.  But the member's perfectly correct, we would 

benefit. 

 

And the member is perfectly correct in his sort of assumption 

that we would have no flexibility to opt out of benefiting; that 

is, you can't say to the federal government, even though you've 

made this tax change, we don't want it to affect our share of the 

tax, which brings me to a very important point. 

 

One of the things we keep saying, along with the other western 

provinces, to the federal government, is we want more 

flexibility with respect to our tax system.  When we talk about 

tax reform, what we keep saying is we want the flexibility to 

make those sorts of choices within Saskatchewan; just because 

the federal government thinks that a certain type of tax is an 

appropriate tax, we want the freedom to say no, we don't want 

that to be a deduction in Saskatchewan, or we do want this to 

be a credit in Saskatchewan.  Because the way the system is 

structured now, we don't have that flexibility.  To me, a part of 

tax reform, a key part, is to get that flexibility from the federal 

government. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Of course, Madam Minister, the flexibility 

would only be appropriate and desirable if it was for the better 

good of the people of this province. 

In terms of the flexibility that you request, I can see advantages 

in it, and I can see why you would want that.  But there would 

be mechanisms in place, surely, where you could collect the 

tax, turn around and rebate it to the people, and so on.  So there 

would be mechanisms that you could employ, so that these 

farmers and businesses would not find themselves out of house 

and home simply because of some rule in Ottawa. 

 

So it would seem to me, Madam Minister, that if your heart 

was in the right place, mechanisms could be found in order to 

accomplish that goal.  And heaven knows I'm not advocating 

more of a bureaucracy and so on in order to accomplish that, 

but there would be a way and I'd just like to have your reaction 

to that. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is 

perfectly correct in saying you could, if you were totally 

determined and you put all these people to work on it, they 

could find a way around it.  But you're also correct when you 

say, what a bureaucracy and how cumbersome it could be to do 

that.  So our first approach here and so far . . . I mean I think 

what you do in politics is you try the first line of defence and if 

that doesn't work you move to the second. 

 

We still feel confident on the first line.  That is, the legislation 

is not drafted yet, it's not in place, we have made our point 

persistently, we believe that they've heard.  It's only when we 

actually are informed that it is being drafted, the legislation is 

being drafted, and there is a problem, then we'd move to stage 

2. 

 

(1430) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

the finance critic wasn't able to be here today to finish off your 

estimates, but I had a few questions anyway that I wanted to 

ask so this worked out very nicely. 

 

Recently we've had a House of Commons committee travelling 

around the country soliciting opinion on how Canadians should 

be taxed.  And I think this is with a view to the Liberals 

keeping their promise about replacing the GST (goods and 

service tax) and how we go to more fair taxation.  I didn't have 

the opportunity to appear before the committee because of 

other commitments. 

 

But my understanding of the recent reports of the committee is 

that they are recommending Canada-wide harmonization, that 

they are talking about base-broadening, and reducing some 

rates, but not throwing out the GST -- and this was an all-party 

effort with input from all around Canada. And I would like 

comments from you on whether . . . I don't know if you 

attended or not and what submissions the provincial 

government made in regards to this commons committee, and 

what your views are of the recommendation that they've made 

back to the House of Parliament. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the 



May 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2577 

member opposite, well you used to be the critic so it's good to 

be able to have one last exchange here, so there's no problem 

with you rather than the member from Morse. 

 

We've been talking to a lot of provinces with respect to the 

GST.  And what they're saying is something pretty simple.  The 

Liberals promised to eliminate the GST and that's what we 

expect.  We expect the GST to be eliminated.  We do not 

expect it to be quick-fixed, oh well we kind of meant eliminate, 

but we didn't mean eliminate. 

 

And the provinces are not in a frame of mind to engage in 

something that is not above-board; that is, to engage in 

something whereby we would be assisting the federal 

government to renege on an election promise to the Canadian 

people.  They said the GST would be eliminated; we're waiting 

to see how they're going to proceed.  So that's the first point. 

 

And we've had discussions with a number of other provinces 

and there's a general feeling to that effect, no matter what the 

province happens to believe about the issue of harmonization.  

That is, some provinces who would have in the past supported 

harmonization still feel that there is an issue of principle here.  

When the election was run on the basis of elimination of the 

GST, that's what the federal government should be delivering. 

 

The second point which this government believes -- and again 

we've consulted with other governments which share our view 

-- is we have many problems in the tax system.  When I was 

discussing the issue of farm income tax with your colleague, 

what we were saying there as a government is we need a 

different tax system, we need more flexibility as provinces. 

 

So once again, we're not prepared to just take one little part of 

the tax system, which is the sales tax, and cooperate in fixing 

that without asking more general questions about the whole tax 

system and how it needs to be reformed. 

 

The third thing I would say is about the process.  And the 

process for the GST is just like the other processes that the 

Liberals have established -- they're unilateral.  They invite us to 

come and to talk about the tax change that they want.  They 

have no provincial participation in deciding what other tax 

changes are required to make the system fairer and to make it 

more effective. 

 

And again, the western premiers have taken a position on other 

changes that they want to see.  One change they want is the one 

I was mentioning to your colleague -- they want more 

flexibility with respect to the income tax system.  The other 

change that we all agree in western Canada we want is changes 

with respect to the collection of taxes, because it's 

cumbersome, it's expensive, and it doesn't work. 

 

So from the point of view of the Government of Saskatchewan 

and other governments, it's an issue of principle, it's an issue of 

proper consultation, and it's 

an issue of broader tax reform. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, the Liberals wouldn't be the 

first political party that made a stupid election promise.  I mean 

for you to stand here and say the reason that we're not doing 

anything is we're waiting for the Liberals to come through on a 

stupid election promise isn't good enough.  I thought the whole 

process behind politics, as you refer to it, whether it's in the 

House of Commons or here or anywhere else, is problem 

solving. 

 

Now we'll have our political biases certainly and we'll have our 

philosophical biases.  But I thought . . . and I didn't have the 

opportunity to appear, and for that I am sorry because it would 

have been interesting to be part of that process -- but everything 

I've been able to read on that committee is that they genuinely 

started to do some problem solving on an all-party basis.  And 

they went across and they listened to hundreds of people across 

Canada, and at the end of that process, it came back that 

Canada has more room to broaden its tax base that way, in a 

more fair way, than they do any other way. 

 

Now if you can tell me that the newspaper reports and the 

things coming out of the House of Commons are wrong, then 

tell me that.  But that was the recommendation.  And I noticed 

the Liberals at their recent convention saying the majority of 

them wished to lower the rates, but broaden the base.  And that 

seems to be a universal feeling across Canada. 

 

So how do you tell me that your government . . . and I'd like 

you to tell me what other governments you talk about when you 

say that your government in conjunction with others -- I hope 

it's just not Harcourt and Rae -- don't agree with this process. 

 

If there's something here that the public should know about that 

our provincial premiers and provincial governments are up to 

on the taxation side, please enlighten us.  Because I don't think 

the population in this province, who are as concerned about fair 

taxation as anywhere else in Canada . . . and certainly, the 

economic challenges that we have, given new labour 

legislation, given some other things that are going to impact on 

the cost of doing business in this province, want to understand 

that taxation will be applied universally across Canada in a fair 

way.  Because we are in a global market today, and how 

Alberta functions tax-wise, how Manitoba functions tax-wise, 

how the United States functions tax 

_wise is very important on how we survive. 

 

And business people here are no different than they are 

anywhere else in Canada.  Why would we lower provincial 

trade barriers if it was not to reach some type of a consensus 

Canada-wide how we can be better off economically, we can be 

more fair, and that the average citizen knows that he is also 

being treated fairly by the system? 

 

Now I thought that that type of a process was a good one.  

You're telling me that it's fundamentally flawed because the 

Liberals made a stupid election promise. 



2578 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1994 

Well that's not good enough.  I think we should be able to take 

this discussion a little bit further down the road.  You've had 

three years nearly now in government.  You denied 

harmonization back in 1991 and yet a lot of people across 

Canada believe that that is the proper process to go by. 

 

Tell me why the submissions that were made to that commons 

committee, which in the end basically came to that conclusion, 

were wrong. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite.  What I said were three things.  I said . . . and I will 

mention the government that is most adamant about, it's an 

election promise, and we expect it to be lived up to. 

 

And the member opposite is going to be a little bit surprised 

when he finds out which government is taking that position, 

because I've checked with my officials and it's a public 

position.  So I'll get into that in a minute. 

 

But the other two points I made was the process.  The federal 

government says, here's the question we're asking, here's the 

time frame, here's where we're going to go, and here's who 

we're going to open the doors to.  It's their process, not ours; 

but the key point is tax reform. 

 

What they have said is you've got a whole pie, a whole tax pie 

-- different issues in the tax system that different groups bring 

up.  You have one going to the Supreme Court right now about 

the taxation of child benefit programs or maintenance 

programs.  So you've got a whole range of taxation issues and 

different groups concerned about different parts of the pie. 

 

But they said, our process is this: we're going to take this one 

little, narrow piece out of the pie.  That's tax reform for us, this 

one narrow piece.  And we're going to go across Canada and 

we're not going to be surprised because we don't get a lot of 

people beyond business groups out, because they're only 

talking about the one narrow piece of the pie.  We said, hold 

on; this is a new government in Ottawa, a new mandate.  What 

we want is the whole pie talked about.  We want other groups 

to have their chance to have their say. 

 

Now with respect to the politics of it, when we consult with 

other governments, this is obviously confidential, and I don't 

want to phone another Finance minister and then have the 

minister find out two weeks later I conveyed our private 

conversation to the legislature.  But I will tell you, because it is 

a public opinion, this is a publicly noted statement or position, 

the government that is most adamant about the GST being 

eliminated, because it's a tax that shouldn't be here and because 

the Government of Canada promised, the present Government 

of Canada promised in the last election to eliminate it -- it's not 

Mike Harcourt; it's not Bob Rae -- it's the Tory government in 

Alberta.  Ralph Klein has said the GST is 

to be eliminated.  That's our position. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well that doesn't surprise anyone, Madam 

Minister.  I mean Alberta has been the only tax-free jurisdiction 

in this country probably since the First World War.  I mean 

that's the way they have operated because they had resource 

revenue that they chose to use in lieu of taxation. 

 

So the fact that Albertans or an Alberta premier would say we 

don't like sales tax is no great mystery to anyone in this 

country.  No great mystery, Madam Minister.  The simple fact 

is that the province of Alberta, whether they like it or not, do 

understand that worldwide taxation has changed.  And we only 

have to look at our major competitors around the world and see 

where they derive most of their taxation from.  And they have 

backed off personal income tax and they have gone on to 

broad-based consumption taxation.  And that's all over the 

place, and you and I both know it. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, it is also no surprise that business 

people would show up.  Because I don't know of a government 

in this province or in this country that hasn't used business as 

the vehicle to collect the tax.  So naturally they show up 

because they're the people that are at the front end.  They're on 

the sharp end of the stick. 

 

Government brings in the GST; who collects the GST?  The 

business people do.  You put an extra point on your sales tax; 

who collects it, Madam Minister?  The business people collect 

it.  So there's no great mystery there that they would be 

concerned, because they're the people that always take the 

brunt of government decisions.  Every time you do something, 

there's a business person out there that has to suck it up and 

implement your policy.  It's not the bureaucrats in the 

Department of Finance that go out and deal with the public on a 

daily base, it's business people. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, if business people, the people that have 

to collect your taxes and collect the Prime Minister's taxes, 

show up to the hearings and come forward with a 

recommendation, I would say that you should listen to it.  

Because they're the people that have to do your dirty work for 

you all the time.  They're the people that collect the taxes. 

 

So, Madam Minister, once again could you tell me and the 

House and the people in the province of Saskatchewan where 

the provinces are coming from then on fair taxation.  If there 

has been discussions, you don't have to name them 

individually, but give us an idea.  If you disagree 

fundamentally with the House of Commons committee 

recommendations, give us an idea of what the counter-proposal 

is that takes in more of the pie on fair taxation, rather than 

harmonizing sales taxes across Canada under one 

administration at a lower rate. 

 

If there is some other fair taxation agenda, why wouldn't you 

want to share it with this House so that people in this province, 

who are some of the highest-taxed citizens in our country, 

would have an 



May 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2579 

idea about where the government is going, what types of 

regimes that they're going to face in the future, what portion of 

their personal income tax they may be able to use for other 

things. 

 

If there is another agenda, as you say, that takes in more of the 

pie than this narrow wedge which you claim that the commons 

committee was selecting, then I think it's appropriate that we 

discuss it in your estimates because you are the minister who 

discusses these things with other ministers across Canada, and 

discusses fair taxation. 

 

And I have heard nothing out of your government over the last 

three years except criticism.  You criticized harmonization in 

'91; you criticize the Liberal government now; you've criticized 

the commons committee.  But at the end of the day we have no 

idea where you, Finance minister in the New Democratic 

Government of Saskatchewan, are coming down on fair 

taxation. 

 

Give us your view -- and you obviously tell me you have allies 

across Canada for your view -- why don't we put it on the table 

here and we'll see how it works with the public?  This is the 

proper forum. 

 

(1445) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, member opposite, it 

has been on the table -- it has been on the table in written form, 

it has been on the table verbally, if you turn on TV it has been 

on the table. 

 

Let me tell you, all you had to do was read the western 

premiers' report.  The one from the meeting in Alberta, it was 

in there, great section, very clear what we wanted, why we 

wanted it; and look at what was said in Gimli because it was 

reaffirmed in Gimli.  So it is very clear what the position is of 

these four, actually six, governments in Canada. 

 

And the position is that we want a broad . . . we want broader 

changes in the tax system rather than just merely addressing 

one part of the pie; and we're quite specific about what we 

want.  We want something called tax on taxable income, which 

means that you're given more flexibility within the income tax 

system to decide what is a tax credit, what is a deduction.  

People know when they fill out their income tax form that the 

province only becomes a factor in their income tax form when 

they get to the very end and they decide how much tax you owe 

and then the province just takes a certain percentage of the 

federal tax owed. 

 

We want more flexibility to decide in Saskatchewan these sorts 

of business deductions should not be eligible deductions any 

more; we don't have that flexibility.  Or that we would like to 

have this sort of tax credit for low income people.  We want to 

be able to do these things in an easy way, not a cumbersome 

way. 

 

And so this is clear, it's on the record; it has been on the record 

for months, and it's been on the record with 

respect to the federal government.  So we want those sorts of 

changes. 

 

We also want changes in the collection and administration of 

taxes.  And again we've been very clear, what we want -- and 

we have support from the other western and northern 

governments -- we want a single tax collection agency to 

collect all taxes on behalf of both jurisdictions -- federal, 

provincial. 

 

Now what we want the federal government to do is to address 

these sorts of issues as well as just the issue of GST. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well once again, Madam Minister, you aren't 

saying anything here that hasn't been said by western provincial 

governments for years and years and years.  I mean one of the 

inducements about harmonization was that you simplified the 

collection procedure, that you got rid of some of the costs, 

because the alternative that you talk about is collecting your 

own tax like Quebec does.  And there's always been a price tag 

attached to that. 

 

So I guess you could run off . . . and the last figures I saw were 

-- if Saskatchewan and Alberta, for instance, went together and 

collected all of the taxes and remitted a portion back to the 

federal government -- was in excess of $120 million a year.  

Now that's a lot of money.  That's taxpayers' money that you 

presently don't spend because the federal government does that 

on your behalf, and then they remit to you. 

 

So what you talk about here in business deductions means that 

you would have to move to that model.  Perhaps western 

Canada would have to move to that model.  But there is a cost 

attached to it.  And the way you present this thing and the way 

it was presented by the western premiers at Gimli was that 

there was some kind of freebie here for the taxpayer.  And you 

and I both know that that's not true.  At the end of the day, the 

administration as you move into those areas will be very, very 

significant. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, are you saying that that's the way you 

want to go, that you're going to do all of the collections and 

you're going to assume all of the costs?  If that's the case, I'd 

like you to put it on the record. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, no.  What we are supporting is this.  We all support 

the idea . . . two things about the tax system.  It has to be a fair 

system, and it has to be a simple, easy to administer system.  

What we're saying is that we have a complicated system now.  

We have provincial governments collecting tax, provincial 

governments collecting sales taxes.  We have federal 

governments collecting sales taxes.  We have the federal 

government collecting the income tax.  What we're saying is 

we want, as governments, provincial and federal, one 

independent agency supported by both levels of government 

which would collect all taxes on behalf of all governments, 

federal and provincial. 



2580 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1994 

The advantages would be cost; be less costly and for business 

people less burdensome, less administratively complex.  So 

that's what we mean there. 

 

But in a way, this is all premature because we have no idea 

what the commons committee is going to report.  We have not 

seen the report.  I think we have been absolutely open and up 

front with the people of Saskatchewan in terms of what our 

positions are to date, what our thinking is, what other 

governments we're consulting with -- working very closely 

with the other western and northern governments particularly.  

And we will continue to do that. 

 

And I will make another further commitment.  We believe that 

the people of Saskatchewan need to be consulted about how 

their tax system should look. We hope the federal government 

is going to do that consultation, not just about one little narrow 

piece of the pie, but about the whole pie.  But if they don't, we 

certainly will ask them.  So there will be lots of opportunities 

for input and discussion. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I certainly hope so, Madam Minister.  

Your record for consultation in other areas has been rather 

dismal.  And we get a taste of that in this House each and every 

day. And 500 of the folks that have to collect your taxes 

showed up in Saskatoon last night, your home community, to 

tell you that they don't like the way your government consults. 

 

So if we're going to go through a consultation process on the 

issue of taxation in this province, I hope you don't 

automatically discount, as you seem to do, the business 

community for one -- who probably will have to collect a good 

portion of taxes that you want -- as being irrelevant, that they 

are too narrow in focus. 

 

And I'll be very surprised, Madam Minister, of the 82,000 

people on welfare in this province, if very many of them show 

up to your tax hearings.  And the same with the thousands of 

people on UIC (Unemployment Insurance Commission) and 

seniors, low income seniors.  There won't be many of them 

show up to your hearings. 

 

Simple fact is that taxation, even though it affects us all, affects 

some of us far more than others.  And the responsibility of 

government is being able to discern what is the best and fairest 

system in an open manner.  So let's hold these consultations 

and see what comes out of it. 

 

But you know what?  At the end of the day, I'd be willing to 

wager with you here, if the process isn't politically 

manipulated, that you will get basically the same kind of 

feeling that the House of Commons committee got. Because 

people travel, people understand what's going on around North 

America and around the world, and they see how other areas 

who compete with us tax.  And those views are going to get 

stronger and stronger. 

So if we can have an open process, no manipulation and honest 

consultation, then I believe you'll get the same message.  And 

I'd be willing to participate in that, and stake a good part of 

what I believe in on that process.  And I hope you'd do the 

same. 

 

Madam Minister, I have here five pages of questions from 

people around the province of Saskatchewan who have written 

in to our "Mr. Premier I want to know . . ."  And rather than 

enter them all into verbatim, what I would like from you is a 

commitment that you will endeavour to, if I provide you with 

this list, to answer each one of these individuals in writing 

because I think if taxpayers around this province are concerned 

enough to write in a question to the Premier on taxation issues, 

that they deserve an answer. 

 

And they're general economic in some cases, and here's an 

example.  I'll use this one to give you a flavour.  This is from a 

Henry Denesik of Wynyard.  And he says, Mr. Premier I want 

to know . . . wants to know why he has to pay income tax on 

medical disability pension when welfare recipients do not.  

They're that flavour of question, and I think they'd appreciate 

an answer back from you.  Can I have that commitment? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, yes, you certainly can have that commitment.  And I 

think that process actually worked quite well.  I thought some 

of the best questions we had in question period were the ones 

that came from the average person, so I'd be very pleased to 

answer those questions. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 18 agreed to. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Finance 

Servicing the Public Debt 

Government Share 

Vote 12 

 

The Chair: -- There is no vote required but it is available for 

questions or comments. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I just see the officials leaving, and I 

want to have the opportunity to thank them on behalf of certain 

people and they're already gone. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- No, they're still there; they're back there. 

 

The Chair: -- You can thank them on the record. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Okay, I would like to do that, Mr. Chairman.  

On behalf of the member from Morse, the Finance critic, and 

myself, I appreciate the role the officials played today and the 

minister through this series of estimates.  And it's not an easy 

job and we do appreciate the efforts and the answers that were 

made. 



May 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2581 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Yes, I will undertake to thank the 

officials for the member opposite.  And I thank the member 

opposite for the questions. 

 

Item 1 -- authorized by law. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Debt Redemption, Sinking Fund 

and Interest Payments 

Votes 175, 176, 177 

 

Items 1 to 3 inclusive -- authorized by law. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

(1500) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 32 -- An Act to amend The Labour Standards Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, 

Minister, here we are again discussing Bill 32 and today I think 

we can have probably the most meaningful approach to the 

Bill.  We've now had an opportunity for some time to go by so 

that folks in the community have become aware of not only the 

Bill but its contents, and of course they've had now time to 

discuss what the implications and ramifications of the Bill will 

be to different segments in our society and to society as a 

whole. 

 

Obviously most folks who are listening today will be aware of 

the fact that we did have the business rally in Saskatoon last 

night, the reason for which we had I think all . . . let this Bill sit 

for a just a little while to find out how the folks really felt about 

it.  But now the jury is in and the verdict is that the people in 

the business world are not happy.  They express that 

unhappiness through a letter to yourself which I think would be 

proper to put on the record so that the rest of the folks of the 

province will know that we have paid some attention to it. 

 

So I'm going to quote from the letter that was sent to yourself, a 

copy of which was thankfully sent over to our office as well.  

And after we get through this we will ask you some specific 

questions with regards to the opinions that were expressed at 

the major rally held last night. 

 

This letter begins by addressing the Minister of Labour with his 

surname and goes on to say: 

 

 Last night in Saskatoon an assembly of approximately 550 

business owners, taxpayers, and their employees, gathered 

together to express their ongoing concerns over Bill 32 and 

54, and the government's consultation process.  As a result of 

this meeting we are enclosing a petition which calls upon the 

Saskatchewan government to delay passage of this legislation 

until further amendments can be made and until all final 

regulations and policies made pursuant to these Acts are also 

fully detailed as a result of proper consultation with the 

business community. 

 

 We are also enclosing the detailed wording of three 

resolutions which were passed by this very large, 

unprecedented assembly of business groups which came 

together from all corners of the province.  Resolution no. 1 

and 3 were passed unanimously.  Resolution no. 2 was 

carried with the support of over 500 people and only one vote 

against.  Please give these resolutions and petition your most 

serious consideration. 

 

 The Saskatchewan business coalition is also still awaiting a 

reply to our request to meet with the Premier and his senior 

cabinet ministers as per our joint letter of May 13, 1994.  

Once again, we respectfully suggest that this unprecedented 

unity should merit a meeting. 

 

And it is signed, sincerely, Dale Botting, the executive director 

of the prairie region of the Canadian Federation of Independent 

Business and spokesman, Saskatchewan business coalition. 

 

Minister, the obvious thing that we have to note from the letter 

is the resolution and the unanimity of this group of people that 

gathered together last night.  I think that you would recognize 

the fact that business people,  by their very nature, are 

competitive.  They are in business, many of them, trying to sell 

product in competition with other businessmen.  Much of the 

atmosphere of business itself by its very nature is adversarial.  

And as a result of that most business people find themselves 

reluctant to join forces with other businessmen on any subject, 

because usually they're competing against one another to try to 

get a share of the market or a share of the potential profits 

within the province or without. 

 

So to see that number of people and that number of businesses, 

many of them in competition with one another, coming 

together to join as a force to bring to your attention their needs, 

that is extremely significant, Minister -- extremely significant.  

It's not like a union leader saying to the union troops, we all 

have to go and storm the legislature and stand on the steps, and 

if you don't, we're going to keep track of you. 

 

See, there's no threats, there's no intimidations.  These business 

people came there of their own free will with no potential 

recourse being taken by anyone if they didn't show up.  There 

was no hammer over their head.  This is not like a meeting of 

union people where you're told if you don't show up, we'll have 

you watched. 

 

And we know that happens.  And I know the union people 

won't like my making this direct comparison.  But the truth is 

the truth and they must recognize that they use the heavy 

hammer sometimes.  And I want specifically for the media to 

understand that business 



2582 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1994 

people did not have this hammer over their head of any kind of 

pressure to come, except the knowledge that if they didn't come 

and join together some very serious things were going to 

happen to them as a result of provincial legislation that is about 

to be passed in this Assembly. 

 

They did that, united, only because they know very well that 

their very existences depends on getting changes that will allow 

them to survive in what one person there described as the need 

to compete in a global market. 

 

We are no longer an island in the middle of a land-locked 

province and a land-locked continent.  We are no longer an 

island unto ourselves.  We are no longer able in this world of 

fast transportation and fast communications to be able to live in 

a shell or a box or whatever metaphor might properly apply.  

That is what the people there were saying.  We now have to 

compete on a world market and we have to compete on a level 

playing-field.  Very simply, what they're asking you for is that 

field to be levelled once again; a field that you, metaphorically, 

have put a big hill in and the business community can't climb 

over it. 

 

They see that obstruction as so terrible to the possibility of 

maintaining their businesses that they were able to bring their 

employees out to support them, many of them.  That's 

significant.  The fact that the employees were willing to join 

with their employers to come to a rally tells me, Minister, that 

you'd better pay attention because both sides of the spectrum 

are now united in an attempt to get you, not to change the 

legislation altogether, but to get you to recognize that you've 

gone too far in putting the balance of this legislation into place.  

You've got the balance out of tune with the rest of the world 

around us. 

 

I didn't hear anybody say, scrap the legislation.  I only heard 

people say, delay it, put it off, rework it, do it better.  I did not 

hear anybody say, tear it up and burn it.  Those words were not 

used last night -- I never heard that.  What I did hear was some 

very common-sense approaches. 

 

I heard one man by the name of Mitchell, who identified 

himself at the meeting, defend some of the government's 

action.  Realistically, Minister, the man did not defend your 

legislation.  He got up to speak against, he got up to speak 

against . . . if you don't mind me saying so, Minister, because 

you weren't there so you couldn't know what he said for sure.  

He did not support you. 

 

He defended the position that business should not wash their 

dirty linen in public.  He simply thought that the process and 

the mechanism used by the coalition of businesses was too 

dramatic.  He was not in favour of the legislation by the words 

that he said, but he also didn't say that he was totally against it.   

What he did say was, that we ought to sit down and work 

harder behind closed doors.  Quite frankly I disagree with his 

approach.  I think the time to work behind closed doors is long 

gone -- it's too late for 

that. 

 

We do have to, as the young man that followed him said, we do 

have to get out in the public with this.  It's too important an 

issue to do behind closed doors.  We have to do it in public and 

we have to clean it up. 

 

So, Minister, we've had a lot of opinions expressed.  I quite 

frankly believe that even the minister from Rosemont would 

agree, or the member from Rosemont would agree, that the 

legislation has met with far more opposition than anyone had 

ever anticipated.  The reason being that people who attended 

the rally have employed some of the best and brilliant legal 

minds around to do a research analysis of the legislation and 

the potential impact it will have.  A very well-noted lawyer 

who works with labour relations got up and explained what the 

effects of the legislation will be. 

 

So no one can say that this group made a decision based on a 

lack of knowledge or understanding, because the time was 

taken for 10 speakers to get up and individually explain parts of 

the legislation and how it would affect their lives and the lives 

of the rest of the people in the province.  The labour relations 

lawyer got up and explained how the Bills will affect people 

from a legal point of view, and he expressed those things that 

are wrong with the legislation. 

 

It's not that hard, Minister -- if you'd have come to the meeting 

and listened -- not that hard to know what would have to be 

done in order to make this legislation palatable.  The business 

coalition, by the way, for your information, actually got up and 

said that they were happy about some of the amendments that 

you have now started . . . in the process of putting into place; 

very happy with the fact that you had given some of those 

concessions.  They did say though, unfortunately, you haven't 

gone far enough to make that level playing-field available to 

them to do business in this province. 

 

And so they're saying to you that, Minister, you've got to wake 

up and smell the coffee here, you haven't done enough to 

modify this position.  The few people have said to me today 

that the labour people are unhappy because you're softening 

this legislation up.  I haven't heard that.  I haven't seen any 

labour people on television or on radio.  I haven't seen one 

news clipping today saying that the organized labour people are 

opposed to what you have done in the amendments to make 

business happier.  They haven't said that because they're quite 

happy, obviously.  That's the conclusion I have to draw. 

 

So any of you that stand up in this Assembly and say that you 

have to balance between labour and business because labour's 

now unhappy with you and you have to back off and not do any 

more, that's not justified.  Because we haven't seen the 500 

union people on the steps demanding you to maintain your 

position, or to come against the business community in their 

requests. 

 

I haven't seen it; I haven't seen those people; I haven't 



May 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2583 

heard from them.  The fact of the matter is that they're quite 

satisfied with what's going on or they'd be here.  The labour 

union has a long record of letting their opinions being known 

publicly very quickly. 

 

(1515) 

 

So, Minister, knowing now that they're not going to very 

dramatically oppose you making this legislation more fair to 

the people that supply the jobs, we now have to ask you the 

questions that were asked there.  And we have to, in all 

fairness, give you an opportunity to answer those questions for 

the record.  And so I'll begin by reading the first resolution: 

 

 Resolution No. 1:  Be it resolved that the Saskatchewan 

government delay passage of Bill 32 and 54 until further 

amendments can be made and until all final regulations and 

policies made pursuant to these Acts are fully detailed as a 

result of proper consultation with the business community. 

 

Minister, will you do that for the business community? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I was asked by the media after the 

question period: do you deny that the only people that are 

concerned are the paid lobbyists?  Do you you not admit that 

there's some concern in the business community which goes 

beyond the paid lobbyists?  My answer was yes, I do.  I 

acknowledge there is a general disquiet in the business 

community about this legislation.  Disquiet and concern that I 

think is caused by uncertainty as to what the legislation is 

actually going to look like. 

 

When I'm on hot-line shows and open-mouth programs and 

they phone in and ask me about it, they always say -- they 

always use the conditional tense -- I may have to leave if . . . 

My response is yes, if that would have happened you might 

have to leave all right, but that's not going to happen. 

 

There is concern; it's caused by uncertainty.  There is only one 

way to lay the uncertainty to rest and that is to pass the 

legislation, to pass the regulations, and get it in effect.  Further 

procrastination is not going to resolve the uncertainty; it's 

simply going to add to it. 

 

So we think the best . . . if our only goal -- and it's not the goal 

of this legislature to put an end to people's concerns -- but if 

that were the only goal of the legislature, we'd pass it as 

quickly as we could, pass the regulations as quickly as we 

could, and get it in effect.  That is our intention. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Minister, I take that as an unqualified no, that 

you will not adhere to the resolution no. 1 passed by the 

business community, and of course the minister is 

acknowledging that from his seat. 

 

That's unfortunate, Minister, because 500-and-some-odd 

business people, gathered in the city of Saskatoon, will all be 

waiting to hear this message today and they're going to be very 

disappointed with your answer.  They're going to be 

very disappointed that they were put to the test of spending all 

of that time and all of that effort just to be told that they once 

again don't understand the effects of the Bill on them.  And as 

soon as they have it . . . it's like castor oil, once you've 

swallowed it, the effects will be good for you and the taste will 

go away after a while. 

 

That's the way this works.  The taste won't go away.  Quite 

frankly, Minister, you've got 82,000 people on welfare in this 

province.  You have 10 per cent of the people, the population 

of Saskatoon, now going to food banks to try to get enough to 

eat. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Fourteen per cent in Regina. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Fourteen per cent, my colleague throws in, for 

the city of Regina.  And we shouldn't forget Regina in this 

debate even though the meeting was held in Saskatoon.  

Obviously the feelings and the effects of this legislation will be 

across this entire province, and Regina will be affected just as 

much as Saskatoon. 

 

But the reality, Minister, is that you've got 16,000 less jobs now 

than we had in the province when you were elected.  Certainly 

you've done some good things in some areas to offset some of 

it, or it would have been 32,000.  But you can't dwell on the 

good things when they don't bring about the results of 

balancing the bad. 

 

Unfortunately, Minister, you're going to not have very many 

more people on welfare in Saskatchewan or on unemployment 

because the welfare system simply can't afford any more.  So 

people that are in need are now coming to me saying that 

they're being turned down the help that they need.  They are 

being rejected even though they're hungry, even though they 

have no place to call a home.  They are being told to go home 

to their parents or their grandparents.  They're being told to go 

somewhere else for help, live off of somebody else.  That's 

what people are being told in Saskatchewan today. 

 

And so the numbers won't get much bigger in Saskatchewan as 

far as the unemployed or the people on welfare because they 

are going to move away.  Not just the business people who 

create the jobs are talking about moving; it's the people who are 

tired of sitting in this province without a job that are going to 

move away.  So I'm not too worried that your numbers are 

going to get that much bigger because those folks are simply 

going to be gone.  The test here will have to be to watch how 

many people are left in the province as a whole, and quite 

frankly, Minister, more people have got to leave this province 

with this kind of legislation. 

 

That was attested to by the young people who spoke at the 

meeting last night.  People who represented themselves came to 

the microphones, and one representative was actually on the 

podium with the list of prepared speakers to talk to you about 

how these couple of Bills will affect the youth and the future of 

the youth in this province.  They're very unhappy with what's 

going to happen because they 



2584 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1994 

want to stay in this province.  They see the potential in this 

province that a lot of people see, but you folks don't.  We do 

have the best place in the world for potential to grow, but you 

are stifling that potential.  You're killing it. 

 

The fact of the matter, Minister, is that the young people of this 

province have recognized that, and they're crying to you 

through that meeting last night to recognize the need to let the 

opportunities of this province flourish.  The opportunities are 

there. 

 

Certainly we have natural resources beyond the imagination of 

the rest of the world, and you won't allow it to develop.  You 

won't allow a business that can create jobs to stay in business 

because you make the business atmosphere so negative that 

they can't stay here.  And certainly there will always be some 

people that will come in on a very marginal basis to develop 

some of the natural resources and gas; out in the Sand Hills 

may be one example. 

 

Here again we have one example that comes up that you can 

use to defend your policies as compared to the 500 that are 

opposed to it and showing a negative effect from everything 

that you're doing. 

 

It doesn't add up, Minister; one against 500 is not good enough 

odds for you to go ahead with this legislation.  It's simply not 

good enough odds to go ahead and destroy the potential for our 

youth in this province, and they're going to be extremely 

unhappy when they hear that you have flatly refused and turned 

down the request that was made in fairness and honesty 

through their resolution last night. 

 

The second resolution, Minister, simply was this, and I'll quote 

it to you: 

 

 Be it resolved that all businesses' appointments to future 

government regulatory committees, task forces, and 

commissions established by the Department of Labour work 

under the coordination and guidance of the Saskatchewan 

business coalition and that the Saskatchewan government and 

its Department of Labour respect the coordinating roles of the 

Saskatchewan business coalition in all future consultations. 

 

Minister, this resolution was not quite unanimous, but it had a 

very strong majority, and I ask you today: what will you do 

about this resolution? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm going to make a comment, and 

then I'm going to move that we report progress and go to The 

Trade Union Act.  I don't know if that's going to change the 

tenor of the comments, but . . . ah, I've got a little resistance 

from the members to your right . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Let me describe them as the members to your right.  I've got a 

little resistance to that, do I? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Our left. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- They are indeed I guess to 

your left . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You have questions on 

The Labour Standards Act . . . Okay, that's distinct from The 

Trade Union Act because you can still put your questions . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . You have questions about The 

Labour Standards Act, do you?  All right.  Okay, I will not then 

move we report progress. 

 

Let me just say with respect to the rally -- and then we'll see if 

we can get the questions of the member for Regina North West.  

It's up to the chair, I guess -- let me just say with respect to the 

rally, I don't regard 500 people as a mob scene.  When they 

were initially . . . I partially disagree with the member from 

Maple Creek, and I partially agree with you.  I disagree with 

you that 500 is a sign of overwhelming opposition.  This came 

from across the province, among 30,000 business people. 

 

Of those, 500 came to the meeting; most, but not all, from the 

city of Saskatoon, and I suggest that that's not an overwhelming 

crowd.  It did not meet their expectations; in terms of the 

percentage of people that turned out, wasn't an enormous 

number. 

 

I agree with you that not much importance should be attached 

to the relatively low turnout.  I agree with you.  They don't 

have a motto: solidarity forever.  I agree.  The personality of 

the business person makes them such that they don't readily 

participate in those sort of rallies.  I agree with that, I agree 

with that. 

 

So I disagree with you that the numbers were overwhelming; I 

think they were underwhelming.  I agree with you that not 

much importance should be attached to that because they don't 

readily lend themselves to organizations. 

 

With respect to the resolutions that were passed, I don't regard 

the meeting as representative of the business community.  I do 

admit, in the business community there's some concern.  I think 

that's largely caused by uncertainty.  The time has come to put 

the uncertainty to an end. 

 

That is our position with respect to those resolutions.  

Resolutions calling for a delay in the Bill, we think, will 

aggravate the problem of the concern and not alleviate it. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, I'm quite happy that we're 

going to go on with this just a little longer, because I certainly 

have a few more questions here as well. 

 

Again I must, I guess, put on the record the comment that the 

people who gathered at the meeting last night must obviously 

be watching today for the results of what happens, either 

directly on television right now or through the media later or by 

phoning in to check.  They will be wanting to know what your 

answers were because it was obvious that someone would ask 

you to reply to these questions today in the Assembly, and as 

the critic for Labour, I suppose it was natural that I would be 

the one to do it.  But you had to know it was going to happen -- 

everybody did -- so they'll be 



May 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2585 

watching for the answer. 

 

And they're going to be extremely unhappy to find that you are 

flatly, coldly turning them down.  Flatly and coldly telling them 

that they don't understand the legislation and that they'll be 

happy after you put it into place.  Flatly and coldly what you're 

saying to the business community that gathered in Saskatoon is, 

that they're too dumb to understand because they're going to be 

happy after you put the legislation into effect -- legislation that 

they're not happy with now.  You're flatly and coldly saying: 

you don't know what's going on; I know better; I know what's 

good for you; let me do it to you and then you'll be happier 

later because you really don't know what you want yourselves. 

 

I don't think the business community is going to buy this 

argument very well.  I don't think they're going to be very 

happy.  It's unfortunate that the results of all this will neither 

give the official opposition any comfort in the polls, nor will it 

give you any comfort, but those that do the least work will reap 

the benefits because there is no justice in politics.  But we will 

work hard to change that in the next while, Minister. 

 

Realistically though the questions that I have to ask you today 

are related both to The Trade Union Act and The Labour 

Standards Act.  And because the member of the third party 

wants to voice a few questions before we go on to The Trade 

Union Act, I think it's appropriate that we give them a chance 

and an opportunity to put their foot in their own mouth rather 

than us do it for them.  So I'm going to ask you to reconsider 

your position on these resolutions, to think hard about the fact 

that you might go along with the business community, and 

perhaps you can do that.  And in the next few minutes when we 

change over to The Trade Union Act, I'll be happy to address 

the rest of the issues with you. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

I'm quite exasperated by the actions of your government with 

respect to Bill 32.  This whole process was doomed from the 

outset.  You knew it and you ignored it.  The fact that you 

abandoned your original commitment to achieve consensus 

between business and labour was indicative of your lack of 

genuine desire to forge a long-term future for Saskatchewan 

that does not require the government to be in control of 

everything. 

 

That, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, is part of the process of 

letting go, a process which your government does not want to 

begin because you are so fearful of the slippery slope of losing 

power.  It is apparent that you will introduce whatever 

legislation you choose, amend it only to your own satisfaction, 

and then ram it through in your haste to escape the confines of 

the legislature.  You may proceed as you see fit because you 

have a majority, and we must accept that. 

 

I see no sensible purpose in trying to amend this legislation 

when you have so obviously made up your mind that it will 

only change to the degree that you are 

prepared to change it.  If you were interested in building 

consensus, if you cared about employers and employees 

coming to any agreement on the regulations that will be the 

steering-wheel of this legislation, you would not hesitate to 

draft the regulations and put them before the concerned parties 

for review. 

 

Mr. Minister, I urge you to withdraw this legislation from 

committee, to go to the process of preparing draft regulations, 

and to return both the Bill and regulations to the public forum 

for consideration.  I believe that until that has been 

accomplished the opinions of those of us in this Assembly are a 

poor substitute for the critical analysis of the employers of 

Saskatchewan, without which this legislation would not be 

passed. 

 

I urge you once again to pull this Bill, produce the draft 

regulations, and circulate the proposed amendments together 

with the draft regulations, for a minimum of 90 days to allow 

for public discussion, analysis, and debate before returning 

them to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I thank the member for her question.  

I was looking for some clarification as to whether you are 

going to maintain your opposition to the Bill or whether your 

leader's reluctance to sign the petition last night signifies a 

more enlightened approach.  I certainly didn't get any 

indication from that comment.  I can see the Liberals are 

maintaining their position of decisively sitting on the fence. 

 

Let me say with respect to the passage of the regulations, it is 

not our position . . . if you think about it, it's self-evident.  You 

can't draft the regulations till you have a Bill authorizing the 

regulations.  The Bill's got to be passed; then we've got to draft 

the regulations.  You can't do it in reverse order.  There's no 

way of doing that.  We must pass the Bill; then we must do the 

regulations. 

 

I want to point out what I've said repeatedly but which may not 

be clear to everyone, and that is just as there's been extensive 

consultation on the Bills, there is also going to be extensive 

consultation on the regulations.  There will be extensive 

consultation on both. 

 

With that, I'm going to move that we report progress on this 

Bill, Mr. Chairman. 

 

(1530) 

 

Bill No. 54 -- An Act to amend The Trade Union Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Again, Minister, 

we have talked about The Trade Union Act in days that have 

gone by, but we haven't really spent as much time on it as we 

have with The Labour Standards Act. 

 

And as I pointed out to you the other day, The Labour 

Standards Act is going to have a tremendous impact 



2586 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1994 

on our province, but The Trade Union Act has a tremendous 

impact in a different way.  This is not regulations that each 

businessman is going to have to adhere to in the same sense, 

although it has a tremendous effect on people because it affects 

how the unions will operate and under what rules they will be 

able to operate. 

 

I only throw that in because I have a little letter from a Gordon 

Boychuk of the city who didn't think that I knew the difference.  

So just for his benefit, I want him to realize that we do 

understand the difference between the Bills. 

 

What we have said, though, is that the effects of these two Bills 

are on the very same people, and they more or less become one 

huge problem.  Even though they are individual in themselves, 

they will affect the business community and the people who 

create jobs and, of course, the workers of our province. 

 

So, Minister, last night we had a meeting in Saskatoon -- 550 

people, according to this letter that I alluded to during the 

debate on Bill 32 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member 

from Regina North, I think, observes that the numbers seem to 

grow.  Obviously he's right.  In politics that seems to be like 

fish; they get bigger the longer after you've caught them.  I 

can't help that.  That's not something that I'm trying to address 

here today.  You'll have to deal with that yourselves. 

 

I was there, and quite honestly, I thought there was 500; the 

letter says 550.  You have to live with it.  I have to live with it.  

The reality is, though, that the place was full of a lot of people 

that are unhappy. 

 

And what they did there, Minister, just to get back to this point, 

they made three resolutions.  Two of them were passed 

unanimously; one was a very large majority.  I've had an 

opportunity to talk to you directly about two of those 

resolutions and ask you for your judgement of how you will 

react to those resolutions.  And you've said you will at this 

point not do anything with them.  You're not going to listen to 

them; you're simply going to carry on. 

 

I asked you in the dying moments of that debate if you would 

think about them as you went on with your discussion with the 

Liberals, and perhaps you might change your mind if you had a 

little more time to think about it. 

 

So rather than go back to the first one, in order to get your first 

observation of the last resolution, I want you to comment on 

the last resolution even though it's not specifically directed to 

you as the other two were. 

 

But I'll read it first and make a little comment about where it's 

coming from.  It says: 

 

 Be it resolved that this Assembly endorse the ongoing work 

of the Saskatchewan business coalition and that from time to 

time further legislation updates and joint meetings of this 

kind be considered on other key issues 

affecting job creation and the competitiveness of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Minister, obviously that's not asking you to specifically 

interfere with the legislation or anything of that nature.  It's 

simply saying that here we have a group of people saying that 

they want to organize yet another power, another structure as 

an umbrella group to defend business against yourselves. 

 

I was a little bit puzzled that the resolution didn't go a little 

further and say that they also endorse those umbrella groups 

still in existence, like the chambers of commerce and those 

kinds of folks around that are already representing business.  

But I had nothing to do with it, so obviously this is what the 

people felt. 

 

So realistically, Minister, how are you thinking in terms of the 

potential for the business community to be so upset with you 

that they're prepared yet to organize even a stronger umbrella 

group through this resolution? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- At one level it would be hard to 

disagree with the resolution.  I think the resolution is worth 

reading for the benefit of anyone who may be watching this: 

 

 Be it resolved that this Assembly endorse the ongoing work 

of the Saskatchewan business coalition and that from time to 

time further legislative updates and joint meetings of this 

kind be considered on other key issues affecting job creation 

and the competitiveness of Saskatchewan. 

 

At one level, nobody could object to that.  At another level, I 

want to make it clear, however, that we will consult with a 

wide variety of groups in the business community.  If there's 

any suggestion that the business coalition is our primary 

vehicle for consultation, I do want to attach a caveat to that. 

 

To some extent, this is a self-appointed group.  I don't know 

that anyone, that they actually sought election anywhere.  And 

to some extent the business coalition is a self-appointed group.  

But I do want to attach a caveat to any suggestion that we ought 

to deal with them as a paramount business group or as our 

exclusive contact with the business community.  That's patently 

not the case. 

 

Those which have a more democratic base, I would name the 

chambers of commerce in all the cities.  I would name the 

Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce as at least being elected 

by the other chamber of commerces around the province, and 

so on.  I would name those groups as well. 

 

So while I don't object to . . . at a literal level, I don't object to 

this.  But if there's any suggestion that the business coalition is 

our primary contact, that I do attach a caveat to.  This is 

something of a self-appointed group, so I do want to attach that 

caveat that we will seek consultation from a wide variety of 

groups and no one group exclusively. 



May 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2587 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Minister, 

we can today at least agree on one thing.  And I agree that your 

position is a fair and reasonable one on that resolution.  

Certainly you should, as a government, pay attention to this 

coalition; you should pay attention to their needs and their 

requests here. 

 

But I do agree with you that obviously the chamber of 

commerce and other folks that are talking about problems with 

business legislation should also be listened to, just as you 

would listen to the trade union people on these matters, and that 

should be a consideration.  And that's fair ball.  I agree with 

you on what you're doing here, and I think there will be some 

comfort in the business community knowing that at least you 

will recognize them, but also recognize the other players. 

 

Now having had the great fun of spending a few minutes on 

something that we finally can agree is going to be done right, I 

want to go back and test you to see if your resolve is still so 

strong on the other resolutions. 

 

I've asked you to consider this for a few more minutes, and so 

I'm going to give you the opportunity to rethink your position 

on these other two resolutions because they're extremely 

important to the direction of our province and to the comfort 

level of many, many business people. 

 

Now I think I'd better quote the resolution again so you know 

which one I'm talking about.  Resolution no. 1, and it reads like 

this, Minister: 

 

 Be it resolved that the Saskatchewan government delay 

passage of Bill 32 and 54 until further amendments can be 

made and until all final regulations and policies made 

pursuant to these Acts are fully debated as a result of proper 

consultation with the business community. 

 

Minister, that's not such a hard question.  It was made last night 

by a lot of business people who feel that not only Bill 32 

should be held up for a while and thought through, but also Bill 

54, the one we're debating right now.  They want you to stop 

and rethink the impact that this legislation will have on the 

province. 

 

They're not specifically saying they want any more money 

from your government; they're not specifically saying that they 

want any free hand-outs.  They're saying let's talk about 

legislation here.  They're not talking about a war between 

business and labour.  They're not talking about a war between 

the unions and the folks.  In fact one fellow even got up and 

said unions do some good.  There's a place for them.  Fair ball. 

 

I think that was good.  You should have come to the meeting.  

You'd have been really happy with the fair and reasonable 

approach that these people took. 

So, Minister, would it really be so bad in the province of 

Saskatchewan where we are living out a six-month perhaps 

period of time?  In the scheme of things the world has probably 

been here for quite a few billion years.  We know that there's 

been civilized human beings on the world for several thousands 

of years. 

 

In the scheme of things, is six months really a very long period 

of time?  Simply a flash of the eye in the existence of 

humanity, and yet so important to a group of people that live 

here in this part of the world, here in Saskatchewan.  Would six 

months more to reconsider this and delaying of the regulations 

that will affect this legislation, would that really be so hard on 

your government to do? 

 

As for a couple of the comments that you made, Minister, 

saying that the regulations have to be in place after the 

legislation is passed, that you can't deal with them, that you 

can't write them up -- I can't buy that.  I don't think the business 

community can buy it either.  Why wouldn't you be able to tell 

people what the regulations are going to do and how they're 

going to affect people along with the legislation? 

 

Are you not simply saying that we pass legislation allowing the 

government to become a dictatorship, allowing the government 

to make regulations that in effect becomes the legislative 

power, that becomes the driving force of how people have to 

respond to the demands of the government?  You can make 

things legal or illegal with regulations.  You are making 

legislation with the regulations after the Assembly is gone and 

has no more impact on what you're doing.  You're saying to the 

people of this province: allow me to pass legislation that will 

give me the power to be a dictator. 

 

I don't think they can buy that and I know that I won't buy the 

argument that it has to be done that way.  And I know that you 

will come up with an example of how a past government some 

place also did it that way.  That doesn't make it right, and it 

doesn't make it workable for the best interests of all the people.  

In a true democracy you lay your cards on the table with the 

faces up.  You don't hold the hand in your hand and everybody 

looks at the back and tries to guess what cards you've got in 

your hand.  That's not fair democracy. 

 

And, Minister, I ask you once again:  Will you reconsider 

taking the advice of this resolution no. 1 from the meeting in 

Saskatoon last night?  Will you capitulate to the demands and 

the requests of the people that were at that meeting? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I have already explained that we're 

not prepared to delay the passage of the Bill.  I've already 

explained as well that while we're interested in what the 

business coalition have to say, I want to be clear that we do not 

regard the business coalition as the primary vehicle through 

which we consult with the business community.  The elected 

and democratic bodies, chamber of commerces, the local 

boards of trade, are our primary vehicle.  I've already explained 

that. 



2588 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1994 

I think before we go on . . . I think before we move and report 

progress, in fairness, I think there was an understanding that the 

member from Shaunavon would have an opportunity for a 

question and perhaps we should now permit that. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Actually I want 

to make a few comments and I guess that will lead into some 

questions perhaps later. 

 

I raise these with this view, looking at Bill 32 and Bill 54, Mr. 

Minister, because I didn't get a chance to speak in second 

reading on those two Bills.  So I want to just raise a few 

concerns right now in regards to these Bills, because the people 

that I represent view both of these Bills sort of as a package 

from your government. 

 

(1545) 

 

And you know, when I go around talking to the people in Main 

Street, Shaunavon or Assiniboia or Ponteix, you know what 

comes up time and time again, Mr. Minister, is not so much the 

contents of Bill 32 or Bill 54, but why they're there at all.  And 

it's one of priorities for your government and it, I guess in the 

eyes of the people out in those communities, it shows that 

they're definitely not the priority of your government. 

 

And the many calls that I've received lately, and doing some of 

main-streeting and talking to these people, they're more than 

disappointed.  You know you take a look at some of these 

communities, and I think of Frontier and Climax and Mankota, 

how your government has actually taken away their busing.  

Communities such as Ponteix are now struggling for health 

care services, and that also is your government that has taken it 

away, a community of some 700 people, struggling today to 

have some form of health care.  Definitely that wasn't a priority 

for your government, Mr. Minister. 

 

And we also take a look at things that your government could 

have been doing in the last session.  You talked a lot about 

bringing in farm programs, after being so destructive in the last 

session and taking away anything that the farmers had, 

promising them that there would be something in the future.  

And yet you have brought nothing forward. 

 

And it really shows where the priorities of your government are 

versus where the mindset of the people are and where they 

think that a government should be out there fighting for them. 

 

And we'd look at communities such as Ponteix -- again I've 

raised a number of times in question period and in speaking to 

the House -- SaskPower offices, and these are communities that 

are out in Mankota and Ponteix, that whole area out there, 

where they have a two- or three-hour drive to get a SaskPower 

crew out.  And in an emergency that's unacceptable.  Why isn't 

that a priority to your government, Mr. Minister?  It never is. 

The highways, you've let the highways fall completely apart.  

Once again, if you take a look at some of the schools -- Wood 

Mountain, I know they're fighting to retain their school in the 

community of Wood Mountain.  Not a priority for your 

government. 

 

So what is confusing to the people that I represent, and all the 

people out in rural Saskatchewan that I talked to so often, is 

why isn't there some priority for them to have some economic 

development?  You had the Economic Development minister 

travel halfway around the world, how many times?  He's been 

to Cuba and Mexico and the former Soviet Union, many of the 

Slovakian countries.  It hasn't meant anything out to rural 

Saskatchewan -- nothing. 

 

In fact, just the opposite.  They're sitting there . . . when you 

take a community such as Ponteix and you've pulled out a 

one-third of the workforce alone because of your health care 

cuts and bussing cuts, and then you expect them to be 

supportive of a government that says: well at this point we have 

to defend workers' rights.  Well you don't even have workers 

out in those communities any more because of actions of your 

government. 

 

So it's not so much what's in the Bill, it's the priority of the 

government itself.  That's what so disappointing to the people.  

And you know, I get several letters, and I have one here and I 

know you have a copy of this, Mr. Minister, one from a Mr. 

Norman Kouri at Ponteix.  And Mr. Kouri is an owner of 

Kouri's Market, and in his letter he states: 

 

 We have been in business over 72 years and never have we, 

as business people or citizens felt our existence and that of 

our children so threatened. 

 

And they're referring to your government, Mr. Minister, that's 

what they're referring to.  I mean as Minister of Labour . . . I 

don't want to dwell on whether, you know, the parts of the 

legislation that are necessary or good, but the fact of the matter 

is you guys have been asleep at the wheel.  You're not helping 

anyone out there and they're going to take you to task in a few 

years on this.  They're not putting up with it any longer. 

 

And when people like Mr. Kouri are saying: listen, why don't 

you start to listen to what the small-business community is 

saying in communities where their very existence is at risk, 

why don't you listen to them?  Maybe you don't want to travel 

to Saskatoon and hear what 500 or 550 business people want to 

tell you. 

 

Why don't you come out to a place like Shaunavon or Ponteix 

and ask them what they're thinking of you?  Come out to 

Assiniboia; see what they think of your government being 

solely focused . . . winding this session down, being solely 

focused, Mr. Minister, on bringing down labour standards, 

trade union, changes to auto insurance.  What has been in it for 

those people out there?  Your government has done nothing.  

They're going to take you to task and the Minister of 

Agriculture also.  Why don't you take a drive out there 



May 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2589 

and see what they think of your priorities.  You have done 

nothing. 

 

In fact when I take a look at even some of the manufacturers 

that we have in the province . . . and here's a letter that I have 

from Bourgault Industries.  And the Minister of Agriculture 

should recognize this name.  They're a small implement . . . 

well not a small implement, an implement manufacturing 

company.  And when you read through this letter, Mr. Minister 

. . . I don't know if you have a copy of it, so maybe I'll read a 

little bit of it and see what . . . you can tell me what you think 

of his letter. 

 

 The purpose of this letter is to express my opinion that if the 

proposed amendments to the Labour Standards and Trade 

Unions Acts are passed, Saskatchewan will lose its 

opportunity to grow the economy to prosperity for the 

foreseeable future.  If these bills are passed, companies will 

only locate in Saskatchewan when every other, feasible 

location has been eliminated. 

 

I mean if you had these people onside like the member at the 

back there is saying you do, I don't think he'd be writing letters 

like this, would he? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- He is onside . . . 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Well this doesn't sound like he's onside to 

me. 

 

 In the world of manufacturing, this means only companies 

with the need for natural resources only competitively 

available in Saskatchewan, will choose to locate here.  This 

probably eliminates 95% of all manufacturing opportunities. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What's the date? 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Oh, the date, it's recent.  It's May 13, May 

13, 1994 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, I'll give . . . I'll 

send a copy over because I'm sure you guys are very out of 

touch.  It wouldn't hurt for you to read some of this stuff and 

find out what those people, those people that are actually 

creating the jobs in rural Saskatchewan, are thinking . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well they're not supporting you.  

They're not supporting you or else they wouldn't be sending me 

letters complaining about the way you guys have run 

roughshod over them. 

 

He goes on to say: 

 

 Sure, you can argue that if your government makes these 

changes, that all manufacturing companies will not 

immediately pull out of Saskatchewan, but I can assure you 

that most are checking their options in Alberta and the States; 

I know we are (he says). The shift will come in the form of 

expansions made into the U.S. and not into Saskatchewan. 

 

Well what do you say to people like this, Mr. Minister, 

when he's threatening to not expand, or he knows of other 

companies that are not willing to expand here, or in fact 

actually pull out of the province? 

 

And once again it's because you've, as a government you've sat 

back and said, well we can't offer services to people, we can't 

do things to protect rural Saskatchewan, we can't give them 

busing, we can't give elderly people any care - 

_ because of the cost.  Now how often have you said that? 

 

Just time and time again you've cut services, especially to rural 

Saskatchewan, because of the cost.  But yet these people that 

have to exist in rural Saskatchewan, they create jobs, necessary 

jobs out there.  And you've put a large cost on their shoulders 

and you don't even talk to them.  You haven't consulted with 

these people at all.  You're afraid to go to the meeting.  Well 

come on out to rural Saskatchewan and have a few meetings.  

You haven't been around . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, 

Minister of Justice, I'm sure that you haven't been out in rural 

Saskatchewan for a few years . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Well you haven't.  Lord knows they're calling for your 

resignation the same as I have been. 

 

He goes on to say: 

 

 I find it difficult to comprehend that a modern government 

such as yours does not understand the fact that if we want 

employment in our province, the proper supportive business 

climate is necessary. 

 

Maybe what you should do is ask this guy, Mr. Bourgault, to be 

an adviser to your government, because you're that out of touch 

that you better start being somewhat more in touch with some 

of the small-business people and finding out . . . If you can't 

create the jobs, you better find out a way of at least retaining 

what is now out there. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, well I'll start with that.  I see that you and the 

Minister of Justice are having quite a chuckle about this guy's 

concern, so why don't you tell me so I can pass this on to Mr. 

Kouri and Mr. Bourgault, what it is that you've done or what 

you intend to do, for those businesses or for those employees of 

those businesses out in rural Saskatchewan.  What have you 

done for them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm going to make a comment to the 

member and then I'll be moving that we report progress, Mr. 

Chairman.  But first of all, I'll respond to the member's 

comments. 

 

The member's comments were mostly about non-labour issues 

actually.  The member commented for a good deal of time 

about some issues that I know, I think, he probably feels 

strongly about -- wellness and so on.  I'm being as charitable as 

I can to the member from Shaunavon.  I would . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well someone says, don't bother.  I would 

perhaps admit his concerns about wellness are genuine.  I know 

I think they're badly based, but they may be genuine.  But the 

fact that you talked so much 



2590 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1994 

about wellness and very little about the labour Bills, really says 

where . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That's right.  It really says 

where you're at, and that is that this is not a primary concern. 

 

Let me deal with the letter from Gerry Bourgault, of Bourgault 

Industries.  I am informed by someone who's talked to him, that 

that letter was written before he was aware of the amendments.  

Specifically what concerned him was the provision with respect 

to automatic certification.  It was his view -- I think mistakenly 

-- but it was his view that this might mean his plant would be 

certified without the employees ever getting a vote or ever 

expressing their wishes. 

 

That's not the way the provision worked in other provinces, but 

acknowledging the concern, we have introduced a House 

amendment which requires a vote in all cases.  I am informed, 

since that House amendment has been proposed, these concerns 

have largely been addressed. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to move that this committee 

rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

(1600) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Education, Training and Employment 

Vote 5 

Item 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, and officials, welcome today.  Mr. Minister, I had 

some information sent to me from the 4-H Council, 

Saskatchewan 4-H Council, and they were interested in having 

4-H as part of the high school curriculum.  I'm not sure if you 

received any information on this but they sent, oh, a number of 

pages on it.  And they feel that the 4-H program would be a 

valid addition, a worthwhile addition to the education process 

because it deals with a number of the issues that students need 

when they move on from the secondary education system into 

either post-secondary education or into employment in general. 

 

And they believe that the 4-H program would be a valuable 

asset for anyone who is moving on, and hopefully everyone is.  

They believe that it provides skills in reading and writing and 

arithmetic; communications, both listening and oral; creative 

skills and negotiations, teamwork, organization, effectiveness, 

and leadership. 

 

Because there is a number of hours spent within a school year 

in 4-H, they feel that this type of a program would be a worthy 

addition and should be allowed to have a credit within the high 

school system.  Has the Department of Education given any 

consideration to this? 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- First of all, before I do get started in 

regards to the question, what I wanted to do is first of all 

introduce staff.  Over to my left here we have Robin Johnson, 

the executive director of administration, and behind me I have 

Ken Horsman, ADM (assistant deputy minister), as well as Lily 

Stonehouse, the ADM.  And over to my right I have Jim 

Benning, the president of SCN (Saskatchewan 

Communications Network Association) 

 

So with that I will therefore proceed to answer your question.  

I'll have the the member know that 4-H, you know, has been a 

strong aspect of the culture and educational history of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The curriculum, the way it is, when you include both the core 

and the adapted dimension and the common essential learnings, 

a lot of the teachers will include the agriculture dimension, 

which is an important part of Saskatchewan history.  And your 

specific question on 4-H being a particular course itself is, of 

course, a unique individual question. 

 

But I think overall a lot of the people who look at the question 

wherein the curriculum deals with agriculture, probably have 

dealt with the issue of 4-H clubs in the province.  And I think 

just about, you know, most teachers all recognize that as an 

important part of our historical dimension. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I discussed 

with the minister at the last estimates an issue dealing with a 

couple of students from Reliance business school.  I'd just like 

to give you a bit of an update on it. 

 

The two students met with the new owner of Reliance, Dorothy 

Prior, and they were very pleased with the outcome.  And 

although she was not required to do anything according to 

regulations, Dorothy fully refunded the students for their 

tuitions plus interest. 

 

Ross and Petria are both very happy with the outcome and 

would like to submit suggestions to you regarding vocational 

school legislation so that no other students will again find 

themselves in the same predicament they did.  And we will 

provide you with those recommendations, Mr. Minister. 

 

I'd like to ask you some questions concerning the Avant-Garde 

private vocational school, Mr. Minister.  We've received a 

number of complaints dealing with this particular school.  

Individuals are being expelled for asking too many questions 

regarding the education they're receiving for their dollars that 

they're spending.  The students feel that there are too many 

students cramped into smaller than regulation-size rooms when 

it comes to teaching. 

 

Mr. Minister, perhaps you have already looked into some of 

these issues.  Has the department been doing any investigations 

whatsoever with the Avant-Garde school? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Thanks very much.  On your first issue in 

relation to Reliance, you know, when you 



May 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2591 

raised that particular issue, the government responded, and I 

was very pleased with your comments.  And as a matter of fact, 

we'd be happy to receive any further suggestions that you may 

have. 

 

As in regards to the Avant-Garde, we had dealt with some 

particular issues there before.  Now this is a new case, in 

regards to smaller rooms.  And you know, I think what we will 

do is do some follow-up on this regard. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister.  I have a 

number of other items that deal also with the Avant-Garde 

school, if you would look into these also.  We've received 

complaints that the locker space is below regulations.  It seems 

that three students are being asked to share the same space.  

The school is also running a professional salon within the 

school in which the clients for the salon have to walk through 

the school classrooms to reach the salon.  And from what we're 

told, that's not up to regulations. 

 

There's concern that the instructors do not have the proper 

qualifications, that students who have left the school without 

the tuition running out have not received a proper . . . without 

the institution returning the proper amount of education money 

to student loans similar to the situation that happened with the 

Reliance business school a couple of years ago. 

 

There's no policy manual.  Each student is supposed to have a 

doctor's approval before being accepted into the school, and 

this is not being done; that there is no longer a pre-entrance 

exam into the school, that the hours are not being kept track of, 

the students' hours are not being kept track of on a proper form 

or in a proper manner, and that the required guest speaker for 

informing students about the risks of AIDS (acquired immune 

deficiency syndrome) has not taken place yet to date -- and 

we're almost at the end of the school year, Mr. Minister.  So I 

think some of these issues definitely need to be looked into and 

we would ask you would follow through with that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Thanks very much for sharing that 

information.  You've dealt with a few more issues.  What we 

will do is continue to do the follow-up work.  In terms of 

process, it's always very good for the students who have 

worked through you, maybe they could just phone the 

department, you know, directly because we need . . . in order to 

do a thorough follow-up we need something in writing and we 

could have that arrangement with them.  And I think in that 

way then we could, you know, follow up on the suggestions 

made. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  We'll follow 

up and provide some contacts.  But the students are finding out 

that by contacting my office they do have the opportunity to get 

some results whereas in the past, at certain times when they 

have contacted the minister's office, things seemed to have 

moved a little slower than perhaps the students would have 

liked.  And by talking to our office, they have achieved the 

results that they have wanted. 

Mr. Minister, school closures are a problem around the 

province.  It's a problem because of the cut-backs in funding 

from your department to the various school boards who in turn 

cut back the funding to the schools, particularly the smaller 

schools.  It's a problem with lower enrolments in some of the 

schools.  So it's a combination of factors. 

 

But the problems that arise with school closures is, in a lot of 

communities, the division boards do not pass on the proper 

information to the local communities so that the local 

communities can understand and appreciate exactly what is 

happening. 

 

The Wood Mountain School has contacted me, and it's a 

situation there where the community has has put together a set 

of numbers which would indicate that there is little or no 

savings in place for the division to close their school. Yet they 

have a great deal of difficulty in communicating with the 

division board for whatever reason that might be; in trying to 

reach an amiable solution to this problem. 

 

I have a letter here which is -- probably you received the same 

letter -- from Kelly Fitzpatrick; also letters here from Mike 

Klein, who is a teacher at the Wood Mountain School and who 

is also the mayor of the community.  And they have put 

together some numbers which would indicate that the school 

divisions in place there stand to lose money depending on what 

happens in those communities. 

 

If they close the school, the student population is split; then 

either the school board will lose money because the students 

will go to separate school boards, different school boards.  And 

yet they have a great deal of difficulty getting actual numbers 

for what the savings will be; what the costs are for that 

particular school in the school division. 

 

Mr. Minister, what are you doing to allow communities to have 

access to the numbers that the communities need to be able to 

understand what is happening for their school and their 

community?  I know that these numbers should be provided by 

the local division board.  But in cases where the local division 

board is reluctant to provide that, Mr. Minister, what is the 

department prepared to do? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Yes, in regards to the information base on 

school closures and the democratic process that occurs at the 

school division level, I think it's important to know that 

historically we've always had about 15 to 20 schools, you 

know, that have closed down in the province of Saskatchewan 

-- this past year we've had 17 -- and that decision is always 

made at the local and division board level.  And I think it's 

important to recognize and respect the democracy in that sense. 

 

Now, it's a lot similar to decision-making processes at 

municipalities as well.  You have your elections at that level 

and the questions could be raised at board meetings, you know, 

that are held at the division board level, or raise these issues in 

relation to writing letters at that level.  And I think those are 

probably just 



2592 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1994 

as important ways in terms of access. 

 

But I think the important point is that whereas we've looked at 

it historically -- government used to control everything in 

regards to education before -- we've left it to the autonomy of 

the school boards and we continue to respect that autonomy.  

And they have to get that information through the democratic 

process, you know, that is available for them at the school 

board level. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  I wonder 

if you could provide me with a list of the schools that closed in 

the previous year and a list of the schools that are proposed for 

closure in the upcoming year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- We will provide that information at a later 

time. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  You talked 

about democracy in the process of school board elections and 

that the people represent the communities.  Indeed they do.  

However, those elections are for three years as compared to the 

RM (rural municipality) elections which are . . . you have half 

of the board is up for election every year.  So you can have a 

direct say on what is happening on your board every year on 

RM council which you do not have that opportunity on the 

school board divisions. 

 

But we all know what happens with letter-writing.  I'm sure 

your government is receiving a lot of letters on various pieces 

of legislation.  That doesn't mean you provide the people with 

the information or that you change what you're doing.  

Obviously if you've received the copies of the letters that we 

have received dealing with the labour legislation and The Trade 

Union Act, you would have changed your mind -- if the letters 

were having an effect. 

 

(1615) 

 

And the school boards are the same way.  The ratepayers on the 

school board can write letters to the school board 

representatives, but if the representatives don't wish to change 

their mind or provide the information, there is no way that the 

ratepayers can force that information out of the school board. 

 

And the people in the communities are being asked to agree to 

the closures of their schools, or at least to acquiesce without 

saying too much, when they're not being provided with the 

information that they need to make a proper judgement as to 

whether or not it's going to be of benefit financially or if it's 

going to be of benefit to their children.  And that's the area that 

is lacking is that information being provided to the people. 

 

Also when the schools are being closed, the communities have 

a great deal of concern as to what consideration is being given 

to the children who are being affected by this.  Wood Mountain 

is a very good example because it is a significant distance away 

from 

surrounding communities.  How long a period of time are the 

children going to have to be on the school bus to reach another 

school?  Do the children themselves not have some legal 

recourse, some legal right to expect that they will be in a 

position to study when they get to school because they haven't 

had to travel a considerable amount of distance on the bus? 

 

The Minister of Education, at the SSTA (Saskatchewan School 

Trustees Association) convention last fall, said that in her mind 

students should not get on the bus before 7:30 in the morning 

because when they reach school after they've travelled for an 

hour to an hour and a half on the bus, the younger children are 

going to have a great deal of difficulty being awake in class, 

being able to concentrate, being able to study and to absorb the 

information that is being given to them. 

 

In the case of Wood Mountain, those children will be pushing 

that 7:30 limit if not more, Mr. Minister.  So what 

considerations are being given for the children that are going to 

be affected by this type of occurrence if the school closes in 

Wood Mountain? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I think the important point to make is that 

while you in fact state that the elections at the school board 

level are three years, you've got to remember that in this 

legislature we're elected every four or five years.  And the 

expectation that we have in regards to good political 

representation, such as yourself, in this legislature, there's 

probably very good political representation as well at the local 

school board level. 

 

So that political process takes place, you know, in regards to 

school board levels right throughout the province.  And I think 

it's important that the political democratic process that is held at 

the school board level continue in regards to board meetings, 

letters, etc., that I had mentioned before.  So I think the 

question of accountability that you raise, you know, could be 

addressed more effectively there at the local level. 

 

And also the overall time period that people spend on buses, 

etc., has always been an issue of discussion in this province.  

And I think that the existing situation in the province has been 

more or less considered relatively fair, you know, by the people 

of the province who have determined lengths and times and so 

on. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  The 

previous minister of Education brought in a Bill which 

amended The Education Act and made some changes to the 

process of closing a school.  And I approached her at that time 

to allow some community input into that. 

 

And I would ask, Mr. Minister, that you again review that 

situation to allow the communities to have a little more direct 

input into the closure of their schools; to allow the community 

to have some financial input, if that's their desire, to support a 

school within their community. 



May 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2593 

The Wood Mountain School -- the comments from Mr. Klein 

state that in effect the maintenance costs are being shifted to 

bussing costs.  So that would be the maintenance costs for 

operating the physical plant at the Wood Mountain School, 

those costs are simply being shifted now to bussing costs.  And 

so there's really, according to his numbers, very little, if any, 

savings to be had in place.  And so the community wonders, 

why are they closing our school when in actual fact they're 

going to save very little money. 

 

When the item of a school closure comes forward, the 

community needs to have the ability, through The Education 

Act, to have some direct input into that. 

 

Now I realize that there's two three-month periods of time, or 

two six-month periods of time -- I'm not sure just exactly which 

one it is now -- that a school division has to go through before 

they can close a school. 

 

But some place within that process the community needs to 

have an opportunity to express themselves.  They need to be 

given the opportunity to have the actual dollar numbers of what 

is happening, and they need to have some information on what 

impact this is going to have on their children. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you, or are you, giving any consideration to 

this kind of a community input into the school closures issue? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Again as I mentioned before, there is 

opportunity for community input, and you've recognized that in 

your comments as well.  And I think I've mentioned before that 

that type of political process, the democratic process at the 

local level, is best handled there.  And I think what needs to 

happen is that they just have to, you know, continue and deal 

with their representatives and move forward in that fashion. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I talked to the 

Minister of Education previously about this issue, but I wonder 

if you could provide an update on the 4-4-1 issue, dealing with 

bargaining units between the SSTA, the government, and the 

STF (Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation). 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Yes, we had concluded an agreement in 

regards to 4-4-1, which was the policy, and we had made a 

joint agreement with SSTA, a protocol agreement -- and as a 

matter of fact I was present at the signing of that protocol 

agreement and I think both sides were relatively happy about 

the protocol agreement -- and so that position on 4-4-1 is the 

one that we had agreed upon. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister.  Am I to 

assume then that 4-4-1 will be four SSTA, four government, 

and a chairman that would be agreeable to both groups? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- The legislation stands as it was on 4-4-1, 

and we had come out with, on that protocol agreement, you 

know, a decision where we would 

have a joint process.  And the key idea in there was the joint 

process.  You know before that it was always considered a 

unilateral decision, you know, by government.  Now we have a 

process where it is joint. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'm sure 

that the SSTA will be happy about that because that is one of 

the issues that they were pursuing fairly vigorously. 

 

I notice in the globals, Mr. Minister, that you made significant 

computer purchases in the last year.  I don't have the total 

dollar figure for it handy, but there were considerable 

computers purchased.  I was wondering why such a large 

number of computers purchased? Were they all tendered, and 

will this carry on again in the upcoming budgetary year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- In regards to the new information 

technology system that was in place, it was basically dealing 

with . . . and the improvement, of course, in the technology on 

computers, so that we could improve our correspondence in a 

school system as well as apprenticeship.  And we felt that we 

needed to update, you know, our system.  Of course it was 

tendered, and this is for this year and it would not continue for 

the following year. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  I could 

perhaps refer you to my comments last night, dealing with the 

minister of Gaming; I don't remember what portfolio he was 

dealing with last night there about computer purchases -- 

SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation), 

thank you member, SPMC -- that you don't always necessarily 

have to go out and buy the latest and the best piece of 

equipment, that something down the line can still do the job.  

Now I'm not recommending that you go out and buy a bunch of 

8088's, but you don't all need 586's either.  So, Mr. Minister, 

when it comes to buying computers, I think you should buy 

what you need to do the job but don't buy in excess. 

 

Mr. Minister, I notice in the globals that there is a significant 

number of committees in place within the Department of 

Education.  What is the cost for all of these committees, and do 

they all have a time line in which to provide their reports, or are 

they ongoing committees that sort of grow like Topsy and 

never end? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Yes, we'll get back to you on this issue. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Could you please repeat that, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- We'll get back on this issue.  I haven't got 

information right at hand. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister.  I notice 

also in the globals that you did one survey by Environics in 

August 1993 for $23,000.  What was that for? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I've been told that there was a 



2594 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1994 

global package that was provided for you.  That information on 

Environics poll should be contained in that global document. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, we have the fact that the 

survey was there and that it cost $23,000, but it doesn't explain 

what they did.  What happened with this survey?  What was it 

for?  What kind of questions?  What were the results? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Again we'll look into that. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I have another 

concern coming from a school division or people within a 

school division out west, Golden Prairie area.  Is it possible for 

students to move within a division from school A to school B? 

 

These people would like to move to another school within the 

division but are having a great deal of difficulty getting 

permission from the division board to do this, and they live 

right on the border of the two school districts.  The fact is the 

gentleman was telling me that there's about two or three 

families involved in this, and the one family lives within a 

hundred yards of the boundary of the school divisions.  And 

what the school division was trying to do was to move the 

school district boundary another mile away, so it would make it 

that much more difficult for them to argue that they should be 

going to the other school. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Yes, in regards to your comments, the 

issue was within a school division.  Again that lies within the 

realm of the local board or school division.  It's between two 

boards, and there's always . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- It's the same division. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- You're saying within the same division?  

Yes, it still has to be handled at the local level.  There's always 

a continuous problem on areas.  It's like constituency 

boundaries.  The town at the edge of the boundary should be on 

this constituency or that constituency; it should be on this 

school board or that school board.  And it's always, you know, 

a decision that is made, and I think we will always have that as 

a problem.  And I think we try and leave it to the democratic 

process of the local boards and elections for that decision to be 

made there. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  I realize 

it's an ongoing problem, but it's a serious concern to those 

parents that are involved in it and they would like to have some 

avenue to move their concerns forward and to apply some 

pressure on the division board to allow them to have a move. 

 

Talking about the division boards, I've received a large number 

of letters from the various division boards around the province 

with concerns about the budgetary process and the actual 

number of dollars they're receiving from the Department of 

Education and the manner in which it is going to affect their 

own 

decisions.  I have a letter here from Saskatchewan Valley 

School Division No. 49, which is up in the Warman area, and 

I'd read a paragraph from their letter: 

 

Sure, our board had to reduce staff -- 10 teachers in each 

of 1993 and '94, reduce program support, band, industrial 

arts, home economics, cut back on purchase of new buses 

-- but the part that really hurts is all of the increases that 

have been passed on to the board by other government 

agencies.  Some examples are UIC and CPP increases of 8 

per cent, heating fuel costs of 12 per cent, and teacher 

salary costs of two and a half per cent. 

 

Mr. Minister, what is your department doing to try and lessen 

the impacts of your government's decisions on the various 

school boards?  They mention the heating costs.  There's also 

telephone, taxes on fuel, which will increase the cost of 

bussing; the education and health tax, E&H tax; the provincial 

sales tax up by 2 per cent since you become government.  All 

of these costs greatly add to the burden that school divisions 

face and the net result of those added burdens are the closures 

of schools such as Wood Mountain. 

 

Mr. Minister, what do you and your department do to try and 

lessen the impacts that your government's utility and tax 

policies have on these school divisions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I think in regards to the traditional process 

on budgets, a lot of the school boards were very happy that we 

had moved from the year-by-year basis system that had been 

there before.  And we had given advance notice for a couple of 

years so that they can do forward planning.  And many of the 

school boards throughout this province saw that as a welcome 

advantage in regards to planning in their own areas.  And we've 

gotten a lot of good, positive feedback on it. 

 

The other thing that was very important is that in regards to 

costs, we knew that the costs on payment to teachers was 

relatively high.  And in our budgetary process we have gotten 

the costs covered, you know, through the province by 75 per 

cent.  And that again came to be a very important gain for the 

people at the local level.  And I think that these two aspects 

have been something that they said that were very good, strong 

measures that the government had brought in. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  It doesn't 

exactly say what you're doing to aid the divisions with the 

increases in utility and tax rates.  And the fact is your providing 

them with the information in advance as to what the grant 

structure is going to be or what the decreases to their funding is 

going to be is like cutting the collar off the man before he is 

guillotined.  At least he knows he's going to be guillotined.  

And if you give him a date, I'm sure that he's very happy to 

know that it'll be next week or the week after that.  But at the 

end of the day, his head is still cut off. 

 

And so while you have given the date and how much 



May 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2595 

money the decreases are going to be to the school boards, to the 

division boards, I'm sure they're not very happy -- in fact I 

know they're not happy -- about the decreases in funding to 

them.  And they're also very unhappy about the increased costs. 

 

I have another school division that writes in. And this is from 

the Paynton, Unity, and Wilkie areas.  It says: 

 

 1. All teachers and librarians are gone due to budget cuts.  So 

much for resource-based learning. 

 

 2. School-based budgets are at a 10-year low.  Programs and 

resource materials will be cut back.  Professional 

development will be cut back. 

 

 3. Reduced maintenance budgets cannot be a long-term 

measure. 

 

 4. Surplus cannot be used to balance budgets for many years. 

 

 5. All we have left to cut is professional staff and programs. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, what are you doing to provide a proper 

education to the children of the communities when this is the 

kind of results that are coming from your telling the school 

divisions that we're going to cut this much this year and this 

much next year and so much the year after that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Well I know that the member wasn't 

around when I was in opposition, and we raised all these issues 

in regards to the opposite view.  One was, if you're asked for 

money, you just give it out.  And money was, you know, being 

given out all over the province during that time, and we ended 

up having a $15 billion debt in this province, and we now have 

interest payments of $850 million. 

 

We tried to do as best as possible given the limitations that we 

were faced.  And I'll say it again, the basic concern that people 

had was, on a year-to-year budgeting basis, it was very difficult 

to do planning.  When we introduced the measures that we did, 

we provided them two years in advance.  And I say again, a lot 

of the boards welcomed that decision, and I think that overall 

the help that we provided them on the teachers, on 75 per cent, 

etc., I think was important in this province.  So we've gotten of 

course statements on other matters, but overall people sense the 

fact that they could do more forward planning in regards to 

education in this province. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  You 

mentioned while you were in opposition -- I've looked over 

some of the quotes from the current government members 

while they sat in opposition; and I certainly don't remember 

ever finding a quote where you were calling on the government 

to cut back on education spending.  I can recall a good many 

quotes calling for more and more and more spending. 

The fact is, the Minister of Education was complaining to the 

then-minister of Education about only getting a 3 per cent 

increase for education -- not a 4 per cent cut, Mr. Minister, but 

a 3 per cent increase.  And that's what your opposition was 

calling for -- that 3 per cent increase was not enough -- and 

demanding, more and more and more money be spent on 

education. 

 

I'd like to go on to another issue, Mr. Minister, and that's 

dealing with division amalgamations.  And I have a letter here 

from the Oxbow School Division commenting on 

amalgamations: 

 

 With regard to school amalgamations we have submitted a 

joint application with the Arcola School Division to 

participate in the pilot project recently announced by the 

Minister of Education. 

 

 As stated previously, we are already sharing services with the 

Arcola School Division and talks for further sharing of 

services are ongoing. 

 

Mr. Minister, where and at what stage are your pilot projects 

for amalgamations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- In regards to the process, what we will be 

doing in regards to amalgamations is that we have been 

accepting proposals from the different divisions and boards, 

and we will be . . . those proposals will be examined by an 

inter-agency committee.  And we expect that we should have a 

handle in regards to the decision by mid-June. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister.  That's 

all the questions I have today.  I look forward to receiving all of 

the information that you have indicated you will provide us, 

and I would like to thank you and your officials for coming in. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair.  Mr. 

Minister, it is interesting to note that there's actually less money 

in the budget for universities, for aboriginal and northern 

education, and for literacy, apprenticeship, and adult education. 

 

Can the minister explain how this is consistent with the 

approach of adequately preparing those most in need of skills 

for the future employment markets; what improvements and 

modifications have been made to programs to deliver these 

services more effectively to greater numbers of people needing 

them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I think we have made our positions 

known in regards to the planning process in regards to 

questions raised by the previous member.  And we tried to give 

a forward plan for the universities as well as the other programs 

relating to aboriginal people, and also dealing with literacy. 

 

I might add that on the question of aboriginal people, I look 

back at the whole history of the province of Saskatchewan.  

When the Liberal government was around in the '60s and early 

'70s, there was no special programing for aboriginal people -- 

absolutely nothing existed.  When the NDP government came 



2596 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1994 

into power in the '70s, many of the programs that we now see 

as the essence of programing for Indian and Metis people were 

created during the time the NDP government was around. 

 

We started looking at such programs in the province, you 

know, arose the Indian teacher education program; there was 

the native law program in the province of Saskatchewan which 

graduates 80 per cent of all Indian and Metis and Inuit lawyers 

across Canada.  We had a system where we had set up southern 

urban native teacher education program.  We had NORTEP 

(northern teacher education program) teacher education 

program.  We had Saskatchewan Indian Federated College.  

And so a lot of the programing that was done for Indian and 

Metis people were started when an NDP government was there. 

 

And as we look back in history, we have continued to support 

these programs.  And even in my own area up in northern 

Saskatchewan where there was only about five people that were 

of Indian and Metis ancestry in the schools, now we have 

approximately 150, you know, that are graduated and teaching 

in the schools of northern Saskatchewan.  So as a government, 

we've always been known to provide the leadership in this 

direction right across Canada. 

 

And I think it's become well-known and appreciated, and I 

think as we move forward definitely, we had some 

decision-makings on tough times when we had to deal with the 

mismanagement of the budget by the previous government. 

 

But I think with the forward planning that is out there, with the 

fact that there was lead time in regards to making, you know, 

the tough decisions that needed to be made, I respect, you 

know, the fact that the proper choices were probably made in 

regards to trying to keep the best of what existed in the 

province of Saskatchewan, whether it was at the universities or 

the Indian and Metis programs or literacy and so on. 

 

So we have tried our best in living up and trying to get the best 

of programing, you know, given the tremendous budget 

situation that we were in. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'm not sure that you as 

NDP government can claim all you were claiming because this 

sort of work . . . I agree Saskatchewan has been in the forefront, 

but it has gone on under other governments besides yourself. 

 

What I'm asking about is what is happening now not only with 

the aboriginal programs, but with the apprenticeship programs, 

with the technical schools, with the universities?  How is this 

budget cut affecting them and what is this forward-looking plan 

that you have talked about? 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I guess the issue of quality education in 

this province has been well-known, you know, across Canada.  

And we have excellent people 

at the university, the technical institutes, you know, the boards 

in this province, and I know that they've been thoroughly 

involved in many aspects of the educational process and 

especially the interconnection between education and jobs and 

the apprenticeship area. 

 

And I know that I have a lot of respect in the decision-making 

process that they will have made the right decisions in regards 

to that interconnection.  And I believe that what they have done 

so far, from what we have gathered, has been again an excellent 

basis of decision given the tough situation. 

 

And I might add that on the apprenticeship side in northern 

Saskatchewan development, we had a $10.5 million 

announcement this year on northern training.  What had 

happened in the past that many of the people had gotten the 

labour and other jobs which was very important for northern 

development, as well as getting the mill operators and so on, 

but there have been relatively few in the apprenticeship area on 

electricians and also industrial mechanics and heavy duty 

mechanics and so on, and the carpenters.  And what we have 

said this past year . . . we redeveloped the programing so we 

are targeting those areas. 

 

We are moving . . . and as a matter of fact we used to have 

lesser amount of programing in the Athabasca region and the 

very, very far North, and we have gotten programing 

decentralized to that level.  So we're moving in on 

apprenticeship field so that . . . there used to be about 15 per 

cent employment of people in northern Saskatchewan at the 

mines with the previous government.  We now average up to 

40 per cent, 600 workers out there, and many of them are now 

moving into the apprenticeship trades. 

 

So we are trying to get this in the places of need, and I'm sure 

that the institutions in the South have done much the same as 

we have done in joint planning with them. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, I'm glad you have confidence 

in what's going on, but what I was asking about is an overall 

plan on the departmental level, and perhaps we can get back to 

that from another context.  According to the budget, overall 

there's less money being put in the student partnership-student 

employment program.  Can the minister explain the basis for 

that decision and articulate what steps have been taken to 

increase access to employment for students this year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- In regards to access, we have looked at 

the number of jobs.  And last year we had approximately a 

couple of thousand and this year we will have about 2,700.  

There is a basic subsidy for the businesses in that regard.  So 

we're up, you know, from where we were at last year. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- I'm not sure how that coordinates with what 

the budget said about being less in the student 

partnership-student employment program.  Can you tell me 

about that? 



May 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2597 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Basically the subsidy before was $2 per 

student.  It was dropped down to $1.20.  Then what happened is 

that we did a lot more intensive planning with the business 

community in making sure that the access, you know, by 

students would be there.  And we had a tremendous response 

from the business community.  And you know, they have 

worked with us in making sure that the students in this 

province, you know, could have jobs.  So that's where the 

increase came from, about 2,000 to 2,700. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Could you 

provide an analysis of the numbers of people receiving 

education through our post-secondary programs who actually 

end up pursuing careers after graduation out of province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I don't have that specific information right 

now, but we'll get back to you on that. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- I would appreciate that, Mr. Minister.  Can 

you tell us what the department's position is on charging tuition 

for extracurricular activities within the K to 12 school 

programs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- That is a school board decision. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, there appears to be some 

movement in Saskatchewan towards private schools.  I'm 

interested in knowing how the department's long-term plan 

addresses the continued emergence of private schools in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- We've had a policy development process, 

you know, this past year in regards to the independent schools.  

And we did outline a process, you know, with them.  And my 

understanding is at the last meeting it was more or less fairly 

well received. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- I understand you have a process, Mr. 

Minister, but do you have a vision or any idea where this is 

going?  Private schools seem to be popping up.  What is the 

department's vision for what will come of this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I mean, there's always been a concern 

over the history of education.  Initially the school system was 

fairly public.  It was not formal as it developed. 

 

Then a lot of the private school systems came into being.  

During that time in history only the rich were able to access the 

educational system.  And as such, a lot of the people during 

that historical period asked for public school system wherein 

everybody could go to school whether you were rich or 

whether you were poor. 

 

And with that, that vision was established a long time ago.  

And we continue that vision of having high quality publicly 

controlled schools in the province of Saskatchewan.  At the 

same time, we had respected the developments of independent 

schools in the process, you know, from where the policy had 

been developed this past year.  And I think that we had a 

certain degree of flexibility in that regard. 

 

But overall, I think the public sees us continuing with a public 

educational system publicly controlled.  And it's not to be 

absolutist in a sense wherein there is flexibility for independent 

schooling as well. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  You mentioned a 

process that you put together about private schools.  Is that 

written down?  Is that available? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Yes, we'll provide you with that 

document. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  With respect to local school 

closures, what criteria do you use to assess the viability of a 

school?  How does your department determine whether the 

school remains open or closes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- We don't make that decision.  That 

decision is made at the board level. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, is there any sort of guideline 

from the departments on the per-pupil cost factor to local 

school boards to give them some sort of framework for their 

decisions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I'm sure that individual boards will have 

excellent criteria in regards to making a decision, you know, 

before they do the school closures.  But those criteria are 

available at the board level.  If you wanted to have requests, 

you know, to the board in regards to what criteria they can use, 

I suppose as a public person you could probably do that. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'm interested in 

knowing where the game plan is for school district 

amalgamation.  There seems to be some confusion between the 

department and local school districts as to whether this is 

indeed a desirable or a necessary outcome.  Can you tell us 

where, in your vision of the direction of education for the 

province, where we are going with school board amalgamation 

and why? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- When we looked at that issue last year -- 

and we had waited for the political process that took place, you 

know, with the schools and the trustees -- we have come out 

with a system that was different from the processes in the East 

and also in Alberta.  And rather than going through on a 

process of doing something immediately, we said, let's go 

through a process of consultation and a voluntary process with 

the school divisions.  And that's a type of process, you know, 

that we have started. 

 

And as I mentioned to the other member, we see that this will 

require proposals from the divisions and boards and what 

happens is that there will be a committee that reviews that.  

And the decision, as I said before, would probably come in 

around mid-June. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- How long do you project that it will 



2598 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1994 

take for the voluntary amalgamation game to play out?  What 

leadership is your department showing in terms of a vision for 

the delivery of education services in the long term? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I think what we wanted to do in regards to 

our difference with . . . our different policy from the 

Conservative government in Alberta, we wanted to see what 

the results were in regards to quality education.  I mean the 

basics of any decision is quality education and what impact it 

has, you know, for the children. 

 

And we also wanted to look at the impact it would have 

financially, basically because, you know, that was a major issue 

that this government has stood for, for some time. 

 

So it was a combination of those two main factors that we 

looked at in regards to the issue of amalgamation, and we will 

therefore be watching very, very carefully in regards to what 

will actually happen in the process because it's always good to, 

rather than try and work it from a simple theoretical level at 

what it ought to be, it's better to work it out from the practice 

and the practical amalgamation processes that occurs here in 

the province.  And when that happens, then we can make the 

decision properly. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Is it true that 12 

Kindersley students are currently attending an Alberta school?  

Can you explain why this is, and can you offer the rationale on 

the part of your department in funding this situation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- In regards to the students at Kindersley, 

it's true that there are 12 students from the western edge of 

Kindersley school district attending school at Empress, Alberta.  

Now Kindersley is being fair in its tuition offerings and they 

could probably insist on students attending Saskatchewan 

schools.  Kindersley and the Alberta division need to work out 

an acceptable solution, and these are the points in regards to 

that solution; so that Saskatchewan students don't spend too 

long on the buses is one other issue.  The other one is that these 

students not be seen to be an expense to the Alberta system, 

and the school at Empress be closed or kept open without 

consideration of the Saskatchewan students as the determining 

factor. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, can you tell me how long the 

bus ride is for those 12 children? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Not at this time.  I'll get back to you on 

that one. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  Mr. Minister, I understand there 

is a committee to develop policy and practice guidelines for 

children with behaviour disorders, conduct disorders, and 

emotional disturbances. 

 

Mr. Minister, I've worked in this area for 25 years, and I'm very 

concerned about this.  Is there a target date for this committee, 

and if so, what is that date?  If not, is 

there . . . why is there no time line for its reporting?  And will 

the committee be addressing the need for preschool preventive 

programs? 

 

(1700) 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- We are doing this in a broader context of 

our child action plan, and there will be an interdepartmental 

approach to this issue.  A lot of the people had, you know, 

provided the fact that we needed to work together in a 

coordinated effort basically because one department or another 

was unable to resolve this issue throughout history.  And I 

think . . . we will try and get back to you on the specific 

information of a time line on it.  We are unable to ascertain 

exactly how long it will take at this time, and we'll try and get 

back to you on this, on the time line issue, later. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  As I said, I'm 

very concerned about this area because of the implications for 

prevention as well as treatment and the whole issue of 

interdepartmental cooperation.  I know it's been struggled with 

between the three departments for at least the 25 years I've 

been working in the field. 

 

I'm concerned as well with the percentage of high school 

graduates that are returning for upgrading after grade 12 

graduation.  Can you advise me what study has been made of 

the number of graduated students that re-enter the high school 

system for upgrading? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I don't have the exact number with me 

right now but I think we're looking at it in a context of lifelong 

learning.  There are some people who had initially dropped out 

of school, you know, and have come back, and I think it's very 

important for us when they're motivated and interested to come 

back to school.  We know that from a teaching-learning 

situation, you know, motivation is an important part of success.  

And in this context I think we're trying to work with them and 

address and support them in this sense. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Well, Mr. Minister, those are not the 

students I'm talking about.  I'm not talking about the drop-outs.  

I'm talking about the graduates who are coming back into high 

school after they graduate to apparently upgrade their skills.  

Can you give us any idea what changes are being made to the 

system to ensure that those young people who graduate from 

high school have adequate entry level for further training and 

post-secondary education? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I think there is always impact on decision 

making on what the university decides, you know, on what 

grade point averages are required in different colleges.  And if 

a particular student wants to get into medicine that student 

requires a certain average, or if a student wants to get into 

education they require a certain average and so on. 

 

So sometimes the students who may have a decent average may 

still want to upgrade their area in science because they may 

have felt that their science mark 



May 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2599 

was not as good because of the area that they wanted to enter 

in.  So they make the individual decision themselves to come 

back to school and retake some of these classes and improve 

their averages so that they can move forward to the university 

level. 

 

So it's done on an individual decision-making level at that time.  

And the teachers, I think, try as best as they could to see that 

because they recognize that the motivation is relatively high for 

students who do that, and I think in many cases, though the 

decision-making process is individual. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'm concerned that there 

may be a larger problem here, and I wondered if the department 

is doing any kind of assessment or study of this phenomenon 

which seems to have cropped up in the last few years.  I know 

that when I went to high school, people didn't go back to high 

school; they went on to whatever programs and training 

programs.  And I feel that there may be an issue here or issues.  

Is the department studying this one? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Yes, I guess we are in a sense, you know, 

providing the space for them in coming back to school and 

getting them to improve their own level.  In regards to impact, 

we will be monitoring the situation to see what it indeed 

requires and what type of action needs to happen in the future. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- So you're saying, at this moment there isn't a 

particular study going on of that phenomenon. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I think, you know, it will fluctuate in 

regards to what happens on university entrance requirements.  

And all we can do at the present time is provide, you know, 

those spaces for those students, and we leave it up to the 

excellent teachers who are working with them to try and do 

their best in the areas that they are interested in.  But as I said, 

we will continue to monitor it. 

 

As far as trying to get a budget on mid-stream on a study, you 

know, it would be a cost item, etc., and I feel that the regular 

monitoring that is done and the feedback, you know, that we do 

get from the teachers out there I think is sufficient.  So we'll be 

seeing what happens in the future. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Page 4 of the budget speech says: 

 

 Last year, almost $18 million was saved by making common 

sense changes to the day to day operations of government. 

 

 This year, we will save an additional $12 million. 

 

Could you tell me where your department made its share of 

these savings last year, and where you intend to make the 

savings this year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- The department's share is about 630,000. 

Mrs. Bergman: -- I understand the amount, but how did you 

go about making these savings? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- There's all kinds of administrative 

efficiencies -- rents, etc., and that type of thing, but those are all 

nitty-gritty items.  But it's basically administrative efficiencies. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, in 1993 you had full-time 

equivalents of 495.3 in your department.  The 1994 estimates 

reflect an estimated 484 full-time equivalents.  Can you explain 

what the objective was in eliminating those positions, and how 

it was decided which positions would be cut or eliminated?  

And can you give some idea of how this will serve to deliver 

services more effectively? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I mean this government has looked at 

administrative efficiencies throughout the system, and this has 

gone in regards to administrative costs, and it has impacted 

personnel at strategic levels.  And everybody knows that we do 

have . . . There is an expectation out there to cut in the area of 

administration and that's what we have done.  I mean that's all I 

can really say. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Could you give us the cost of the severance 

packages issued to those, approximately 11 employees. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- We've had 11 positions cut, and the total 

severance packages was approximately $50,000. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Are you saying that's the total severance 

package for all 11 positions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Out of the 11 only 2 were severance 

packages, so the total amount for severance packages was 

50,000. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I've been 

contacted by individuals from all over the province when they 

don't get results from government ministers and agencies, and 

I'd like to ask you a few questions that pertain to your 

department that have come to me in this way. 

 

My first question is regarding the High School Review 

Advisory Committee and the issue of high school English 

credit requirements.  What is your current position and that of 

your department regarding this proposal? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- We still haven't made a final decision so 

the existing situation stands and we'll let the public know at the 

point when we make that decision. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  The concerned teachers of 

Moose Jaw have written to you several times.  This group 

forecasts that if the committee recommendations are adopted, 

the following will very likely result: (1) it will be impossible to 

maintain current standards of achievement in communication 



2600 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1994 

skills; (2) Saskatchewan level of literacy will decline; (3) 

deeper divisions in society will be created as the gap between 

skilled communicators and weak communicators increases; and 

(4) the study of literature, especially Canadian literature, will 

be slashed. 

 

What response do you have to this group's concern? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Well we appreciate the concern.  We've 

had that information from Moose Jaw; we've had information 

from throughout the province.  We've had information dealing 

with all subject matter areas.  And we appreciate the 

tremendous concern that people have in regards to our total 

educational process as well as in English, and we will be taking 

this into consideration when we make our decision. 

 

(1715) 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I look forward to 

your decision on this matter. 

 

I have a letter from an individual I'll identify only as student 

loan account 1641660.  This young woman is a U of S 

(University of Saskatchewan) graduate from the College of 

Nursing.  She is now living in the United States due to the lack 

of employment opportunities for young nurses in this province. 

 

This young woman has been making payments toward a 

student loan of $9,000 for two years and she has managed to 

pay off $2,700 of it already.  Yet her account was turned over 

to a collection agency that is harassing her and her family.  The 

collection agency has told her that they will accept payments 

but will pursue her for the full amount as they only get their 

commission on the full payment.  Could you please commit to 

me that you will look into this situation and report back to me?  

I will send you a copy of her letter now. 

 

Perhaps though you could today advise me what your 

department's policy is regarding contracting out of collection 

services. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- You have provided me with a specific 

issue and a specific person.  Just provide us with that 

information after and we'll do some follow-up work on it. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, could you outline for me your 

department's policy on the contracting out of collection 

services? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- The policy is that we tender out the 

process and we . . . before we do that we have our own process 

of trying to collect.  And after a certain time period and so on, 

and after certain attempts, then the agency is then brought in. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- I appreciate your looking into this particular 

situation and I would like to thank you, Mr. Minister, and to 

your officials for the questions you answered. 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 5 agreed to. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Loans, Advances and Investments 

Education, Training and Employment 

Vote 141 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 141 agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I would like to thank my officials. We've 

had Ken Horsman and Lily Stonehouse, Jim Benning, and 

Robin Johnson.  And I'd also like to thank the members from 

across in regards to their questions today. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:23 p.m. 

 


