




















































Hansard: February 25, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN  447
 February 25, 1994 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Harper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to introduce to you and through you to all the 
members of the House four ladies sitting up in your gallery, 
Mr. Speaker.  It's my wife, Carol, and accompanying her 
here today is our youngest daughter, Corrin, who is a student 
at the U of S (University of Saskatchewan) and is on her 
mid-break here and is spending a few days in the city here 
with us.  And also accompanying them is Carol's sister, 
Gloria Rudnisky from Swan Plain and with Gloria, is 
Gloria's daughter, Roxanne Haberstock who is also on a 
break -- she's part of the teaching profession.  And I would 
wish them a good morning down here and ask all the 
members to offer them a very warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 
just delighted on behalf of the member from Elphinstone to 
introduce to you and through you to my colleagues in the 
legislature, six grade 12 social studies students from Scott 
Collegiate in Regina.  They are seated in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker, and they are accompanied by Ms. Sejal Pilatzke.  
I'm looking forward to meeting with them later on and I 
would ask everyone here to join me in welcomimg them 
warmly to this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Rural Emergency Health Care 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions are for 
the Minister of Health.  Madam Minister, the following event 
took place in Langenburg, once again one of the towns where 
rural hospitals had to close their acute care facilities 
eliminated last year. 
 
Kelly Hertlein's mother was struck by a hockey puck at the 
local arena and received some medical attention because two 
EMTs (emergency medical technician) happened to be there 
watching the game as well.  When it became apparent that 
she needed more in-depth medical attention, they dialed the 
much-touted emergency number. 
 
Madam Minister, it wasn't a doctor that answered.  It wasn't a 
nurse that answered.  It wasn't even the janitor that answered.  
After many rings one of the residents, a senior at the special 
care home who happened to be wandering by, answered the 
phone and then hung up. 
 
Madam Minister, I know you like to think that there are no 
problems out there in rural Saskatchewan.  I 

know you have said that medical treatment for rural residents 
have dramatically improved.  But this incident, and hundreds 
of others like it, tell a different story. 
 
Madam Minister, is this the form that your 24-hour 
emergency care has taken in small towns or is this simply a 
job creation scheme for seniors who live in special care 
homes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  
With respect to the case that the member has mentioned, I 
have asked the Department of Health to take a look at how 
the systems are working in that particular town.  I do want to 
mention of course, that if the member wishes to bring those 
facts to our attention that he has, we will take a look into 
them as well. 
 
I find that like the case he mentioned here in the House not 
so long ago, on the Moose Mountain Health District, his 
facts were incorrect, completely wrong.  And I will be 
pleased . . . and he's aware that they are.  In the same way 
that the facts raised by the member from Greystone were 
wrong on her particular case.  We are prepared to look into 
these individual cases where problems have arisen and to 
correct the situation if there's a problem there.  The members 
should feel free to phone my office at any time, provide us 
with the information, and we'll get on it immediately. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, 
subsequent to that they phoned again.  Finally a nurse from 
the special care home answered and informed the callers that 
no doctors were on call.  Madam Minister, your wellness 
program offered them an option, she said.  They were 
informed that medical services could be received in Yorkton, 
about 70 kilometres away; Esterhazy, about 45 kilometres 
away, or they could go to Manitoba -- Russell, Manitoba. 
 
We have known for some time that Saskatchewan is closed 
for business, but they are telling injured people that 
Saskatchewan is now closed for medical services as well and 
maybe they should go to Manitoba. 
 
Madam Minister, they were finally able to get a hold of a 
doctor which had previously treated the family.  The patient 
was driven, not by ambulance but by the RCMP (Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police), to the hospital in Langenburg 
where EMTs had to unlock the door because it was locked 
and closed -- the facility. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Does the member have a 
question?  I ask the member to put his . . . Order.  I'll ask the 
member to put his question, please. 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, this sounds like an episode of 
Keystone Kops except that this happening, 



448 Saskatchewan Hansard February 25, 1994 

is actually happening to real people in Saskatchewan.  
Madam Minister, what would have happened if someone in 
Langenburg would have suffered a severe heart attack or if 
one of the players at the hockey game received a serious 
skate laceration or some other emergency?  What would you 
suggest the people of Langenburg do now, Madam Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, with respect to the 
situation that the member opposite is mentioning, I believe 
that from the newspaper reports that I read there were two 
stitches that were required.  And I want to say this: the 
emergency services are being provided through the long-term 
care facility in Langenburg and that is where patients should 
be presenting themselves.  And Langenburg is looking at a 
possibility of having a health centre attached to their 
long-term care facility.  Right now the hospital is separated 
from the long-term care centre. 
 
Now with respect to whether doctors are on call or not, the 
member opposite knows full well that that has nothing to do 
with health reform.  It has to do with doctors' practices 
within their communities.  And we do not require doctors to 
be there.  This is up to them, because they're private 
individuals practising on their own. 
 
However we do want to develop through these health centres 
multi-disciplinary practices with physicians and nurses 
working side by side, which is why we've started an 
advanced clinical nurses' training program to deal with 
situations particularly in rural Saskatchewan where the 
physician may have taken the evening off or the weekend 
off, so that nurses can fill in with advanced clinical training, 
some of these services. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, the 
editor of the local paper said that this story would not have 
been so comical if someone had a severe injury.  The editor 
says, and I quote: 
 

 The reality is that we are in much greater danger than we 
were last year at this time.  At that time we had 24-hour 
emergency treatment available at the old Langenburg 
hospital, complete with back-up lab and x-ray support. 

 
 A person knew that medical assistance would be available 

at the hospital regardless of the time of day or night. 
 
 Such is not the case any longer.  Because the new system 

has not . . . 
 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  The member knows 
he can't have a long, long preamble to his next question, and 
I wish the member would put his question. 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, the editor 

of the local newspaper says that your hospital system is a 
sham; that people in Saskatchewan now have to travel into 
Manitoba.  Madam Minister, will you make the commitment 
today to the people of Langenburg that you will look into the 
situation and provide them with 24-hour medical services as 
is needed in that community? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The members opposite, as usual, are 
misinforming the public.  At Langenburg they have an acute 
care nurse on 20 hours in a day and 24 hours a day they have 
a nurse -- not only a nurse but an acute care nurse for 20 
hours a day, and 24 hours a nurse is on call. 
 
For the member opposite to suggest that there isn't medical 
services in Langenburg 24 hours a day, and there isn't 
emergency medical services, is false, it's misinformation, it's 
wrong.  And I believe the member is aware of that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Education Funding Cuts 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question 
is to the Minister of Education.  Madam Minister, you've 
stated that your so-called delivering the promise budget 
means no program cuts.  This is pure balderdash.  The day 
after your budget, one trustee from Saskatoon stated and I 
quote: 
 

 There is no way the board can escape program cuts after 
sustaining a four percent cut this year". 

 
There was no way they can escape a program cut, Madam 
Minister.  In the light of this fact, how can you possibly say 
that there will be no program cuts? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 
member for the question.  As all members will know in the 
Assembly, all school boards in this province were advised 
about a year ago that there would be a 4 per cent reduction in 
education funding for the fiscal year 1994-95.  It was our 
opinion that advising school boards one year in advance 
would give them an opportunity to plan for that fiscal year. 
 
I'm pleased to say to the member opposite that we have 
announced that there will be no further reductions, barring 
some unforeseen catastrophe, for the fiscal year 1995-1996. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam 
Minister, what you did is you give them a year to plan your 
program cuts.  The SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association) says that: 
 

 Children in classrooms are going to feel the 



February 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 449 

effects of this funding cutback. 
 

Children are going to feel the effect of your 1994 budget.  
The SSTA goes on to say: 
 

 The ability of communities to provide high quality 
education is becoming increasingly jeopardized. 

 
Madam Minister, you know that your '94 budget means 
quotas; it means program cuts in schools; it means loss of 
teaching positions; it means hikes to university tuitions.  
How can you stand here today and claim this budget means 
no program cuts?  How can you say that to Saskatchewan 
students when you know that isn't true? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 
member for the question.  If he were to look to our 
Conservative neighbours in Alberta and listen to the budget 
that was delivered by your Conservative cousins in Alberta, 
you would know that they cut their education budget by 12.4 
per cent. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I can't hear the minister.  
There's much too much noise.  Order.  The noise started at a 
fairly high level immediately this morning and it just seems 
to be going up, and I can't hear the question that is asked or 
the answer that is given.  At least we should have that 
courtesy. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Not only did the Conservative 
cousins in Alberta cut education programing in their 
province by over 12 per cent, but they have in essence gotten 
rid of school boards, which is the tradition of this province to 
work in partnership with our educational partners.  There 
will be no public school system or Catholic school system 
collecting taxes.  That is not the route that our government 
has decided to go.  We are working in concert with our 
partners to deliver an education system that is second to none 
in this country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm sure the 
students in Alberta are glad that the minister is concerned 
about them.  But how about some concern for the students in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Saskatchewan students are going to 
feel your cut-backs in the classroom, Madam Minister.  
University students are going to feel your cut-backs with 
tuition hikes and quotas.  Saskatchewan families are going to 
feel your cut-backs through hikes in their property tax.  How 
and why do you say that this budget means no program cuts 
and no tax increases when your budget means exactly the 
opposite? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I want to thank the member for his 
question.  Mr. Speaker, our fiscal turnaround in this province 
has been unprecedented in Canadian history.  The fiscal 
turnaround in this province is remarkable, and we would not 
have been able to do that without the help of the 
Saskatchewan people through their elected local 
governments like school boards and municipalities. 
 
We applaud our partners because they have worked with us 
as we've made this remarkable recovery.  And because 
they've worked with us, Mr. Speaker, we can say to our 
education partners that there will be no further funding 
reductions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, I'm sure the students 
feel as comforted about the idea of no further cuts to their 
monies as they feel about no program cuts, because it's going 
to happen.  Your government has already increased the 
deficit by $2 billion since 1992, and your budget's supposed 
to mean no tax increases? 
 
Today, Madam Minister, the school boards, to be able to 
provide the same level of programs and services and 
maintain the same staff levels as last year, there must be an 
average of 3 mill increase to the property tax.  A 3 mill 
increase in most areas before -- before -- your 4 per cent 
cut-back to the K to 12 system.  So much for your delivering 
the promise of no tax increases. 
 
How can you in good conscience, Madam Minister, lead the 
public to believe that they are safe from tax increases when 
you know full well that your cuts to education will mean 
increases to property taxes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 
member for the question.  As I said earlier, this province has 
advised our educational partners that there will be no further 
funding reductions for the 1995-1996 fiscal year.  What I 
said earlier is that we, through our fiscal planning, were able 
to advise our partners last year of the funding reductions for 
this year. 
 
As a result of our careful fiscal planning with all of our third 
parties -- because in fact monies to third parties in essence 
are two-thirds of a provincial budget -- you have to have 
your provincial partners onside with you in order to meet the 
targets that have come about as a result of your fiscal 
mismanagement from 1982 to 1991.  You left us with a $15 
billion debt.  All of our partners in this province have helped 
us meet our targets and we have had a remarkable 
turnaround, Mr. Member. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Farm Safety Nets 
 
Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 



450 Saskatchewan Hansard February 25, 1994 

Speaker, this question is to the Minister of Agriculture and 
Food.  Before the last election the current Labour minister . . 
. before the last election the current Labour minister 
criticized the Conservative Finance minister by saying there 
were a hundred million better ways for the Finance minister 
to get money in the hands of farmers than taxing city folks.  
The member for Churchill Downs said the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) could find well over a hundred million 
dollars a year that would pay for GRIP (gross revenue 
insurance program) and NISA (net income stabilization 
account) programs just by eliminating waste and 
mismanagement. 
 
Mr. Minister, when will your government produce the 
agriculture strategy you have been promising for two and a 
half years and pay for it the way you promised, by 
eliminating waste and mismanagement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, it's great to 
see that the member from Shaunavon hasn't lost his magic 
calculator.  He can still do the magic numbers.  Very simple 
to bail out the farmers in this province. 
 
The international price war in this province is costing this 
province . . . the producers in this province lose . . . bases the 
international price war around a billion dollars a year.  Use 
anybody's numbers; it's somewhere in that neighbourhood is 
what the international price war is costing the producers of 
this province. 
 
We have a small economy; we have a million people.  If the 
member opposite is suggesting, as he did when he sat on this 
side, that we would somewhere find a billion dollars to bail 
out Saskatchewan farmers -- and that doesn't bail them out. 
That just makes up the difference on the loss that we're 
having on international price war -- now I don't know where 
you'd find that without going to the people of this country 
and the federal government to get that money.  And that, I 
think, is where you should be talking to Mr. Goodale and 
your federal counterparts if you really think you're going to 
find a billion dollars for farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I think 
translated, what he's saying is they don't have the will or the 
ability to address the problem.  Mr. Speaker, do the members 
not realize Saskatchewan is a province, an agricultural 
province, and the NDP is the provincial government in the 
province?  It's just about time for the NDP government to 
stop passing the buck and blaming the former and federal 
governments for everything. 
 
To the minister, you have had two and a half years to take 
your proposals of a revised safety net to the federal 
government.  If your government has a workable plan you 
want the federal to support, have you ratified it with the 
farmers, and when will you bring it forward in this 
Assembly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, we have our ag 
strategy out and we are carrying forward with it and you can 
see that in the budget. 
 
I would like to ask the member from Shaunavon where his 
federal counterparts are; they've cut a hundred million dollars 
in this budget from agriculture and the program they cut the 
heaviest was the WGTA (Western Grain Transportation Act) 
which impacts on Saskatchewan much more than it impacts 
on any other province.  Are we going to pass that . . . that 
buck has been passed onto us already and we are picking up 
all that we can possibly pick up in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Speaker, before the last provincial 
election the Premier was quoted as saying, and I quote: 
farmers are facing tough economic times and the province 
must do everything we can to keep farmers on the farm. 
 
To the Minister of Agriculture, last fiscal year your 
department spent $334 million.  In the recent budget, you 
have allowed only $321 million to be spent on agriculture.  
That's a drop of more than $13 million, and that's the third 
straight deficit . . . drop in the budget, third straight drop in a 
row. 
 
Mr. Minister, is this what you do to help farm families?  Do 
you do it by cutting back? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, as the member 
points out we spent over $300 million in the ag budget.  
There's another $100 million in fuel tax credits and some 
other benefits that go to farmers.  This government, this 
government is spending something like 10 to 11 per cent of 
our budget on farmers.  We are supporting our farmers. 
 
I would like to know where the member stands on the federal 
budget that just came out where they are cutting their support 
to farmers and particularly on cuts to the Crow rate.  Where 
do you stand on cuts to the Crow rate?  Where do you stand 
on interest-free cash advances which your counterparts 
promised in the past election and have not delivered on?  
Where does he stand on those issues? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Speaker, at a federal-provincial 
agriculture ministers' meeting in Winnipeg recently, it was 
revealed that the province of Saskatchewan is projecting a 
surplus of $320 million in the GRIP fund.  I asked this, I 
asked this question of the acting minister on February 15 and 
he refused to answer it. 
 
Now I'm asking the minister:  confirm this if it's correct and 
what plans do you have for this money.  And will you 
commit to returning it to the farm families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



February 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 451 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the 
surpluses in the GRIP fund will depend on the prices and the 
final prices of the products, and the member well knows that.  
We will not know those surpluses until the end of the year.  I 
guess what I would like to point out to the member is that if 
we have a surplus in our fund, that will certainly be different 
from Alberta and Manitoba, who will have deficits.  And 
guess who gets to pay the deficits?  The producers get to pay 
higher and higher premiums to cover those deficits. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Media Services Appointments 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Deputy Premier.  Mr. Deputy Premier, the 
other day my colleague from Wilkie asked you about what 
appeared to be a downsizing of government, the disbanding 
of your cabinet press office. 
 
As it turns out, this wasn't a downsizing at all as all six of 
these people have resurfaced elsewhere in government.  In 
fact, you moved two of your own political assistants out of 
the cabinet press office into the media services office, an 
office that I remind you is supposed to be non-partisan.  The 
other day you hired a new communications event coordinator 
for this office at a salary range of 51,900 to 67,400 a year. 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, why were none of these new 
appointments to media services advertised and open to public 
competition as a non-partisan office should be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, it is true that the 
executive council is . . . has been downsized.  The member 
opposite only has to look at the estimates to see the kind of 
numbers that are there and compare them to last year because 
the government, as we have done throughout all of the 
government, has reduced the operating side of government 
by $32 million in the last two years; where on a comparative 
basis with the federal Liberal government is far beyond what 
they have been able to achieve in their budget. 
 
I think that that's an indication of a commitment to reduce 
the size of government while protecting, as best we can, the 
services that go to the people.  In the unit that the member 
opposite asks about, the positions which he refers to are 
order in council positions and so therefore they have been 
hired as order in council positions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Deputy Premier, in addition to moving 
two of your political appointees into media services, your 
new media events coordinator is an individual named Anne 
Davis.  Could you please tell the House if this is the same 
Anne Davis whose name appears on the list of New 
Democrats, whose name has appeared in The 
Commonwealth as supporting the Economic Development  
minister's bid to become 

president of the NDP?  Is this the same person? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I am not familiar 
with the activities of this individual in her duties as a citizen, 
beyond her responsibilities in the office and the position that 
she holds. 
 
I can say to the member opposite that Anne Davis is a very 
qualified individual to do what she is doing.  We are very 
happy to be able to have her there to make the contribution, 
to making this government the best government that this 
province has ever had.  And we will continue to apply that 
kind of criteria on the people which we hire because the 
people of Saskatchewan deserve that kind of a consideration, 
and that's what we will continue to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Deputy Premier, it seems that 
that was certainly a good career move.  And I'll quote from 
The Commonwealth because I have the list here with me.  It 
says, and I quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

 Dwain has a record of commitment to the party and has 
demonstrated his ability to work with New Democrats to 
get the (patronage) job done. 

 
Oh, I'm sorry:  ". . . to get the job done." 
 
Now a list of 20 people off of here, Mr. Deputy Premier, 
have already got government jobs.  How can you justify 
media services, which is supposed to be non-partisan, which 
I as the Leader of the Opposition go down and use, how can 
you justify putting a person off of this list in there and have 
the gall to stand in this House and say that she isn't a political 
appointment doing your political work.  How can you do 
that, sir? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, considering that in 
1991 the New Democratic Party -- this government -- 
received 51 per cent of the popular vote, it is not unusual that 
some of the people who will apply for and get jobs within the 
government may have been supporters of the New 
Democratic Party in 1991. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, just simply because people have views, 
philosophically and otherwise, shouldn't disqualify them for 
doing jobs in the government, the public sector, or anywhere 
else. 
 
The individual the member refers to is perfectly qualified for 
the position, will make an important contribution to the 
public service, will serve the Government of Saskatchewan 
and the members on the opposition, and most importantly, 
Mr. Speaker, will serve the people of Saskatchewan very 
well and that's why she is where she is today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 



452 Saskatchewan Hansard February 25, 1994 

Bill No. 17 -- An Act to amend The Municipal Employees' 
Superannuation Act 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 
Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend The Municipal 
Employees' Superannuation Act, be now introduced and read 
a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second 
time at the next sitting. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I 
would ask leave to make a statement in regards to Mr. Vaive 
and his leaving the Assembly. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(1030) 

TRIBUTE TO DEPUTY CLERK 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to 
all members of the House.  I rise today, Mr. Speaker, to wish 
a fond farewell to Robert Vaive, the Deputy Clerk of our 
Assembly.  As we all know, Bob has sat at the Table in 
Saskatchewan for the last four years since arriving here from 
the House of Commons in Ottawa, and is now on his way to 
the Legislative Assembly of British Columbia. 
 
I'd like to sincerely say that I think that British Columbia's 
gain this morning, Bob, is our loss because I think both sides 
of the House would agree, whether it is in here or in 
committee, that you've certainly been very diligent in your 
endeavours here. 
 
So I would just like to say to you on behalf of the 
Progressive Conservative caucus that we wish you well in 
your new position.  I know that you and your family will 
certainly find Victoria a very pleasant place to live.  And one 
only had to walk outside at minus 26 this morning to realize 
there's probably warmer places and more inviting. 
 
But we really do appreciate the diligence that you've shown 
here and we know that the Legislative Assembly in British 
Columbia will also receive that same diligence.  And, Bob, 
we really do wish you the most sincere congratulations and 
the best wishes for the future in British Columbia and 
wherever you happen to go, serving the democratic process 
in our country.  Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker.  I thought of this as I drove this morning to the 
legislature.  I couldn't imagine why anyone would want to go 
to B.C. (British Columbia) this morning as I drove in minus 
26 weather at the end of February. 
 
Members of this caucus want to join our colleagues in 
opposition in wishing Mr. Vaive well.  It seems to be our lot 
to find very talented people and then send them on to B.C.  
You will join at least one other -- two others, two other 
Clerks -- who began here in 

 Saskatchewan.  The previous two had a fair amount of 
ability but don't quite seem to have got that House running as 
we think it should, so we expect to see a vast improvement in 
the B.C. legislature from here on in. 
 
Seriously, you have discharged your duties with dignity and 
ability, and that's much appreciated by members of this 
Assembly.  We don't often take time to say that and we 
should, but we certainly want to do so now.  We very much 
appreciate the help you've given us, the dignity which you 
have lent to this Assembly, and we wish you the very best in 
B.C.  Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 
Speaker, it was my pleasure for two years in opposition as 
chair of the Public Accounts Committee and, more recently, 
as Chair of the Committee of the Whole, to have worked 
very closely with Bob Vaive.  In those capacities I've gotten 
to know Bob, and I can say that I have appreciated the sound 
advice that he has given me over the years, that I appreciated 
the help that he has given me over the years, in both those 
capacities and as a member of the legislature. 
 
This is a person with tremendous ability, a good sense of 
humour, and qualities that the people of B.C. were looking 
for, and we're going to miss him.  And I want to wish him 
well, and his family, as they take on new challenges on the 
west coast.  I join with the member for Churchill Downs in 
contemplating the weather.  I understand that this opening 
came about and he was contemplating this as our 
temperatures were in the neighbourhood of minus 30 to 
minus 40.  And we may be losing him as a misfortune of 
timing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But having said all that, I want to wish Bob and his family all 
the best in B.C. and thank him for his service to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too want to 
acknowledge the work that Mr. Vaive has done in this 
Assembly and particularly in Public Accounts.  I know that 
he has provided a very quiet, gentle manner to the 
committee.  I note that he has done that with a great deal of 
intensity, and the intensity comes when you start talking 
about hockey and whether you cheer for Toronto or 
Montreal.  And I've noted that he is an avid Montreal fan, 
which I don't find surprising. 
 
But I know also that he's a fan of the parliamentary system.  
He worked hard in the House of Parliament in Ottawa.  He 
and I were there last spring for a meeting, and he walked 
about that building with a sense of reverence and awe that I 
found was both inspiring and it showed me the kind of 
person he was.  He has a great deal of respect for the 
democratic process and a great deal of respect for those 
people who work there, and also for the people who are 
elected.  And that translated itself into a great deal of 
sympathy -- no, empathy perhaps -- for the kinds of things 
that we do 



February 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 453 

in Saskatchewan. 
 
So Robert, on behalf of myself and the rest of the PC 
(Progressive Conservative) caucus, we want to thank you for 
that.  And you don't have to cheer for the Vancouver 
Canucks when you go there; you can still cheer for Montreal.  
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's indeed an honour 
just to stand in this Assembly and to recognize the work of 
individuals who work at the Table, and certainly Mr. Vaive.  
And I want to thank him especially, as chairman of the 
Regulations Committee, for his involvement, his input.  
Certainly he's been an inspiration to myself. 
 
Many times as MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 
we sit around, we come into this large structure that we call 
the Legislative Assembly and all these committees that 
operate, and we begin to wonder where is Z, where does Z 
come in place in reference to point A in this House and how 
it operates.  And Regulations Committee is a committee that 
seems to be very insignificant, but it certainly plays an 
important role, an important part; and as the chairman, I 
really appreciated Mr. Vaive's time that he spent with me 
explaining the role and the purpose and just giving me sound 
advice.  And I want to thank him.  I want to extend best 
wishes.  Maybe one day we'll join you out in B.C., Robert.  
Best wishes to you and your family.  Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I intend 
to be very brief because I'm sure if Mr. Vaive collects the 
Hansard recording of the comments here today, it's about at 
this point that it'll begin to sound more like a eulogy than a 
moment of commendation. 
 
So let me be very brief, and simply to say that it's been my 
honour to serve in the Assembly for the past two and a half 
years as Deputy Chair of committee, which means that we've 
spent many hours seated next to each other and trying to 
bring order where there is disorder at times.  And I'd just 
simply say to Mr. Vaive that I have appreciated the wise 
counsel and his strong respect for democratic principles, 
respecting both the need of government to govern and the 
opposition to challenge.  And that I think it's been wisdom 
that he's brought to give me advice in the carrying out of my 
roles. 
 
I've also appreciated as well that Mr. Vaive's son and my 
daughter have been engaged in similar athletic challenges in 
the province, and that we have had a chance to rub shoulders 
occasionally away from this Assembly.  And I've appreciated 
coming to know some of his other loves in life, in addition to 
his appreciation for the parliamentary process. 
 
So I simply would like to say on the public record what I've 
already said privately to Mr. Vaive:  I've enjoyed working 
together with you, I wish you and your wife 

and your family a lot of happiness, and that you'll enjoy your 
time and the development of your career in British 
Columbia.  Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cline: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to rise briefly 
just as one of the newly elected members, elected in 1991.  I 
believe I am the only one of the speakers who is a newly 
elected member.  And I want to say that as such Mr. Vaive 
has certainly been very helpful to me and I know to all 
members in terms of learning our role, and of course we have 
a lot to learn. 
 
I had the opportunity to be with Mr. Vaive in Toronto when 
the public accounts committees met last July and also in 
Ottawa at the Canadian Parliamentary Association 
conference.  Mr. Vaive not only was helpful to me and the 
members of our committee, but helped us I think represent 
our province well at those meetings.  And I certainly have 
been impressed and I think my knowledge of the system 
enriched by being able to work with Mr. Vaive.  And I just 
want to join with others in wishing him all the best.  Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- I wonder if the members would permit the 
Speaker to say a few words on behalf of Bob. 
 
This is most difficult for me to have a friend leave.  In the 
last two and a half years, I've gotten to know Bob very well, 
and as you people are well aware, you baptized me with fire 
in the first year with the GRIP legislation and the 
bell-ringing; and Bob was always there with the advice that I 
needed as a new Speaker and to keep the parliamentary 
procedure going. 
 
But what I valued mostly of Bob was his quiet way of going 
about doing things.  He never gets too excited about things 
even if there is a crisis, but you can always count on his 
valuable advice.  And one of the things that I really 
appreciated was the contacts that he had in Ottawa and the 
experience he brought with him from Ottawa.  If there was 
ever any advice or information we needed from Ottawa, we 
could just count on Bob.  He had his contacts there and this, 
as a Speaker, I really did appreciate. 
 
I know, Bob, members have said here that they will miss you 
and miss you as far as your expertise is concerned in 
parliamentary procedure.  But I can assure the members that 
the Speaker, the present Speaker, will miss you most of all.  
As I say, I've counted upon your advice and you've given me 
very valuable advice in the last two and a half years. 
 
I do want to wish you well.  But I do also wish that you 
would have taken up the question that I asked you the other 
day about a lateral transfer for the Speaker to Victoria.  I 
know most members would applaud that, but I'm still . . . not 
only that, but the pay in B.C. is much better too. 
 
But, Bob, I do want to wish you well and I want to wish 



454 Saskatchewan Hansard February 25, 1994 

your family well.  On behalf of the Assembly, I thank you 
very much for the valuable work that you've done for us not 
only in the Chamber, but in committee work.  It'll be a long, 
long time before the name of Bob Vaive will be forgotten in 
this Chamber.  Thank you very kindly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 9 -- An Act to repeal The Agriculture 
Development Fund Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 
Speaker, at the end of my remarks I'll move second reading 
of The Agriculture Development Fund Repeal Act, 1994.  
Mr. Speaker, agriculture research and development is vital to 
the future of agriculture in Saskatchewan.  It is a key 
component of Agriculture 2000, the province's agriculture 
strategy. 
 
We are seeing major technological advance in areas such as 
agriculture biotechnology.  Success will come provided all 
interested players are prepared to commit resources toward 
achieving results.  The Government of Saskatchewan needs 
to be a part of that commitment.  We have made some 
changes to improve the effectiveness of our research funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Department of Agriculture 
and Food has undergone a significant restructuring over the 
past year to improve its efficiency and to position itself for 
the challenges of the 21st century.  As part of that 
restructuring, the Saskatchewan Agriculture Development 
Fund, or ADF, rejoined the Department of Agriculture and 
Food from which it was separated by The Agriculture 
Development Fund Act in 1989. 
 
Mr. Speaker, provisions in this repeal legislation will transfer 
all powers, privileges, and duties of ADF to the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food under The Department of Agriculture 
Act.  All properties belonging to Agriculture Development 
Fund, both real and personal, is transferred to Her Majesty in 
the right of Saskatchewan.  The assets and liabilities of the 
funds are transferred to the General Revenue Fund. 
 
The Agriculture Development Fund remains in place but it 
will operate under The Department of Agriculture Act, as it 
did prior to October 1989.  Consolidation within the 
department will ensure that agriculture development funding 
contributes significantly to the province's agriculture strategy 
that was released in November 1993.  The board responsible 
for allocating research and development funds will be 
retained. 
 
That board is composed of producers, university, the 
research community, and Agriculture and Food 
representatives.  The ability of industry representatives 

 to direct the priorities will not be diminished.  In fact I am 
pleased to report that the board is working very effectively. 
 
(1045) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Agriculture Development Fund is now 
being operated very effectively within the department.  
Repeal of The Agriculture Development Fund Act brings 
closure to a decision made in the spring of 1993 to simplify 
and improve the delivery of agricultural research and 
development funding.  Clients have been dealing with the 
new administrative structure, and now I'm pleased to report 
are finding it to be a major improvement.  Passage of the Act 
will eliminate the fund's need for a separate annual report 
and do away with the cost of an outside audit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, repealing The Agriculture Development Fund 
Act is an administrative requirement to make legislation 
conform with the new departmental structure for delivering 
research funding.  It is cumulative of a number of changes 
we have made to make better use of our research dollars. 
 
Therefore I ask members of the Assembly to support this Act 
and I move second reading of Bill No. 9, The Agriculture 
Development Fund Repeal Act. 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, as 
opposition members, we recognize the significance of 
agriculture in this province, and certainly we can empathize 
with the government as well as they look at ways and means 
of cutting down the costs of administering government. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, many producers across the province -- 
and certainly not just across the province of Saskatchewan 
but across Canada -- are quite well aware of the necessity for 
ongoing research as we look at the dramatic changes that will 
be taking place in agriculture; and how we continue to work 
and support and feed not only this nation but the people of 
the world. 
 
As I listened to the minister's comments, Mr. Speaker, I 
would trust that as this ADF fund has been now transferred 
back to the Department of Agriculture, that it just doesn't get 
swallowed up in the department, and then all of a sudden 
disappear.  And that may be one of the major concerns, that 
it is sitting there.  Some of the questions that -- as we look at 
the legislation a little fuller and a little closer -- that we will 
be able to bring out and bring to the minister's attention, so 
that indeed we're not only looking at efficiencies but we're 
looking at still providing an effective service that will 
continue to meet the challenges of agriculture in the future. 
 
And to allow my colleague responsible for Agriculture to 
take a further look, I'll move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 



February 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 455 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- With leave, to introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to 
you and through you to the members of the Assembly some 
people in your gallery from the Saskatchewan Energy 
Authority.  They're here to watch the proceedings.  They 
came in after we'd started and I'd like to welcome the 
chairman of the board and the other members to this 
Assembly.  So would you please welcome them to Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 10 -- An Act to amend The Vegetable and Honey 
Sales Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  At the 
end of my remarks I'll move second reading of The 
Vegetable and Honey Sales Amendment Act, 1994. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the commercial production of fruit is a growing 
industry in Saskatchewan and provides an important 
opportunity for diversification and value added processing.  
The original Vegetable and Honey Sales Act of 1947 
provided for inspection, grading, and packaging standards 
for vegetable and honey commercially marketed in 
Saskatchewan but did not anticipate a commercial fruit 
industry.  The Vegetable and Honey Sales Amendment Act, 
1994 recognizes the development of the industry, and will 
change the name of the Act to The Vegetable, Fruit and 
Honey Sales Act, and include fruit under the definition of 
produce contained in the Act. 
 
As a result of this amendment the Act will allow for the 
establishment of regulations dealing with commercial fruit 
marketing in the province.  Fruit producers have made great 
gains in developing markets for Saskatchewan-grown fruits, 
primarily saskatoons, blueberries, raspberries and 
strawberries.  The necessary harvesting equipment is also 
now available.  Future development will include 
choke-cherries and plums. 
 
Currently the fruit industry is primarily based on direct 
producer-to-consumer sales which are exempt from the Act, 
but as production acreage increases, commercial marketing 
will develop.  The Government of Saskatchewan will be in a 
position to respond to needs, identified by the industry, by 
passing regulations to establish grading and packing 
standards.  These standards when required will be 
established in consultation with the Saskatchewan Fruit 
Growers' Association. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government's other purpose in amending 
the Act is to bring two rather dated sections 

 up to date.  Therefore the Act's wording regarding the 
method of providing notice under the Act has been changed 
to delete references to telegrams, and to include telephones 
and facsimiles as approved methods of providing notice of 
detained produce shipments. 
 
The new Act deletes references to telegrams, and includes 
telephones and facsimiles as approved methods of providing 
notice. 
 
Also the section dealing with violations of the Act has been 
amended to increase penalties.  This is done to ensure that 
fines provide a relevant deterrent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the members of the Assembly to support 
this Act, and I move second reading of Bill No. 10, The 
Vegetable and Honey Sales Amendment Act, 1994. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, as I was 
listening to the minister's comments as he introduced the Bill 
today, he mentioned the fact that there's a need to bring this 
Act up to date, and I don't think my colleagues and I disagree 
with that fact.  That as we look at our changing society and 
the changing roles that we all face and certainly the changes 
in agriculture, and over the past . . . the decade of the '80s, 
there was talk of diversifying agriculture.  And then we've 
seen the growth of the honey industry in this province; we've 
seen the growth in the fruit and vegetable industry, and I 
think it's indeed appropriate that we review legislation. 
 
And I'm sure the minister has taken time to at least consult 
with honey producers and fruit and vegetable growers, 
seeking their input regarding some of these changes. 
 
Now as we get into further debate on the Bill, we'll probably 
be asking the minister who he's consulted with, who he's 
talked to, what kind of recommendations the groups have 
come up with, and at the end of the day, we trust when the 
Bill has finally moved through this Assembly that everyone 
that will be affected by the Bill will certainly have had the 
time to voice their concerns and that the government has 
taken the time to listen.  And in bringing a Bill up to date, we 
are not only just changing it for the sake of changing it, but 
certainly it's becoming just a lot more clear so that producers 
that are affected by this Bill in the future will know that 
they've got all the guidelines and the rules and the 
regulations in front of them. 
 
And I would suggest that the minister continue this 
consultative process even as we debate the Bill further, to 
indeed meet the challenges that we will face in the future. 
 
And at this time I move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 12 -- An Act to amend The Ombudsman Act 



456 Saskatchewan Hansard February 25, 1994 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  
Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise today to move second 
reading of The Ombudsman Amendment Act, 1994. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I could, I'd like to just join my colleagues to 
say hi to the officials from the institute.  And I'm feeling a 
little extra pressure this morning because Mr. Johnson's a 
long-term friend and he'll probably report in church on 
Sunday how I do this morning.  So at any rate, welcome 
here, and it's good to see you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, shortly after forming the government in 1991, 
we made an important decision, a decision which has 
improved and will continue to improve the lives of thousands 
of children and families throughout Saskatchewan.  That 
decision was to make the well-being of Saskatchewan 
children, youth, and their families a priority. 
 
This has been a big challenge, Mr. Speaker, given the huge 
debt that was left by the previous administration.  And I'm 
proud to say that in each and every budget since we've 
formed government we've put additional money into social 
programs in support of families and children in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This government recently announced a series of initiatives 
under the Saskatchewan action plan for children.  These 
initiatives underline the importance we place on prevention 
services for children and supports to vulnerable families.  
These initiatives result from consultation and planning 
involving many government departments, agencies, private 
organizations, and individuals. 
 
The action plan is bringing together individuals, 
organizations, communities, and government to eliminate 
some of the barriers which have long stood in the way of 
coordinating policies, programs, and services for children 
and families. 
 
The principles upon which the action plan is built, Mr. 
Speaker, state that actions to enhance the well-being of 
children and youth must be preventative, culturally 
appropriate, supportive, collaborative, holistic, and 
empowering.  And the best interests of the child must be the 
primary consideration.  It is our belief, Mr. Speaker, that the 
action plan will act as a catalyst in focusing community 
efforts to advocate on behalf of children and youth. 
 
Establishment of the Children's Advocate, as an independent 
voice for Saskatchewan children and youth, is a key 
component of the action plan.  In 1992 this government 
appointed an independent task force to examine options for 
child and youth advocacy.  The task force met with, or 
received submissions from, over 100 individuals, 
organizations and agencies from across the province. 
 
Four main themes dominated the feedback from the task 
force.  Saskatchewan people want a Children's Advocate 
who: (1) will be a voice for children and youth in crisis; (2) 
will have a role in community 

education and prevention; (3) is independent of control or 
influence of any government department or minister; and (4) 
is visible and accessible to the community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have listened to the wishes of the public and 
considered the recommendations of the task force.  We are 
also mindful of our fiscal situation and the need to be as 
efficient as possible. 
 
As a result, we are proposing implementation of the 
Children's Advocate to be associated with the Office of the 
Ombudsman.  This has been discussed with the task force 
chairman, Mr. Speaker, and he is happy with this 
arrangement. 
 
Most children have at least one, if not many, natural 
advocates, including their parents and others, who love and 
care for them on a day-to-day basis.  They know there is 
someone they can turn to for help, someone who will listen 
to their concerns and who will take action when action is 
necessary. 
 
The Children's Advocate is not intended to replace the role 
played by these individuals.  There are other children, Mr. 
Speaker, who have no such independent voice.  They may be 
children who are living away from home because of abuse or 
neglect within the family; they may be children who find 
themselves growing up in families where their parents 
through fear, family belief systems, or lack of skill or 
education, are unable or unwilling to speak on their behalf.  
They may be youth serving a custody disposition in a young 
offender facility, far from home with very little family 
contact. 
 
These are children and youth who will be most benefited 
from the presence of the Children's Advocate.  The purpose 
of the advocate, Mr. Speaker, will be to protect the interests 
of children and youth receiving services from the 
government to ensure that the services provided are 
appropriate.  This includes children in foster care and group 
homes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because we strongly believe that the Children's 
Advocate must be able to conduct investigations and review 
situations free of any political or other outside interference. 
 
This Bill provides for the appointment of the advocate for a 
five-year term by the Lieutenant Governor in Council upon 
the recommendation of the Legislative Assembly.  In this 
way, the advocate remains independent of any government 
department or minister accountable to the legislature.  Public 
accountability will be ensured through provision of annual 
reports to the legislature, including descriptions of the 
advocate services and the annual report and the annual 
budget. 
 
The advocate will be appointed in the same manner as the 
provincial Ombudsman and will be associated with that 
office.  The Ombudsman will have overall responsibility for 
ensuring the efficient and effective administration of both 
parts of the office.  The Children's Advocate will play a 
significant role in 



February 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 457 

ensuring the rights of Saskatchewan children and youth are 
protected. 
 
To recruit the most suitable candidate, the government is 
committed to holding a public competition for the office.  
We will also consult with the opposition on any appointment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, amendments provide the advocate with the 
power to receive, review, and investigate any matter that 
comes to his or her attention from any source, including a 
child.  The advocate may become involved in any matter 
where a child or children are receiving services from any 
department or agency of government.  The advocate will 
have no jurisdiction to intervene in family relationships or 
conflict between parents and their children. 
 
Amendments further state that the advocate, wherever 
appropriate, attempt to resolve the matters that come to his or 
her attention through the use of negotiation, conciliation, 
mediation, or other joint problem-solving approaches. 
 
(1100) 
 
In addition, the Children's Advocate may conduct research to 
improve the interests and well-being of children, and provide 
advice to any minister responsible for services to children.  
The advocate will have the ability to make special reports to 
the legislature at any time, either at the request of the 
legislature, any minister or department, or upon the initiative 
of the advocate.  The advocate position will be proactive, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Over the past few years, the knowledge we have about what 
causes children and youth to drop out of school, become 
violent, break the law, or display anti-social behaviour has 
grown rapidly.  Invariably, the findings of research and 
studies emphasize the importance of strong, healthy families 
who are able to consistently and adequately meet the 
developmental needs of children and youth. 
 
Today, for a number of reasons, many families are 
experiencing levels of stress with which they are ill-equipped 
to cope.  The result can be conflict, dysfunction, and in many 
cases abuse of children.  Often these results could be avoided 
simply by making parents more aware of what constitutes 
normal childhood development and by providing them with 
effective parenting and conflict resolution skills. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments to The Ombudsman Act 
provide the advocate with the power and responsibility to 
become involved in public education regarding the needs, 
interests, and well-being of children and youth.  This 
provides the advocate with the ability to educate the public to 
help to reduce the number of children requiring services. 
 
Children and youth residing in foster homes, group homes, 
young offender facilities, or other homes or places which 
provide services to children, often have 

concerns or questions with respect to their care or treatment.  
Many of them are extremely reluctant to raise their concerns 
in writing because of their fear, whether real or imagined, 
that they may be affected in a negative way in their request 
for help. 
 
Because we believe every such child and youth has the right 
to be heard, Mr. Speaker, the amendments further provide 
that where any such child or youth writes a letter addressed 
to the Children's Advocate, the letter shall be forwarded 
immediately, unopened, to the advocate. 
 
Amendments will require the Children's Advocate and all 
members of his or her staff to maintain confidentiality of 
client information.  Before releasing any information in a 
report, the advocate must balance the invasion of privacy 
with the interests of the public, any department or agency 
other than government, or any person mentioned in the 
report. 
 
Other amendments are being made, Mr. Speaker, to ensure 
consistency between the parts of the Act dealing with the 
Ombudsman and those parts of the Act introducing the 
advocate.  For example, staff will be required to take an oath 
of confidentiality that references the new name of the 
legislation.  As I stated earlier, I believe the advocate must 
work in partnership with parents, extended family members, 
and the community, to care for and protect children. 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, the advocate must build upon the 
spirit of community involvement encouraged and developed 
though Saskatchewan's action plan for children.  In this way, 
both individuals and the community as a whole will become 
natural advocates for society's youngest members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that backed by strong, caring, active 
communities, the amendments I have outlined today 
represent a significant step towards establishment of an 
independent voice for Saskatchewan children and youth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Ombudsman Act.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, the other day when the minister 
first introduced this Act to the Assembly, I was talking with 
my colleague who at one time was minister of Social 
Services, and he indicated to me that that was one area that 
he certainly had taken a look at and would have dearly have 
loved to have brought legislation forward in his tenure as 
Social Services minister and addressing this question.  It 
speaks to me of the importance of the position, of the 
advocate on behalf of children, and covering it under The 
Ombudsman Act. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, there isn't any one in our society who 
doesn't feel that we owe our children something, that we owe 
them the ability to be able to be spoken out when they have 
no other avenue to turn to, to feel that they have some one to 
talk to, to bring forward 



458 Saskatchewan Hansard February 25, 1994 

some of the problems that they face on a daily basis.  And for 
those of us who know of good homes where families . . . 
where parents really indeed are providing the food and the 
clothing and a good home environment, it's hard for us to 
understand the situations that some children run into that 
maybe don't have that environment, or other situations where 
families have abandoned children and children have been 
maybe placed into foster homes or placed into the care of 
other individuals who may or may not really reach out to 
understand and to provide the necessities of children. 
 
I guess if there's a area that is of concern, that people are 
concerned about, is that this advocacy or this child's advocate 
doesn't go beyond the means of just being there as a contact 
person.  And the minister indicated that the child's advocate 
would not be entering into squabbles or disputes between 
parents and children.  And I think that's appropriate because 
we certainly do not want to go beyond that.  We do not want 
to just create another avenue that gives children a basis 
whereby they can take advantage of, through just accusations 
of anger, that arise out of anger, of maybe coming against 
their parents.  And I'm glad to hear that the minister is 
looking at bringing some firm guidelines to the role of the 
advocate. 
 
The one thing that I would ask of the minister, and we've 
asked this regarding the appointment of the provincial 
Ombudsman . . . The minister has indicated that he's willing 
to consult with opposition members, that it's going to be an 
appointment that's going to come before the Legislative 
Assembly of the province.  And the area that I think, if it's 
going to be really open as the minister has indicated, that 
there be a process of consultation prior to maybe a screening 
down to a certain few names and then afterwards you contact 
the opposition and ask for their input.  And I'm asking the 
minister even now before we get into the further debate on 
the Bill, that the minister give some consideration.  And I 
note by the nod of the minister's head that certainly it's an 
avenue that he's willing to look at.  And we certainly, as 
opposition members, appreciate that. 
 
So to allow us the opportunity of looking further at the Bill 
and what the Bill is really bringing forward, the different 
sections of the Bill and in introducing the new child's 
advocate, I would move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 13 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 
Assistance Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 
am pleased to rise today to move second reading of The 
Saskatchewan Assistance Amendment Act, 1994. 
 
In Saskatchewan extensive reform strategies are under way, 
Mr. Speaker, which is well known by the Saskatchewan 
public.  Economic development, agriculture, health and 
wellness, labour policy, 

financial control of the province's debt - 
_ which is well on track and appreciated by Saskatchewan 
people -- and Saskatchewan's action plan for children, are 
just a few of the many examples of Saskatchewan taking 
innovative approaches. 
 
Approaches, Mr. Speaker, that build hope for the future.  
Approaches that offer long-term solutions that are holistic 
and integrative.  They involve working collaboratively with 
communities and increasing the decision making and 
involvement of those affected by the reforms.  In many areas 
we are building step by step but with a clear vision of where 
each action will lead us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a major challenge ahead of us.  It is 
time to be innovative in our approach to the delivery of 
Saskatchewan Assistance Plan benefits.  The amendments I 
am introducing today allow the Department of Social 
Services to enter into agreements with Indian bands, tribal 
councils, and other potential agents to deliver the social 
assistance program.  This is a major step forward in 
demonstrating our responsiveness to the clients we serve. 
 
The province has agreed to participate in the 
intergovernmental review of social programs recently 
announced by the federal government.  We will ensure that 
Saskatchewan's social programing is protected while we 
work with the federal government to ensure greater 
effectiveness and elimination of duplication by various levels 
of government. 
 
Approximately 45 per cent of all Social Services 
expenditures and 50 per cent of expenditures under the 
Saskatchewan Assistance Plan are currently recovered 
through cost-sharing agreements with the federal 
government. 
 
Reform of social programing must not involve more 
offloading of federal responsibility.  Saskatchewan has a 
proud history of social policy reform.  For example, we have 
been supplementing the income of working poor families 
with children through our Family Income Plan, the FIP 
program. 
 
We supplement the income of seniors through the 
Saskatchewan Income Plan.  We offer social assistance 
clients a continuum of counselling, education, training, and 
employment opportunities through our New Careers 
Corporation and offer child care subsidies for low income 
families requiring child care services. 
 
We know that social security reform cannot just focus on 
unemployment insurance and social assistance, Mr. Speaker.  
It must be done in the context of economic development and 
job creation, labour policy, fair taxation policy, child care, 
training, and other supports -- a holistic and integrated 
approach.  And we've made this very clear, Mr. Speaker, at 
the recent federal-provincial conference on income security 
reform. 
 
We have alerted the federal government that this is a 



February 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 459 

top priority in the reform process and has to be addressed.  
We need to address the income supplementation and 
employment supports for working poor, especially families 
with children. 
 
Child and family poverty is a growing problem in every part 
of Canada.  Progress must be made on this front.  In 
Saskatchewan we have begun this process, Mr. Speaker, in a 
steady manner, but we cannot do it alone.  We have made 
important strides but we need continued federal help, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The issue of child poverty is fundamental to Saskatchewan's 
action plan for children and, I believe, is fundamental to the 
issues of reform across Canada.  New training instruments 
are required.  We also need continued support for our other 
important social programs like child welfare, family 
supports, rehabilitation services for those with disabilities -- 
to name a few. 
 
We are also emphasizing that child care, both as a support to 
employment and as a contributor to child development, must 
be included as a key element.  We must have a national child 
care program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are willing to work with the federal government on these 
challenges, and trust they will not renege on further 
responsibilities and commitments.  While we work with the 
federal government and other provinces on these major 
reforms, we will also take action to make our own programs 
more effective and responsive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is firmly committed to 
assisting and supporting first nations people as they assume 
increased control over the development and delivery of 
programs and services for first nations people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members of this Assembly are aware that last 
year the federal government unilaterally withdrew from 
providing social assistance to the Indian people living off the 
reserve.  This action by the federal government left some 
10,000 clients with no means of support.  The Saskatchewan 
government intervened on a humanitarian basis, or these 
people would have had no money for food, clothing, or a 
roof over their heads. 
 
Our government is committed to ensuring that income 
security protection is available to all Saskatchewan citizens.  
The Government of Saskatchewan believes that all services 
for Indian people are the responsibility of the federal 
government whether or not they live on the reserve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleagues in caucus are strongly 
committed in their support of the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations in their determination to 
ensure that the federal government meets their constitutional 
responsibilities to Indian people. 
 
To that end our government is supporting a legal action by 
the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations against the 
federal government.  Mr. Speaker, 

we urge our Liberal colleagues in this legislature to do what 
they can to support this. 
 
In the meantime Indian people, through their bands and tribal 
councils, have expressed a strong interest in delivering social 
assistance to their own people.  Our government will work 
cooperatively with them to facilitate their goals of 
self-determination, in taking responsibility for administering 
programs which have a significant impact on the lives of 
their members. 
 
My officials are currently involved in discussions with the 
Prince Albert Tribal Council for the establishment of 
agreements with five northern bands to continue to deliver 
social assistance to their members.  Lac La Ronge, Peter 
Ballantyne, Montreal Lake, Hatchet Lake and Black Lake 
bands have delivered the social assistance program since the 
federal government's offloading. 
 
My officials are having ongoing discussions with other tribal 
councils and bands. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proceeding with several other 
amendments to make the Act more understandable, more 
readable, and accessible to clients, their advocates, and to all 
the citizens of the province.  These amendments will 
complement our work in facilitating greater input from 
clients and advocates for improving the way in which we 
deliver services. 
 
(1115) 
 
We have developed a user-friendly handbook outlining 
benefits, responsibilities, and resources available to clients.  
We have initiated a series of meetings with advocacy groups 
across Saskatchewan.  They have been and will continue to 
be invited to contribute to the reform process. 
 
I had the pleasure of meeting with the R-COHS (Regina 
Coalition of Human Services Agencies) group last evening in 
the city here, an umbrella organizations of NGOs 
(non-governmental organizations), and that was a very 
constructive and positive dialogue.  After that meeting we 
established some ongoing processes with a number of those 
representatives for the reform process. 
 
In addition to advocacy groups being invited to be 
cooperative with us in the reform process, we are also 
discussing potential immediate changes in the area of policy, 
service delivery, and improved communication. 
 
One of the outcomes of the changing directions, 
consultations, is a task force for improving of the delivery of 
Saskatchewan Assistance Plan programs.  It is expected to 
lead to development and implementation of a holistic needs 
assessment and case planning practice, enhanced public 
education, community involvement, preventative services 
and integration of social services programs across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no municipality has delivered the social 



460 Saskatchewan Hansard February 25, 1994 

assistance program since 1989.  Numerous references in the 
Act to the municipal delivery process are therefore no longer 
necessary.  Amendments to the wording of the Act, however, 
does permit third-party agents such as Indian bands, tribal 
councils, and other potential agents to deliver social 
assistance on behalf of the province. 
 
I am pleased with the amendments that I have outlined today.  
They will be a mechanism for our government to use to work 
towards goals of partnership and empowering people to 
manage programs which affect them profoundly.  We will 
have an enabling Act which is free of outdated references, 
making it more useful to Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Saskatchewan Assistance Act, 1994. 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I again 
would commend the minister for bringing forward this piece 
of legislation.  I think there are a few questions, though, that 
we would like to ask and we look forward to getting into 
further debate on this Bill, The Saskatchewan Assistance 
Amendment Act. 
 
There's no doubt that we need to look at more efficient, 
effective, and supportive ways of delivering support, and I 
don't think there's a resident in Saskatchewan who doesn't 
believe that we have some responsibility in providing for the 
needs of those less fortunate. 
 
If anything, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me though that people 
are looking for some accountability. And the way our 
assistance has been handled in the past, I don't know if 
there's anyone in the public who will not argue that possibly 
there are abuses in the system and that there are individuals 
who take advantage of assistance, whether it comes under 
Agriculture, whether it comes under Social Services, 
whatever, Mr. Speaker.  And I trust that as we enter the 
debate on this Bill that we can come to a common agreement 
that there is a means in place of guaranteeing and ensuring 
that those who need, do receive, get, and benefit and are 
taken care of and looked after. 
 
Those who are just entering the system for their own 
personal benefit, that there is a way of -- and I use the word 
policing; I don't use it maliciously, Mr. Speaker -- but a way 
of determining that there are people not taking advantage of 
the system.  Because as individuals take advantage of 
programs that are available, it's a cost to each and every one 
of us; and especially as taxpayers, we've got to pay for that. 
 
And so as we look at the Bill that the minister has 
introduced, and as in his remarks and introduction of the Bill, 
Mr. Speaker, it's our endeavour that through debate and 
through discussion and questions in this Assembly, as we get 
into the details of the Bill, that we will all be able to come to 
a consensus of putting forward a more stringent piece of 
legislation that indeed meets the needs of individuals and 
covers up any opportunity of other individuals taking 
advantage of a system. 

And so therefore, to allow us to further review the Bill and to 
do a more in-depth review of the Bill, Mr. Speaker, I move 
adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 14 -- An Act to amend The Fuel Tax Act, 1987 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thanks very much.  Mr. Speaker, 
I rise today to move second reading of Bill No. 14, An Act to 
amend The Fuel Tax Act, 1987. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill adds new provisions that will enable 
Saskatchewan to enter into fuel tax programs and agreements 
with other jurisdictions in Canada and United States.  The 
purpose of the agreements is to simplify the administration 
of the fuel tax and make it more equitable.  The amendments 
are necessary, Mr. Speaker, in order for Saskatchewan to join 
the International Fuel Tax Agreement. 
 
The International Fuel Tax Agreement is a fuel tax 
agreement for truckers who operate interprovincially and 
internationally.  Mr. Speaker, the IFTA program is a 
one-stop shopping program that permits truckers to report 
and account for fuel taxes to their home state or province for 
all member jurisdictions in which they operate. 
 
Under the agreement the home jurisdiction handles all fuel 
transactions, redistributes money, conducts audits, and 
handles reports for all member jurisdictions in which the 
carrier operates.  This benefits truckers by reducing their 
paper burden and saves them time and money in accounting 
for and redistributing their fuel taxes payable to those 
jurisdictions in which they operate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is good news for about 350 
Saskatchewan truckers who operate in Saskatchewan and in 
the United States.  Joining IFTA will help our truckers 
compete successfully with truckers in other jurisdictions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Trucking Association and 
several trucking firms have been requesting Saskatchewan to 
join IFTA as soon as possible.  However, a new jurisdiction 
can only implement IFTA on July 1 or January 1 in any 
calendar year.  Therefore, Mr. Speaker, it is hoped that 
Saskatchewan will become a member of IFTA by July 1, 
1994 and fully implement the program by January 1, 1995. 
 
Mr. Speaker, currently about half of the American states and 
the province of Alberta belong to IFTA.  By 1996, all but 
three of the American states will be required by federal law 
to join IFTA.  Also it is anticipated that all Canadian 
provinces will join IFTA by that time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to providing Saskatchewan with the 
authority to enter into IFTA, this Bill provides 
regulation-making provisions for the procedures, conditions, 
and terms for issuing IFTA licences to 



February 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 461 

Saskatchewan carriers.  In addition, it enables the 
Department of Finance to enter into agreements with carriers 
respecting their duties and obligations under IFTA. 
 
Also there is a regulation-making provision for charging a 
licensing fee and a fee for issuing decals.  It is a program 
requirement that two decals be issued by the home 
jurisdiction for each truck that they register under IFTA. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is proposed to charge an annual licence fee of 
$65, the same as charged by Alberta, and a decal fee of $2 
per decal.  These administrative fees are expected to generate 
about $50,000 per year.  This will cover about one 
_half of the estimated $100,000 annual incremental cost of 
operating the program. 
 
With respect to the revenue collected from the fuel tax, Mr. 
Speaker, the implementation of IFTA is expected to be 
revenue neutral. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Fuel Tax Act, 1987. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, in order 
to allow my colleague more time to have an in-depth review 
of the Bill that's been presented before us, I move 
adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 15 -- An Act respecting Certified General 
Accountants 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 
Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of Bill No. 15, 
An Act respecting Certified General Accountants.  This is a 
new Bill, Mr. Speaker.  The original Certified General 
Accountants Act was introduced by our Premier in 1978 
when he was minister of Justice. 
 
It was with pride that the NDP can again provide a service to 
the accounting profession and the general public by 
introducing an updated version of the Act.  Since there have 
been no substantive amendments since 1978, The Certified 
General Accountants Act is seriously outdated. 
 
While many of the existing provisions have been retained, 
this Bill makes substantial improvements by providing 
further protection and accountability to the public.  The Bill 
reflects general government policy regarding professional 
legislation using guidelines provided by the Department of 
Justice.  The majority of the sections in the Bill are standard 
sections that appear in all new professional legislation. 
 
Several concerns have been raised by the Special Committee 
on Regulations and the Certified General Accountants 
Association that need to be addressed by changes to the Act.  
One of these concerns is that the 

discipline section is not sufficient to protect the interests of 
the public or the association.  The proposed changes clarify 
the discipline section and the appeal process. 
 
Another significant change provides for lay representatives 
to be appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in Council to the 
board of governors.  These appointees represent the interests 
of the general public.  Through the Bill the association will 
have legislation comparable to that of the Saskatchewan 
Institute of Chartered Accountants and the Saskatchewan 
Society of Management Accountants. 
 
These changes will come into force on a day to be fixed by 
proclamation, by the Lieutenant Governor.  Mr. Speaker, I 
move second reading of An Act respecting Certified General 
Accountants. 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 
pleased to hear that Madam Minister is responding to some 
of the concerns brought forward by the Special Committee 
on Regulations.  And no doubt at times we must look at 
legislation.  There's lots of legislation kind of gets lost in the 
woodwork and becomes redundant and at times it needs to be 
brought up to date.  And the fact of what the minister is 
doing is covering some of the areas where some questions 
have been raised, and certainly we appreciate that. 
 
And at this time, however, we would like to take a little more 
in-depth review of the Bill that's been presented to us and 
therefore I move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 16 -- An Act to amend The Revenue and 
Financial Services Act 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 
Speaker, I will momentarily move second reading of Bill No. 
16, An Act to amend The Revenue and Financial Services 
Act.  I would like first to take a few minutes to explain the 
changes being made by this Bill. 
 
Part 3 of the The Revenue and Financial Services Act is a 
consolidation of the administrative and enforcement 
provisions that govern the province's consumption taxes.  
This consolidation ensures that our taxes are administered 
consistently and efficiently.  There have been no major 
changes to part 3 since it was first enacted in 1985.  Most of 
the amendments being made by this Bill are technical 
changes to clarify or bring existing provisions up to date. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill also makes some substantive changes 
which will improve tax enforcement.  Directors of 
corporations that do not remit their tax collections will in 
certain circumstances now be subject to personal liability for 
the unremitted tax.  The Bill amends the legislation so that a 
director may be held liable if a writ of execution against the 
corporation fails to obtain payment of the tax. 



462 Saskatchewan Hansard February 25, 1994 

A director may also be held liable if the corporation declares 
bankruptcy or becomes subject to other liquidation 
proceedings.  However, a director may avoid personal 
liability for tax if he or she can demonstrate that they took 
reasonable steps in trying to ensure that the corporation 
remitted its tax collections. 
 
In addition to this due diligence defence, the Bill also allows 
directors who make tax payments to recover these amounts 
from the corporation or from other directors. 
 
We want to emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that directors may only 
be held liable for tax collected by the corporation from its 
customers.  A director cannot be held liable for tax payable 
by the corporation -- only for amounts collected in trust by 
the corporation. 
 
(1130) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill also amends the penalty and interest 
applied to audit assessments.  The rate of penalty remains 
unchanged at 10 per cent of the tax assessed, however the 
maximum penalty is being increased from $5,000 to 
$25,000.  This change will only affect taxpayers who incur 
audit assessments of between $50,000 and $250,000. 
 
Assessments of this size invariably involve large firms, 
several of which have refused to report or remit tax until they 
are audited by the department.  These firms believe that the 
maximum $5,000 audit penalty is less than the cost of 
complying with the reporting requirements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the increase to the audit penalty will only affect 
about 1 per cent of the audits conducted by Finance.  We 
estimate that the increased penalty will generate less than 
$200,000 in additional revenue each year.  But more 
importantly we expect these large firms to begin filing 
regular tax returns. 
 
As I mentioned, Mr. Speaker, the Bill also changes the 
manner in which interest is applied to audit assessments.  
Interest will now apply to the tax assessed from the time that 
the tax should have been remitted rather than being applied 
from the last day of the audit period.  Under the former rules 
taxpayers would pay no interest if they promptly paid their 
assessment notices.  This had the effect of allowing 
taxpayers who didn't pay or remit tax to have the free use of 
those funds until they were audited. 
 
For example:  if one of the large firms I mentioned earlier 
incurred an audit liability of $150,000 for a three-year 
period, the only cost they would incur for having the use of 
those unremitted funds for up to three years would be the 
$5,000 maximum audit penalty.  They would pay no interest 
if they immediately paid the assessment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our former rules actually provided an incentive 
for taxpayers to delay remitting tax until they were audited.  
Saskatchewan is the last of the taxing 

provinces to apply interest from the tax due date rather than 
the end of the audit period.  All of the other provinces and 
the federal government impose interest from the date on 
which the tax was required to have been paid.  As a result, 
Saskatchewan has had the most lenient audit penalty and 
interest provisions in Canada. 
 
The amendments being made by this Bill will bring our rules 
more in line with those of other jurisdictions.  This 
amendment will affect all audits done by the department and 
will significantly increase the interest component of most 
audit assessments.  We expect this change to generate up to 
$3.8 million in additional annual revenue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we recognize that this is a fairly significant 
change to our audit policy.  Consequently we are deferring 
the implementation of the audit penalty and interest 
amendments until July 1, 1994 to ensure that taxpayers are 
aware of the changes.  We also recognize that the increased 
audit interest may cause undue hardship for taxpayers who 
are sincerely trying to comply with the tax legislation, but 
because of circumstances beyond their control, are assessed 
tax.  Therefore this Bill has a provision to the Act, which 
gives the Minister the discretion to waive or cancel the 
penalty or interest imposed by the Act.  Mr. Speaker, this 
discretion will be exercised so that honest taxpayers are not 
unfairly penalized. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments are necessary because the 
province's ability to recover taxes from insolvent taxpayers 
has been undermined by recent amendments to federal 
insolvency legislation.  The enactment of the Bankruptcy and 
Insolvency Act in late 1992 abolished the province's right to 
claim preferred status or deem trust priority in bankruptcies 
and receiverships.  Our tax claims now rank at the bottom of 
the hierarchy of creditors instead of being near the top.  This 
change has significantly reduced our revenue recoveries from 
businesses that become insolvent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our tax system is dependent on businesses 
self-assessing or collecting and remitting tax on behalf of the 
province.  The success of that system is based on taxpayers 
believing that our tax laws will be applied equally to 
everyone.  Unless we maintain an effective enforcement 
program, the integrity of our tax system will be jeopardized.  
We believe that the changes being made by this Bill are 
necessary to improve our tax system and to protect our tax 
revenues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move that An Act to amend The Revenue and 
Financial Services Act be read a second time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, as I've 
been listening to myself respond to the Bills put forward, I've 
been thinking that maybe this opposition has become very 
serene and has just accepted everything that the government 
has come forward 



February 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 463 

with.  And I think back to the years when we were in 
government and it seemed that whichever opposition 
member at the time responded, they always had to find 
something negative, and I begin to wonder, what am I doing 
wrong here? 
 
I listened to the Minister of Social Services talk about the 
fact they need to do this because they must reduce the deficit.  
I listened to the Minister of Agriculture say it has something 
to with the fact that the federal government has changed the 
rules.  And I think as we listen to the Minister of Finance . . . 
and as I've indicated earlier, Mr. Speaker, certainly the Bills 
that have been brought forward this morning, there's a lot of 
solid, sound suggestions put forward in these Bills. 
 
I think what I will do, rather than getting into a longer 
rhetoric and debate some of comments that have been made 
earlier by former ministers, I would defer it till another date 
when we again will bring these Bills forward to review them.  
Therefore I move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Energy and Mines 

Vote 23 
 
The Chair: -- Order.  At this time I would like to ask the 
minister to introduce the officials who have joined us here 
today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you.  I have with me today the 
deputy minister of Energy and Mines, Pat Youzwa, to my 
right; to my left I have the president of the Saskatchewan 
Energy Conservation and Development Authority, Mr. John 
Mitchell; behind me, right behind Ms. Youzwa, I have Ray 
Clayton, who is the assistant deputy minister of finance and 
administration; and directly behind me is Bruce Wilson, the 
executive director of petroleum and natural gas. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wonder if the 
minister could just take a few moments and give the House 
an overview of where he thinks the major energy 
developments will be in the province of Saskatchewan.  And 
particularly perhaps he could just comment on the major 
ones in terms of where he sees uranium mining or he sees 
nuclear energy development. If he has any considerations 
with respect to further economic development in nuclear 
capacity. If he could tell us a little bit about how he sees 
potash mining in terms of just general economic growth. He 
might touch on diamonds if he likes.  But just generally 
where he thinks the province is in developing energy 
resources in the province. 
 
I'm getting this frankly from looking at sort of the objectives.  
The raison d'e ptre of the department is to develop the 
energy resources in the province, and the 

 public would generally like to know how it's going in the 
development of these resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well as the hon. member would 
know, the budget for the Department of Energy and Mines or 
of the Energy Authority certainly does not reflect the activity 
of the industry within the province of Saskatchewan.  I'd 
want to say that I'm complimentary of the staff both at the 
Authority and at the department for the work that they do 
relative to the size of the industry; very few resources to 
work with in terms of the money that's allocated to them 
through the estimates.  And I think that's a credit to the 
people who work in both the Authority and the Department 
of Energy and Mines. 
 
In a general sense, both in the mining sector and the energy 
sector, I believe that these are one of the brightest lights for 
us in the province.  They have been over the past year, and 
certainly would project that to continue into the future. 
 
In terms of being on the leading edge, the member would 
know that horizontal drilling has been a great success story 
in the province of Saskatchewan.  Places that were not 
economic for the industry to develop in the past are now 
economic for them to develop because of the horizontal 
technology.  And if you look at the numbers of wells being 
drilled, a good number of those now are horizontal wells 
within the province. 
 
If you look at the locations, I can't say that one area is 
brighter for the future than the other.  If you look 
geographically around the province, if you look into the 
north-west corner of the province, we believe there's some 
great gas potential there, and I think the land sales reflect 
that. 
 
When you start getting into the western side of the province, 
in the centre, we expect steadily improving oil activity in that 
area, and I guess, more associated gas than actual exploration 
for any natural gas.  Of course, if you get into the south-west 
corner of the province, into the Hatton field and that area, we 
know that's been around for many years and likely has lasted 
much longer than what we anticipated in the early days when 
the Hatton field was first discovered. 
 
And in that particular area I think you'll find that most of the 
gas activity there is gas activity that's developmental in 
nature and not exploratory as opposed to when you look up 
into the north-west corner of the province.  I think we would 
anticipate a great deal of exploratory drilling there over the 
coming years. 
 
As you move over to your own corner of the province, you'll 
know that the oil industry is very active there.  There are 
developments all the time in, for example, the Midale field.  
With Pan Canadian and Shell having the enhanced recovery 
methods that they're looking at now, it's extended the life of 
a couple of fields, at least in the Midale area, long beyond 
what the initial projections were being when these fields 
were discovered several decades ago. 



464 Saskatchewan Hansard February 25, 1994 

In terms of how we look at energy in the province, we're 
relying to a large extent, as an initial point for having some 
focus on the energy future in Saskatchewan, looking at the 
comprehensive energy strategy.  And the comprehensive 
energy strategy will be on my desk sometime in the summer 
of this year. 
 
And I think that the work that's been put into that is good 
quality technical work and will give us some idea as to 
where we proceed with the economic development activities 
that are associated with energy and looking further as to what 
our options are.  Both the Saskatchewan Energy 
Conservation Development Authority and the Department of 
Energy and Mines are both active players, the two major 
players that are involved in the comprehensive energy 
strategy. 
 
In terms of the potash industry, you mention potash markets, 
I guess, are a bit sluggish.  Production is to a level that I 
think the potash industry is not necessarily happy with, but 
they're proceeding.  We don't anticipate any negative 
set-backs over the coming year in potash. 
 
The member would know that the mining activity . . . I 
shouldn't say mining but the exploration activity in terms of 
diamonds is somewhat heated in different areas of the 
province.  We don't know at this stage whether or not there 
are enough diamonds in the areas that are being explored to 
develop a mine, but some companies certainly are hopeful; 
otherwise they wouldn't be out there doing the exploration 
activity.  With that I think I would leave that as a general 
overview. 
 
In summation, I would say that the outlook for us in energy 
and mining are both bright lights today and will be even 
brighter lights in the future of Saskatchewan's economy and 
in the Saskatchewan community as a total. 
 
(1145) 
 
Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, when I look at the 
objective of the department, it says, and I quote: The 
department is responsible for promoting and developing 
opportunities for petroleum and mineral industries in the 
province.  And you've got oil gas, potash, uranium, coal, 
mineral acreage, and others. 
 
Promoting and developing -- could you describe what you're 
doing to promote and to develop in the province of 
Saskatchewan these energy alternatives, what you've done in 
the last six months, the last year, or since you have been 
elected, that is much . . . that differentiates you from other 
jurisdictions or differentiates what you've been doing 
compared to previous administrations?  What are you doing 
to live up to the objective of your department which is to . . . 
the responsibility to promote and develop these energy 
options in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
What's novel, new, that you could sort of hang your hat on or 
that the uranium industry is looking at, the potash industry, 
the gas industry, the oil industry, the coal industry, or 
combinations thereof?  And I'll 

 certainly be getting into, you know, your so-called claim to 
fame in terms of co-generation and some other things. 
 
But what are you specifically doing to promote and to 
develop that sets Saskatchewan apart or outlines and 
promotes and puts in the window of North America, at least, 
what we have in the province of Saskatchewan?  What's new 
and novel, or what's your claim to fame here in the 
promotion and the development of our energy resources 
which is your responsibility in Energy and Mines? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well as the member would know, we 
have worked in terms of the oil and gas industry, we worked 
with the industry over the past two years.  There were two 
task forces.  And industry has been very complimentary 
towards the government and to the Department of Energy 
and Mines. 
 
The one task force dealt with the regulatory side and how 
regulation affects the industry.  The other task force dealt 
with the fiscal regime and how our royalty and taxation 
structure affect the industry. 
 
Both of those reports were concluded, and as a result of 
those, there have been regulatory changes that have been 
made that the industry is thankful for and they appreciate 
because it's cut down some of the paper burden that so often 
the private sector complains that the government places upon 
them. 
 
In terms of the fiscal regime, the member would know well 
that we introduced a royalty package, a third tier royalty 
system, which in a general sense was well accepted across 
the province and in the member's own constituency, I think 
in part reflects some of the activity of the industry in your 
own constituency. 
 
When we look further beyond that, we've given a 
commitment to both the mining sector and the oil and gas 
sector that we want to watch for them the cost of doing 
business in Saskatchewan.  And they feed information to us.  
We advocate their position with other government 
departments, and in some cases, agencies or entities that are 
not within government in terms of how can we come to grips 
so the cost of doing business -- you can't look at these things 
in isolation -- how the cost of business affects them.  I think 
we've developed a very good working relationship with the 
industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
We also have the development of the comprehensive energy 
strategy, which is a planning document, so that we don't 
come up with knee-jerk reactions to specific little cases that 
come along from time to time.  When the comprehensive 
energy strategy is placed on my desk, it's a guiding document 
for us to establish long-term policy in terms of energy in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In the past and even in the current day to a large extent, 
companies and government and entities of government have 
looked at either electricity or oil or gas and they put them 
into commodities.  In the long-term interest, I project it's 
certainly going to be 



February 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 465 

those companies and governments and government entities 
that look not at the commodities, but look in terms of energy 
as the future.  And that's what we need to address as the 
energy. 
 
The comprehensive energy strategy will assist us in doing 
that because it looks at the options for electrical generation, 
for example.  It looks at energy in a broader scale.  It looks at 
the issue of more transparency in the way that rates are set.  
All of these are initiatives by the government that I think 
have been well received by the industry, both mining and the 
oil and gas sector within this province. 
 
And greater than anything else, and the member would be 
well aware of this, is that for the development to occur . . . 
and when we talk about development in what you're quoting 
from, we're not talking about hands on development out there 
in the oil patch or out there in the mining sector, because that 
development's going to occur by those companies that have 
the expertise and the desire to develop in Saskatchewan. 
 
And beyond all else -- beyond all else -- what makes that 
development occur in the economy of the province of 
Saskatchewan is confidence in what the government is 
doing.  And I think that we've established confidence with 
the industry in Saskatchewan.  And that confidence has been 
expressed to us by many companies that do business in 
Saskatchewan and many companies that want to do business 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
For example, the most active drilling company in 
Saskatchewan last year never did any business in 
Saskatchewan the year before.  And they've come to 
Saskatchewan.  They're now the most active drilling 
company for the year 1993. 
 
And I think there are all kinds of examples that the member 
can look to, to find out.  And talking to the industry, which 
he would talk to on a regular basis, knows that there's a good 
deal of confidence in this government in what's happening in 
the mining sector and also the oil and gas sector. 
 
So I hope that those are a few examples that I've outlined that 
are positive developments and promotions of both the mining 
sector and the oil and gas sector in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, now you've said that the 
responsibility for the development is not really with the 
department, it's with the private sector and the private sector 
will base that on its confidence in the province of 
Saskatchewan.  And that's where you run into the problem -- 
it's one of confidence. 
 
I mean the truth is that energy companies are afraid to death 
of what you might do.  And you talk about the knee-jerk 
reactions.  They never really know for sure what you might 
do.  And that's particularly true when we get into all of the 
hype and all of the promotion that you did on co-generation. 

You said all this is going to be for the private sector, and you 
had a big fanfare, and you're going to do all of this because 
we want the industry to be confident -- that's your words.  
Are they confident in the kinds of things that we can do in 
the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
So you had a big fanfare.  You put it in the Speech from the 
Throne.  You're going to promote and develop and you're 
going to encourage the private sector to come in here 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Item 1 agreed? 
 
Mr. Devine: -- Well if the hon. member would want to 
respond to my question. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- How's the STC (Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company) doing? 
 
Mr. Devine: -- I think STC lost three and a half million 
dollars last year in his estimates . . . (inaudible interjection) . 
. . Listen, Mr. Chairman, we'd just like the attention of the 
minister and the rest of his caucus when we're asking some 
questions.  Must have hit a sore spot, Mr. Chairman, when 
they all want to respond to this at the same time . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, well, well, these are going 
to be long estimates, Mr. Chairman, if they're all going to try 
to answer the questions.  The minister can be confident in 
that.  It's going to take a long time if all of his colleagues are 
going to help him respond.  Clearly that's the case. 
 
Mr. Minister, the reason I went back to the objective and the 
raison d'e ptre of the department, it has a responsibility for 
promoting and developing the opportunities for energy 
development in the province.  And you just finished saying 
the development side is not really the responsibility of the 
department, it's the responsibility of the private sector and 
they've got to have confidence in the things that the 
provincial government is doing and you think that they have 
confidence in the NDP. 
 
Now that raises the question of how could they be confident 
in your fanfare and in your promotion, which obviously costs 
a great deal of money.  Because you put something like 
co-generation in the Speech from the Throne; you have a big 
news conference about it; you say, we are committed to the . 
. . we're really going to look at this and we wouldn't put it in 
the Speech from the Throne unless we were really serious 
about it.  And you ask them all to participate. 
 
In fact I think it's fair to say you charged them $10,000 a 
piece to even have the opportunity to discuss it with you.  
Bring in their money and then they're going to be serious 
about co-generation because it's private sector development.  
And then as we hear, Mr. Minister, you had no idea or no 
intention of maintaining the confidence in the industry 
because the industry has now thrown up its hands. 
 
The industry reports, the television news, the media, the 
newspapers are saying, what was this minister 



466 Saskatchewan Hansard February 25, 1994 

doing?  Wasn't this the minister who, before he was the 
minister, headed up the committee on this co-generation and 
all the economic activity and all the confidence and said a 
nice thing would be, help encourage the Premier to put it in 
his Speech from the Throne. 
 
And then you end up with no confidence at all because the 
public is now encouraged to say don't come to 
Saskatchewan, go to Alberta -- go to Alberta.  Now what 
kind of confidence is that?  And you use the word confidence 
and the private sector.  Because I asked you what your 
responsibilities were and you said, yes to promote and 
develop.  But the development is a private sector . . . and that 
is based on confidence. 
 
I want to just ask the minister why would he think, after all 
of this work on co-generation, that in an interview with Paul 
Martin -- I believe it was on The Provincial last night . . . 
Paul Martin has, and I'm sure you agree, genuine interest in 
economic development, diversification, particularly in 
energy.  Paul Martin is talking about economic development 
and co-generation and all the people who want to invest.  
And he's interviewing . . . and I believe it's true that Tony 
Harras, vice-president of SaskPower, in the interview 
encouraged companies to go outside of the province and 
develop their co-generation. 
 
Now here is a man being interviewed on The Provincial 
who frankly is saying, and he is speaking for the confidence 
of the people in the NDP administration, you might as well 
go to look in Alberta. 
 
Now did you think that fits with your responsibility for 
promoting and developing opportunities?  You say, well no, 
but this guy is with SaskPower.  Well SaskPower probably's 
got something to do with co-generation.  I think it's kind of 
responsible for some of this and you may or may not want 
the responsibility for it.  But that isn't consistent with what 
you said you're doing in the province of Saskatchewan, if 
energy companies and those who want to, invest the 
confidence to do that here. 
 
Secondly, if you look at the kind of editorials you're getting 
as a result of your activities, it's remarkable lack of 
confidence.  The headline says the NDP want to keep 
monopolies in Saskatchewan.  That has nothing to do with 
the private sector.  It flies in the very face of what you just 
said to this House. 
 
You said the development should come from the private 
sector and that's where you're going to generate your 
revenues.  That's where you're going to help develop oil, 
natural gas, potash, uranium, coal, mineral acreage and 
others that are in your estimates.  And the headlines said the 
NDP wants to keep a monopoly. 
 
Now if that shows up in Calgary or shows up in Saskatoon -- 
it shows up in the Leader-Post here -- how do you think you 
are encouraging confidence when you've got headlines like 
that?  And I quote: it 

would seem that the NDP government is far more interested 
in maintaining its monopolies than delivering efficient, 
cost-effective service to the taxpayer. 
 
So the public sector, the media sector -- I mean the guy in 
SaskPower says you might as well go to Alberta  -- the 
media people are writing and say the NDP really hasn't 
changed at all; they just want the government monopoly.  
The private sector guys are saying, well -- I think it was 
somebody from Wascana Energy, formerly Saskoil -- said, 
look, we're going to review it in Calgary.  I think Randy 
Burton had it in an article that he did, interviewing the 
energy company.  Said we've put up $50,000, $100,000, 
$250,000 to participate in this game of confidence that you 
are talking about, and what do we get?  Well we're really not 
interested even though the private sector was going to spend 
the money.  It was just for the Speech from the Throne.  We 
had a nice little news conference. 
 
But it was promotion.  That's part of your mandate.  It says 
here you're responsible for promotion.  And they feel like 
they've been bribed into this because you had to give them . . 
. they had to give you $10,000 apiece, which I suppose you 
spent a fair amount on promotion.  And then you turn them 
down.  And nobody can figure out why you would do that. 
 
The minister . . . your statement in this House that the private 
sector is responsible for the development of the energy 
resources and that development is directly correlated with the 
confidence that they have in the NDP administration, is just 
not valid. 
 
Now I could say your statement is true to the point.  The 
private sector will be responsible for development; and yes, 
that in tune will be linked to confidence -- full stop.  They're 
not going to do it because you cut them off at the knees.  
And for Heaven's sakes, these editorials are not showing that 
they have confidence in you at all.  The companies don't 
have confidence.  The companies are going to be writing to 
you and asking for rebates.  They're going to ask you why 
you led them down the garden path.  And the media 
responses, I mean it's unbelievably indications of 
non-confidence. 
 
So again I go back and ask the minister: in view of your 
objective, raison d'e ptre, the department is responsible for 
promoting and developing opportunities for petroleum and 
mineral industries in the province, if that's your objective and 
you think that the development is the private sector and it's 
based on confidence, how do you square that circle, that your 
people are being highly critical -- highly critical -- of the 
non-confidence signal that you've put out to them in the last 
24 hours? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well I'll address your assertions that 
you make on non-utility or co-generation in a few moments.  
I'm not sure that this is the forum to do that.  You have the 
opportunity in question period, and it's more appropriately, if 
you want to get into detailed questioning, before the Crown 
Corporations 



February 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 467 

Committee. 
 
Neither the Energy Authority or the Department of Energy 
and Mines are the appropriate people, and I don't mind 
addressing those questions that you bring up.  But I just want 
you to know very well, being a former premier of the 
province, that that is not the forum in which to do it.  If it 
was, we would have different officials here to deal with it. 
 
I would want to say in terms of confidence in Saskatchewan, 
what you are saying is not beared in fact.  If you look at the 
oil statistics in Saskatchewan: oil production, the highest in 
12 years in 1993.  If you look at the recoverable reserves 
added, the second highest in the last 11 years in 1993.  The 
recoverable reserves that we now have are the highest 
they've been possibly ever, but certainly in the last decade 
and a half. 
 
(1200) 
 
If you look at the wells capable of producing oil in 
Saskatchewan, the highest in the last 11 years.  If you look at 
the gas wells drilled, 1993 was the second highest number of 
gas wells drilled in the history of the province of 
Saskatchewan.  If you look at gas production, the second 
highest since 1971.  If you look at the value of the sales, the 
second highest since 1971. 
 
If you look at the total gas consumed, the highest.  If you 
look at the investment in the gas industry, the highest in the 
history of the province of Saskatchewan.  If you look at 
employment, 1993 again was the highest in the history of the 
province of Saskatchewan in the gas industry. It's all well 
documented. 
 
The industry has confidence.  These are numbers that are 
statistically correct. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- And they would have been there, 
whether you were there or not. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- And even if the hon. member who 
chirps from his seat as the Acting Leader of the Opposition 
won't accept the statistics that are there, he must follow 
Oilweek, as a former minister of Energy and Mines.  
Oilweek is an industry-pro publication.  And what do they 
say in the February 21, 1994 article of Oilweek?  They say: 
 

 Oil executives are surprisingly complimentary these days 
when they talk about the way Saskatchewan's energy 
policies have been evolving in the past two years. 

 
 Two factors -- fiscal realism and a willingness to consult 

before acting -- seem to have brought about (by) this 
rapprochement between the free-enterprisers of the 
oilpatch and . . . (the) NDP regime. 

 
To me that's an expression of confidence. 
 
I now want to turn for a moment, Mr. Chairman, to the 

 main issue that was brought up by the hon. member, and that 
is one of non-utility generation or co-generation, as he also 
referred to.  And we'll use those terms for today's argument 
interchangeably, but they don't necessarily mean the same 
thing. 
 
First off, I would point out I did not head up the minister's 
steering committee.  Don Geesen, who works for Kalium 
Canada, headed up the report.  And I want to make that very 
clear.  I know that's stated in some of the articles, but if the 
hon. member wants to use the Leader-Post as the authority 
on technical information, he won't be well served by what he 
reads in some of the articles that he's got on his desk. 
 
The only one that I've heard about going to Alberta and 
voicing that quite strongly with their co-generation plans is 
one Tim Jeffery from Wascana Energy, formerly Saskoil.  
And you know very well who Tim Jeffery is.  Tim Jeffery 
was a chief of staff in your government for the minister of 
Energy and Mines at the time.  And he's still wearing the 
Tory hat that he wore when he worked in your government 
as a chief of staff for your Energy and Mines minister.  If 
Tim Jeffery wants to go to Alberta, I say hallelujah.  Go to 
Alberta if you want, Tim Jeffery, because all you're doing is 
voicing things for the opposition that don't do any good for 
the economy of Saskatchewan. 
 
Paul Martin says it's an ideological argument.  It's not an 
ideological argument.  The members on the other side of this 
House should support what's happening in Saskatchewan.  
Everything you say, everything you say about co-generation 
and non-utility generation, is on the premiss that it's not 
going to happen in Saskatchewan.  You are doing your best 
to kill what is a bright opportunity for the people in this 
province, and that is the development of non-utility 
generation. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Your announcement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- And the member chirps from his seat, 
my announcement.  My announcement was, is that the 
decision was not going to be made at this time. 
 
I also heard the member talk about deposits being refunded.  
Well I would assume if companies that participate in the 
request for proposals want their deposit back, they'll ask me 
for their deposit back.  And so if their deposit is paid back to 
them I have to assume that they're withdrawing from the 
competition.  And if they're withdrawing from the 
competition because of the negative attitude that you project 
and misconstruing what was said in this House, then you 
should invite your friends who feed you this information -- 
or if they don't feed it to you, you develop falsely -- let's 
come clean with what was said in this House. 
 
What was said in this House is that the decision wasn't being 
made now.  Those people put in very valid proposals.  
They're technically feasible, they're environmentally 
friendly, and they're still in the running for co-generation in 
Saskatchewan or non-utility generation in Saskatchewan. 



468 Saskatchewan Hansard February 25, 1994 

And so I don't know . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and the 
member hollers out AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.) 
is.  That's why this government is taking the approach to 
have a long-term plan.  That's why we have a comprehensive 
energy strategy.  That's why that's being developed to give us 
guidance into the future of this province. 
 
And when there's confidence because of the numbers and the 
articles I cite we want to maintain that confidence, and what 
you do in your political motivation is to try and destroy the 
credibility of this government.  It won't work.  It won't work 
because the proponents in Saskatchewan should be listening 
to what's being said.  And if they listen to the papers and 
what the media is saying, they may get a different 
impression.  But I want to go very clearly on the record 
today that this government will bring non-utility 
co-generation into the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- So having said that, I hope that the 
member will dwell on facts for the balance of the day and 
deal with the issues that are before the Energy Authority and 
the Department of Energy and Mines so that we can provide 
you with valuable information, and so that the people of 
Saskatchewan can have the facts rather than you to try and 
grandstand in the legislature. 
 
And I hope the member, in the spirit of some cooperation on 
the recovering and developing economy of Saskatchewan, 
will work with us to help develop those that are the brightest 
lights in our energy sector, in our mining sector in the 
province of Saskatchewan, so we can have a long-term 
economy that follows a planned approach rather than 
reacting to specific situations. 
 
And I ask the member to join with us in that, and if you have 
criticism, I welcome your criticism, but the criticism should 
be based on fact and not political rhetoric.  If the member 
wants information, ask information questions, and I welcome 
those as well because we do have information that we want 
to provide to you. 
 
So with that I hope the member will join in a spirit of 
cooperation in this House so that we can get on with the job 
that needs to be done, this being a very important part of the 
accountability process for both the Energy Authority and for 
the Department of Energy and Mines. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I see your colleagues are 
applauding because you've rewritten the release of budget 
day.  You just said in this House, we will bring co-generation 
to the province of Saskatchewan.  So you are responding to 
the heat, because you've changed your announcement, you've 
changed your whole mood, you've changed your attitude. 

 
 
And when people start complaining because of your 
inconsistency and the games you're playing -- the big 
promotion, the Speech from the Throne, and then cancelling 
on budget day federally -- now you're starting to back up and 
you say, no, no, I really didn't mean that; I didn't mean that at 
all; we're going to do this; I want these companies to stay 
here, don't go to Alberta; and we're going to do that. 
 
Now we'll be able to see, the public will be able to see, 
which side of your mouth you really want them to listen to.  
Are you going to close this co-generation, or are you going 
to actually do it?  Now you've made the announcement.  If 
the announcement was, well I'm just going to postpone the 
decision, why didn't you just say that?  But you didn't say 
that.  You said, we're going to cancel this.  And then you 
went on today to say, but I really didn't mean that; this 
co-generation we will definitely do. 
 
So now that we know, so when we're talking to the media -- 
we're talking to Randy Burton or to Murray Mandryk or to 
somebody that they've interviewed, like Tim Jeffery or 
somebody else -- we can say, no, we got the minister on 
record.  He is going to do this in the province of 
Saskatchewan.  It's going to happen.  Now you said that 
unequivocally today. 
 
If it's going to happen today, then I would like you to take 
that statement and get it back out to all these companies 
you've just cut off at the knees and said, I know you spent up 
to $250,000 and I know I kind of had a wishy-washy 
announcement that we weren't going to do it, but today I've 
announced that we will do co-generation in the province of 
Saskatchewan, which means that we'll be led by the private 
sector and you will accept the proposals that have come in 
and that you will get it done. 
 
Now unless you've got some other surprises -- is there 
another surprise that you're going to do it in-house only after 
you've got their information?  Or is the media . . . Is it really 
true that you want . . . Now you've got all this information, 
you've sucked it out of them, plus their money, you can do it 
with SaskPower alone. 
 
Will you make the commitment today, Mr. Minister, that not 
only are you not going to do co-generation, but it won't be 
just in-house, it will be with the private sector as you 
proposed when you put out this tender call. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I want to for the second time, Mr. 
Chairman, put on the record in this House exactly what was 
said.  And the hon. member should know full well what was 
said in this House because you sat here and listened to the 
statement.  I gave you an advance copy of the statement.  
And for hopefully those who are interested in co-generation 
listening today, I'm going to go through that statement again.  
But before I go through that statement, I am unequivocally 
putting on the record that there will be co-generation in the 
province of Saskatchewan and the private sector will have a 
role in that co-generation. 
 
I will read from the ministerial statement, Mr. 



February 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 469 

Chairman, that I put the other day, and I'd like the hon. 
member not to be deceitful to the people of Saskatchewan, 
like you were as the premier of Saskatchewan, and listen to 
the statement instead of quipping with your own members 
over there. 
 
I said: 
 

 Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As the minister responsible for 
SaskPower, I wish to announce the government's decision 
regarding non-utility generation in the province of 
Saskatchewan. I'd like to outline how the government has 
arrived at its decision. 

 
 In 1992, the ministerial steering committee on 

co-generation identified the potential for non-utility 
generation in Saskatchewan.  Following the steering 
committee's findings, SaskPower embarked on a program 
to develop a 25 megawatt non-utility generation 
demonstration project.  All projects had to meet the criteria 
of being reliable, environmentally sound, and economic.  
The first step in that program was to go to a competitive 
proposal process.  While a number of proponents expressed 
an interest in submitting proposals, in the final analysis 
SaskPower received 10. 

 
 A team of expert engineers, economists, planners, 

environmentalists and support staff from within 
SaskPower, assisted by outside experts both from within 
government and the private sector, evaluated these 
proposals.  The result of the request for proposals is we 
now have actual costs based on solid data for non-utility 
generation projects that have undergone the most 
comprehensive and expert scrutiny. 

 
 While the first two conditions were met, the third, that 

being economic, was not met at this time.  Therefore I'm 
announcing today that the plan to proceed with the 25 
megawatt demonstration project has been postponed. 

 
 Purchasing electricity from a non-utility generation project 

can be a good investment for the people of Saskatchewan, 
but not at this time.  In the final analysis, the provincial 
government cannot justify spending the additional dollars, 
during these times of fiscal restraint, to enter into a contract 
to purchase electricity that is not needed in our system.  
We simply cannot ask the electrical consumer to carry this 
additional burden. 

 
 While we will be postponing this project, progress has 

been made toward future non-utility generation 
developments.  SaskPower now has a process to solicit and 
evaluate non-utility generation projects. 

 
 I want to emphasize that SaskPower and this government 

remain committed to proceed with non-utility generation.  
They will be an 

 important part of the considerations made in the 
development of our comprehensive energy strategy now 
under way.  The strategy will bring forward a number of 
options for the future of our province's energy industry.  I 
expect to have a final report on the comprehensive energy 
strategy this summer. 

 
 Given the significance of the first non-utility generation 

project, government has spent some time in reviewing the 
process and carefully weighing the costs and benefits of the 
demonstration project.  While this review has delayed the 
announcement for some weeks, our main priority was to 
ensure the best decision was made on behalf of all people 
of Saskatchewan. 

 
 In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I want to commend the 

proponents for the high quality of their proposals and the 
considerable effort they put into their submissions. 

 
 Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

(1215) 
 
And now we find the opposition members in the House today 
spreading misinformation about what was actually said, 
trying to destroy the confidence that the industry expounds in 
pro-industry publications.  The hon. member from Estevan 
holds up an article by Murray Mandryk from the 
Leader-Post filled with many inaccuracies.  So if you want 
to deal with what's said in this House, you should appreciate 
as much as anyone the sacredness of this institution in terms 
of the democratic process. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the hon. member should address the issues 
that we're here to address today.  I cannot be any clearer than 
what I've been on the day I made my ministerial statement 
and what I say again today.  There is a bright future in 
Saskatchewan for our energy sector, and co-generation will 
make up an important part of that bright future. 
 
When you come to the point that you bring out about 
employees, a provincial entity is encouraging people to leave 
the province, that is not so.  The employees that we have 
within our departments and within our Crown corporations 
are professional people, and you should be chastised for 
casting aspersions on the people who work for this 
government under what some time are very trying 
circumstances that were created for you . . . that were created 
for you. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Why don't we talk about gravel pits 
then?  You cast a few aspersions yourself.  How about some 
gravel pits?  What a bunch of garbage that was. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well the member, acting leader . . . I 
mean they can't even get their act well enough to call a 
leadership convention in the Conservative Party; that's why 
they still have an acting leader sat over there.  So why don't 
you get up and ask some 



470 Saskatchewan Hansard February 25, 1994 

questions instead of chirping from your seat? 
 
I think the biggest thing that you should be addressing is not 
what's happening with the credibility of this government, but 
should be the decimation that you suffered in the last election 
and the decimation that your federal cousins suffered 
returning the most dismal number to the federal House of 
Commons ever in the history of any party in Canada. 
 
What you should do is look at your record and what you did, 
leaving this government in the financial mess that it was in, 
not following any plan that we can find.  Maybe you should 
be tabling your plans in the legislature, how you got us into 
the fiscal mess that we're in in this province.  What we have 
here fits into a plan.  It fits into a plan to repair the 
decimation that you and your government put on the people 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I wanted to deal with the issues today of the Energy 
Authority, and we have the president of the Energy Authority 
here.  And I wanted to deal with the issues that are before the 
Department of Energy and Mines.  But you apparently don't 
want to deal with that.  You still want to have your blinders 
on from the regime that you inflicted on the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The statistics, the industry, reflect confidence in this 
government.  And you stand in this legislature and 
misconstrue the information that is before us, the factual 
information that's before us -- to try and do what?  To rebuild 
your political careers?  This is not about political careers.  
This is about repairing the damage that your government has 
done in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Give us lots of leeway, Mr. Chairman. 
That's fine. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well the former premier chirps from 
his seat about me giving lots of leeway.  Of course I'm giving 
lots of leeway.  The House is going to adjourn in about 28 
minutes and I assume that you'll get up and spin off the 
political rhetoric that you used when you were in 
government.  People told you what happened during the last 
provincial election. 
 
And from to time any government will come under some 
criticism.  But I'll tell you, you criticize us for what we do 
wrong, not what we do right. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Because when you criticize for what 
we've done right, you destroy the credibility of this province, 
not this government that happens to be an NDP government.  
You destroy the credibility of the province.  You destroy 
what's there in the future for the people of this province.  
And shame on you for the approach you take today in this 
legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, we must have hit a bit 

of a sore spot, Mr. Chairman, when the minister delves into 
pure politics.  Listen to them chirp as a result of the 
questions about your energy policy, the announcement that 
you made that said they were going to review this because it 
has serious cost consequences. 
 
The paper says, in talking to the media, the response is:  "So 
what's new pussy-cat?"  What do you know now that you 
didn't know before when you set this thing up? 
 
And the hon. member says, well you can't read the paper, 
you can't listen to the oil patch.  We're talking about 
confidence -- public confidence in the NDP.  The public is 
writing "what's new pussy-cat?"  Why the big change?  And I 
can quote it because that's what the industry is saying.  And 
I'll quote: 
 

 But what really makes Anguish's announcement suspicious 
is the explanation itself -- more specifically, the lack there 
of. 

 
 Anguish announced Tuesday the project wasn't going 

ahead because it wasn't cost-effective and SaskPower won't 
need more electrical generation until well into the next 
century. 

 
And then it goes on to say: 
 

 So what's new, pussy-cat? 
 
 This is precisely what a minister's steering committee 

recognized in its November 1992 report that got the 
test-project rolling. 

 
 While SaskPower's current generating capacity (plus 

import contracts) of 3,095 megawatts would suffice for the 
next 10 years, the steering committee (headed by . . . Doug 
Anguish) . . . "it would be prudent for SaskPower to phase 
into non-utility generation by adding demonstration plants 
ahead of capacity needs". 

 
So what's new?  And, Mr. Chairman, the minister does a 
press release so the media will come out. They put it in the 
Speech from the Throne so the media can respond and the 
media can talk to the Energy people and say, please come 
and do the co-generation.  Now when we say that the media 
and the industry has been let down, they chirp from their seat 
and said, well why would you listen to the media? 
 
Why did you have a news conference and all the fanfare and 
put it in the Speech from the Throne if you didn't want the 
media to cover it?  And when the media turns around and 
calls a spade a spade, what's new pussy-cat, it's just 
promotion, we don't have confidence, then you say, don't 
read the newspaper. 
 
Isn't that a fact?  You can pick and choose what you like.  
That's the oldest Blakeney-Riversdale combination trick that 
we saw through the '80s and throughout the 1970s.  That's 
why they lost the 



February 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 471 

election in '82 and lost again in 1986, and they're going to 
lose in the next election.  It's the same gimmick stuff -- NDP 
gimmick, not confidence. 
 
And if there's been change in the energy development in this 
province, we took natural gas from nine wells a year to a 
thousand wells a year. And you're riding on top of that, 
because thank goodness in the energy industry sitting out 
there shaking, I hope they don't change their mind; I hope 
there's not a knee-jerk reaction. 
 
Well what you've got here this morning is the first major 
knee -- well not the first; there's the Kindersley flip-flop as 
well -- but a major knee-jerk reaction where you promoted it 
and hyped it, put it in the Speech from the Throne, invited 
the media, invited energy people in, and then you slapped 
them in the face and said, well we can't really do it because it 
won't be cost-effective.  And they said, well isn't that why we 
were doing it all along, to research and study it? 
 
And then when we put some pressure on him, he announces 
and reannounces today, I really didn't mean that; we're going 
to go ahead. We're going to go ahead in a co-generation with 
the energy sector. 
 
My question to the minister is, is it a matter of weeks or a 
matter of months, or could he give the House some 
indication when the co-generation projects are going to go 
ahead.  And if it's just a matter of weeks, would he explain to 
all of the industry people why he had to make this 
announcement on the federal budget day; that he couldn't 
have the announcement for a period of weeks.  Why all the 
non-confidence and all the negative rhetoric if it was just a 
matter of weeks? 
 
And if it isn't a matter of weeks, is it a matter of months or 
years or after the next election?  Or could he be a little bit 
more precise to the people who put up hundreds of thousands 
of dollars because you asked them to invest in co 
_generation pilot projects here in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I think the best thing that could 
happen . . . you were quoting from an article from Murray 
Mandryk.  And I mean there are so many holes in the article 
you could drive a Mack truck through it.  He talks here about 
me being in charge of the steering committee.  I wasn't.  Don 
Geesen . . . you see, your problem is you don't listen.  You 
never listened when you were premier of the province, and 
you still don't listen. 
 
Don Geesen works for Kalium Canada, and I know that 
you'd be aware that it sits out there by Belle Plaine as a 
fertilizer company, right beside Saskferco.  Right beside 
Saskferco.  Don Geesen headed up the committee.  I mean 
there's all kinds of inaccuracies throughout the article. 
 
Why do you quote from this article like that?  Do you know, 
Mr. Former Premier, that the best thing I think the people of 
the province could do is pack up you, along with Murray 
Mandryk, and send you out of the 

province to Alberta to develop . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Send Murray out there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- You and Murray Mandryk.  And I 
think that's the best service, the best service anybody could 
do for the province of Saskatchewan, is to get you and 
Murray in the same vehicle and go to Alberta and do 
something there, because we don't need you here. 
 
Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, we haven't seen a minister 
respond like this in a very long period of time, if ever, when 
he's now blaming the media for his problems and he's asking 
that we ship a Leader-Post reporter right out of the province 
because he disagrees with what you've done. 
 
You made a major mistake, Mr. Minister.  You made a major 
mistake, and you're going to have to reap the benefits of that 
because people will not speak positively about what you're 
doing.  And you said energy development is based on 
confidence, and you have loads of non-confidence oozing out 
of your department and out of your policies. And you can't 
blame the media for that. 
 
I'm going to quote the Star-Phoenix, or Leader-Star Services 
by Randy Burton, and you can send him out of the province, 
okay?  Randy Burton says: "Company will look elsewhere." 
That's the headline. 
 
Is that confidence?  Companies will look elsewhere.  And he 
goes on to say: 
 

 Saskatchewan could lose future job creation and the 
benefits of new energy technology if SaskPower refuses to 
proceed with the demonstration project on co-generation, 
says a company with a proposal on the table. 

 
(1230) 
 
Now if companies are saying that they are going to move, 
Randy Burton says that they are reported to be moved, Mr. 
Murray Mandryk is reporting them, and the minister's only 
response is, well, we can ship those reporters out of the 
province, don't you think that there may be, under history of 
the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) and the 
NDP, energy companies and oil companies and investment 
companies and potash companies and mining companies that 
just might get the real message from this Minister of Energy 
from the NDP that the NDP is just up to their old gimmicks? 
 
It's a bona fide socialist gimmick -- just keep them guessing 
and maybe we can keep them in here.  But they really know 
what we're up against, they really know that we can't stand 
them, never could enjoy or have any respect for the energy 
industry.  And what you really see here in the newspaper 
that's got their attention is the fact that you flip-flopped with 
a knee-jerk reaction, which is really what the socialists are all 
about. 



472 Saskatchewan Hansard February 25, 1994 

It goes on to say: 
 

 In December, 1992, the government predicted the 
province's first co-generation project would be operating 
before the end of 1994. 

 
And you predicted, Mr. Minister, that by the end of 1994 the 
province's first co-generation project would be in operation. 
 

 Now it says the power would cost too much at a time when 
the province needs no generating capacity. 

 
 SaskPower refuses to reveal how much it would cost, 

citing client confidentiality. 
 
 Wascana Energy was one of eight proponents to submit 

bids for the demonstration project.  Others included North 
Canadian Oils for a Saskatoon project including the city 
and the university, Kalium Chemicals and Millar Western's 
pulp mill. 

 
 . . . SaskPower has never said what they would pay for the 

power. "They always said this was a demonstration project.  
That's why they picked the 25 megawatt size.   I mean 25 
megawatts is less than one per cent of the total generating 
(cost)." 

 
If in fact the private sector was going to pay for this, Mr. 
Minister, and they're asking why you'd even started to so . . . 
(inaudible) . . . to initiate the proposals.  If the private sector 
is going to pay for this, Mr. Minister, why are you now 
telling them that you have to put if off because of cost 
considerations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- To the question, the answer to the 
question is -- I believe it related to confidence in the 
province, their record activities in some aspects of the oil and 
gas industry, their new mines on the drawing boards in the 
province of Saskatchewan -- those are signs of great 
confidence by the industry and those are the questions that 
apply to the department authority that I have here today, so 
thank you very much for that question. 
 
Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the minister wasn't 
listening.  I asked him why he would postpone the projects 
when he knows that the private sectors were asked to pay for 
the projects, not SaskPower? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well I believe the member's not 
accurate in that.  Thank you for the question. 
 
Mr. Devine: -- Would the minister care to respond to the 
question?  I asked, if the private sector was going to pay for 
the projects and that was part of the proposal, why then you 
are cancelling them or postponing them because of the cost?  
Would you explain that to the general public and to the 
people who have responded saying they didn't quite 
understand why you are postponing it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- His way clear that's appropriate 

to the Crown Corporations Committee, I would be happy to 
do combat with the member when he gets there. 
 
Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, we're talking about the policy 
and the objectives of the Department of Energy and Mines 
and it's to develop and promote energy development in the 
province of Saskatchewan.  We're asking them about policy.  
The minister was kind enough to say it's based on 
confidence, so we're asking him about confidence. 
 
If you flip-flopped on co-generation we want to understand 
why you flip-flopped and what that means specifically.  If it's 
based on cost, didn't you know there was some cost when 
you went into it?  And secondly, if the private sector bears 
the cost or the most of it, what's changed and why have you 
changed your mind? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- There's been no flip-flop.  Thank you 
for the question. 
 
Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, your estimates are going to 
take an awful long time if you won't respond to the public.  
Do you agree?  He finally agrees, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Would you review for the private sector why you're 
postponing this announcement that has them so worried?  
Would you do that in this House?  Because in Crowns you 
said, ask the questions in estimates.  So now we're in 
estimates and you're the minister responsible for the policy 
development in Energy and Mines.  Would you tell them 
what you had in mind when you postponed this and explain 
the cost considerations to the private sector? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Yes I'd be more than happy to explain 
that to the private sector.  There are commercial interests 
with each of the competing companies that put in the 
proposals and I'm not going to undress those figures here 
with you in front the Legislative Assembly.  If you want 
those figures, those companies can either divulge them to 
you as individual companies or choose not to divulge them to 
you. 
 
But I am not going to divulge figures that would have a 
commercial interest for those companies involved unless 
those companies ask me to discuss that in open public with 
you in the legislature during a forum which is not the 
appropriate forum.  The member knows that.  The 
appropriate place is when the officials are there before the 
Crown Corporations Committee. 
 
I think that all you're doing is trying to destroy the 
confidence that the industry has in the professionals that 
work in our department and in this government and I will not 
get into those issues with you in this forum in the Legislative 
Assembly for those two reasons.  It's the wrong forum to 
begin with. 
 
And secondly, there's a commercial interest of the 
information involved, and I am not about to tell you 



February 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 473 

commercially sensitive information that would put at 
jeopardy, or possibly put at jeopardy, some of the companies 
that were involved with the request for proposals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, that was true when you put 
out the proposals.  Everybody agreed that it would be 
confidential.  Why did you make this announcement?  What 
did you make this announcement on?  You said there are cost 
considerations that are going to prevent you from having this 
carry on.  Not that the tenders aren't confidential -- of course, 
they're confidential. 
 
What's new, pussy-cat?  Why did you make this 
announcement that this was on hold because of cost 
considerations?  What cost considerations?  They don't 
understand what you're doing.  Your confidence level is 
falling because you will not explain what you're up to. 
 
What's the reason for the announcement? -- not 
confidentiality.  What new cost considerations are on the 
table now that weren't there in a non-confidential basis that 
allows you to say, whoops, we gotta put this on hold, or 
we're not going to do it, or reannounce it in here today that 
you're going to do it?  Would you explain those cost 
considerations?  Not on the confidential side, but what's new 
today that you didn't know when you put out the proposals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- There was a competitive bidding 
process.  Surely the member understands the competitive 
bidding process.  On the other hand, maybe he doesn't 
understand the competitive bidding process.  Because that's 
likely part of the reason that we're in the mess today and 
having to climb out of it, is because you didn't understand the 
competitive process that would serve Saskatchewan well. 
 
So I repeat again, if the member wants to address those 
questions when the proper officials are here then we will 
address those questions at that time. 
 
I've said very clearly, you are going on the premise that 
co-generation is dead in the province of Saskatchewan.  The 
co-generation process is not dead in the province of 
Saskatchewan and it defies explanation for you because you 
either can't understand it or you don't listen to it.  And I am 
not pursuing this matter of questioning any further because if 
someone will either be watching today or read what's in 
Hansard, they will know very clearly the position of the 
government and the position of myself as the minister 
responsible. 
 
I take full responsibility from what I've said.  I cannot be any 
clearer than what I've said up until this point.  So I ask the 
hon. member to get serious about this and don't try and find 
fancy phrases to get yourself some media coverage or 
whatever you're trying to do.  Because I actually think that if 
you got media coverage questioning the confidence of this 
government, the confidence of the government will likely go 
up. 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, when a minister responds in 
an arrogant fashion when he's in difficulty, asking the media 
to leave the province, doesn't care if companies leave the 
province, won't answer the questions, obviously, number 
one, he's made a mistake.  And number two, he is not going 
to add to the confidence level of his administration or as he 
said, for the private sector to have confidence in investing in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now this individual, Mr. Chairman, who was put in cabinet 
at a late enough date that they knew they had some risk in 
running with this gentleman.  Because of his attitude -- we 
see it now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman -- the attitude is one 
of arrogance and he won't even answer questions.  He's 
afraid to answer.  He made a mistake.  He's got the media 
upset and the public upset and oil companies and energy 
companies and gas companies upset, and he's arrogant in the 
House.  He says, I won't answer your questions.  I'm in 
charge of energy and mining policy.  I'm in charge of 
promotion and development but I'm not answering the policy 
questions. 
 
And all we've asked him -- very simply put -- Why did you 
make the announcement the other day?  And he won't . . . he 
won't say, well I don't . . . I think this has something to do 
with costs.  Well what was new on costs that you didn't 
already know when you put the proposal out?  Get some of 
that confidence back, don't get into the Blakeney 
administration or the Devine administration or some other 
things. 
 
What is it that made you make that announcement?  What 
about the costs do you know now that you didn't know then?  
Not the confidentiality, we all know that tenders should be 
confidential, although they don't believe that you'll probably 
keep them that way.  But what's new?  Why did you make 
that announcement when you knew that the private sector 
was going to pay most of the money, and the cost in the large 
part was coming from the private sector and they want to do 
co-generation? What was the new information on costs 
generally that got you to postpone it?  That's what they want 
to know. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well the process is not yet concluded, 
and when the hon. member wants to put those questions at 
the appropriate place, we'll deal with them then. 
 
I maintain that what you're doing is disrespectful to the 
process and disrespectful to the people of this province and 
disrespectful to the companies who want to be involved. 
 
I have nothing to hide from you.  At one moment you accuse 
me of being arrogant.  To be arrogant, you must be upfront 
about things to be able to be arrogant.  And then you sit in 
your seat chirping, I'm hiding.  I don't . . . 
 
Maybe the member could ask questions at our . . . in dealing 
with why we're here today.  I mean it's hard to determine 
what it is that you actually want.  And so try 



474 Saskatchewan Hansard February 25, 1994 

and be a little bit relevant. 
 
The process is still going on on co-generation and any of the 
companies . . . If Mr. Tim Jeffery wants to deal through the 
media with me, that's fine.  The offer is open to all the 
proponents to sit down with myself, with SaskPower, to 
discuss the questions that they have and how they fit into the 
co-generation mix in supplying our energy needs in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And to get into a political argument with you is just fruitless; 
just fruitless getting into a political argument with you.  Why 
do you try and destroy the credibility of the government, the 
credibility of the process, the credibility of this province?  
Why do you do that during the legislature?  What political 
game are you playing?  Why don't you join with us and help 
rebuild the province?  Or are you so bent on the destruction 
you inflicted over Saskatchewan and its people that you want 
to continue what you've done in the past. 
 
If that's the case, just continue doing what you're doing, just 
continue what you're doing.  And please excuse me if it 
seems arrogant to you, but I have a hard time taking you 
seriously in the questioning line that you're on today. 
 
And as a former premier, you should know the process well 
in this legislature and you should know process when it 
comes to economic development and the opportunities that 
go with that in Saskatchewan, but maybe you didn't.  Maybe 
that's why we're in the fiscal mess that we're in in this 
province.  Maybe that's why there's billions of dollars of debt 
there that future generations will continue to have to address.  
So maybe you didn't understand process. 
 
I'm saying there is a process in place.  This is all part of the 
process.  You interpret an announcement as a negative 
announcement that in fact kills something.  It doesn't kill 
anything.  So I think maybe you should just come a little bit 
clean. 
 
And I don't want to appear to be arrogant, I don't mean to 
project that.  But I do have a hard time taking what you're 
doing here today in this legislature as being very serious 
because it's not to the benefit of this government.  I maintain 
it's not to your benefit.  And it certainly isn't to the benefit of 
the people of this great province. 
 
(1245) 
 
Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, you stood up in the House and 
said, you're going to postpone these projects because the 
timing is wrong, and you linked it to costs.  The public wants 
to know what you meant by that, because people have spent 
hundreds of thousands of dollars to participate in 
co-generation and then you announce the timing's wrong.  
What did you mean? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- In terms of cost there were three . . . 
Well I guess we'll get into this even though the officials 
aren't here that are equipped to deal with that because it's not 
their area of responsibility.  So I'd ask 

 the officials, if you would please take your information and 
depart and go on about the very busy schedules that you 
have. 
 
I'd like to thank you for your time today in coming out to the 
legislature.  And we'll deal with an issue that's specific to 
co-generation in the House.  And I do, Mr. Chairman, want 
to thank the officials for coming out today.  I appreciate them 
being on stand-by to provide the professional and very good 
advice that they provide to us. 
 
I would like to thank Mr. John Mitchell from the Energy 
Authority, Ms. Pat Youzwa, Deputy Minister of Energy and 
Mines, Bruce Wilson and Ray Clayton from Energy and 
Mines, and I apologize to you today for wasting your time in 
the legislature but I do thank you for providing with me with 
the good information that you have. 
 
So more specifically, what we will deal with I guess, from 
now until the regular adjournment time of the House, is 
co-generation.  And there are a couple of factors that you 
bring up. 
 
One is a issue of cost.  There are two things that determine 
cost.  The cost that the proponents would want for the per 
kilowatt generation of electricity that they produce through a 
non-utility generation project -- that's one item of cost.  
Because I would hope that the member doesn't want to think 
that we would have these proponents giving it to us for free, 
so there's a cost there. 
 
We have to pay for the electricity that would be generated.  
We also find that through the process there is a capacity there 
that we have to pay for, one of them being the Shand project 
which was started under your administration.  You should 
know that very well.  And we have to pay a cost that's 
ongoing of so much per kilowatt out of the Shand plant, 
which I'll use for the example because that's our most 
expensive and newest generating station within the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Those two things combined, and the flatter load growth 
forecast, make the situation not economically fit for doing 
the co-generation at the time when I was being pushed for an 
announcement.  And I think in fairness to the industry, we 
want to tell them that this is going to be delayed for some 
time.  And we will be committed, as we have been 
committed, to an element of co-generation within the 
province as part of our mix, because it makes sense to do it. 
 
And I don't know what else you're asking.  If you want to be 
specific on the questions, you be specific and ask the 
questions.  So I've explained what the cost means.  It's the 
generating capacity that your government built that we're still 
paying for and will pay for for a long time.  And there's the 
cost also in terms of what we have to pay per kilowatt to the 
proponents of non-utility generation. 
 
Those two added together make it more expensive than what 
we had anticipated in the beginning.  That 



February 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 475 

expense does not fit in to our general plan.  And we cannot 
ask at this point in time today, to ask the ratepayers in 
Saskatchewan to pay more than what they are paying right 
now for their electrical rates under our current system. 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I 
find it a little appalling that the minister would act in such a 
childish manner, to just ask his members to leave the 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I happen to sit on the Crown Corporations 
Committee.  And we've sat in Crown Corporations on 
numerous occasions -- and even with the present minister -- 
and we've tried to get answers to a number of questions.  
And we've been told: well no, that's appropriate to be 
brought up in the House in estimates.  It would seem to me 
that if we're going to really get into a manner of trying to 
determine whether questions are appropriate in Crowns or in 
the House, maybe we should just bring everything before the 
House and forget the committee work; because we're just 
unable to really determine where we should be getting our 
answers, especially when you look at Crown Corporations 
Committee. 
 
And for the minister to suggest to bring it up in Crowns . . . 
the minister knows very well that the first occasion we will 
get to discuss this question in Crown Corporations 
Committee is maybe a year and a half to two years down the 
road, when the final report comes out on the debate that is 
presently taking place in this Assembly. 
 
And so it would seem, Mr. Chairman, that either the minister 
-- as his government has suggested that they'll be more open 
and accountable -- would stand here and respond, and answer 
the questions if he's got nothing to hide; if co-generation is 
such a sound, and viable, and economical project; if the 
government was so sure that it was going to bring jobs to this 
province . . . that the minister would be willing to stand in 
this Assembly today and respond to some of the questions. 
 
And it would seem to me at times that the responses the 
minister has given haven't been directly related to the 
questions my colleague has asked him.  So I can understand 
his frustration in trying to determine what he should be 
answering.  If he doesn't want to answer the question directly 
we may as well just say, well I'm not interested in answering 
that, and I guess we might have to get on with life.  But I 
think it's time we realized either . . . if we're going to get 
answers we're going to have to maybe find ministers who are 
willing to give the answers.  And maybe the minister should 
just check with his officials a bit. 
 
But I think, Mr. Speaker, if we're really getting into a more 
open debate and discussion in this House, and more openness 
in government, it would be appropriate to indeed give more 
direct responses.  And let's not hide behind the fact that we 
should bring this up in Crowns because that's the more 
appropriate place to bring it up, when it's two years down the 
road when they finally get to that debate.  Thank you. 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I appreciate some of the points that 
the member makes, Mr. Chair.  I just expressed the 
willingness to you to deal directly with the issue.  I asked the 
officials if they would leave because this is not their area of 
expertise in terms of dealing with the projects that you're 
calling into question. 
 
The Crown corporation that dealt with that is SaskPower, 
and if you get into technical, detailed information I should in 
fairness have the officials from SaskPower here.  If you want 
to deal with it in Crown Corporations, I'll deal with it in 
Crown Corporations.  I'd be happy to deal with it in Crown 
Corporations.  Maybe you could deal with the chair of 
Crown Corps and try and expedite this matter on the Crown 
Corporations, if you like.  Maybe that would be a good thing 
for you to do. 
 
But I think what I've given the willingness to do is that the 
member from Estevan can ask me questions and we'll deal 
with non-utility generation, co-generation, and let's get it out 
here on the floor of the legislature today. 
 
It's not the purpose, but I also didn't want to waste the time 
of very valuable officials that have to do a lot of work under 
very trying circumstances. 
 
Both the Department of Energy and Mines and the Energy 
Authority are lean in terms of responsibilities that are put on 
them, and so they need to go on to do their work.  And if you 
want to be specific in your questions, get as specific as you 
want. And if I have the information off the top of my head, 
I'll provide you with the information as I can, as long as 
there's not a commercial interest. 
 
And if you would have given me some advance knowledge 
that you didn't want to deal with the Energy Authority or 
with the Department of Energy and Mines, I could quite well 
have not had them come today and I would have brought the 
information knowing what you really wanted to deal with.  
So don't hide from now on, come out up front and tell us 
what you want to deal with. 
 
I talked to you, the member from Estevan, just prior to 
coming in here.  You mentioned nothing to me today about 
wanting to deal with this issue in the specifics of how it 
happened.  I can talk about policy and I laid out policy to 
you.  I laid out the statement again but you don't listen to 
that.  You just want to make political hay.  So you go ahead 
and make political . . . you keep calling policy. 
 
The policy is, is that we're going to have 100 megawatts of 
non-utility generation by the end of the decade.  That has 
always been there.  That's what was in the throne speech.  
And you smile and chirp from your seat.  The member from 
Estevan, I can't understand what it is that you want other than 
to continue the province on some path that you set it on and 
that's not the correct path.  The policy is that there be 100 
megawatts of non-utility generation in this province by the 
end of the decade.  It will happen well 



476 Saskatchewan Hansard February 25, 1994 

before the end of the decade. 
 
The other thing that comes into question that has to do with 
policy is my statement in the House and I read that back to 
you word for word in case you weren't listening the day I 
brought it up here.  So that's the policy.  Now if you want to 
deal with the specifics, let's get on with the specifics.  It's not 
the purpose of this House to do that, but I want to show a 
willingness to deal with those important, pressing questions 
you have.  So let's be succinct and distinct about it and I'll do 
my best to answer them. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:58 p.m. 
 


