




















































Hansard: March 22, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1067 

 March 22, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's my 

pleasure to introduce a petition coming from the community of 

Rocanville and surrounding area.  And it reads as such: 

 

 To the Hon. Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in 

legislature assembled, the petition of the undersigned 

citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 

 

 That the emergency medical needs of the people in 

Rocanville community have been served well by the 

existing emergency unit, and that the emergency unit 

consists of qualified EMT, and that the nearest ambulance 

service is approximately 25 miles away from the vicinity.  

And that under the current rules the Rocanville emergency 

unit is fully equipped to assist emergency patients, yet not 

to transport patients even though they are more than 

qualified to do so.  And that allowing the Rocanville 

emergency unit to transport patients will be a cost-saving 

measure, and that there is widespread support for this 

petition. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

ensure the medical needs of the Rocanville community are 

looked after by allowing the Rocanville emergency unit to 

respond to emergencies and transport patients to the 

nearest health care facility. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many names on this petition, names of 

individuals from the community of Rocanville, Wapella, 

Welwyn, Moosomin, Esterhazy, Spy Hill, McAuley, Manitoba; 

Estevan, Yorkton, Moose Jaw, Tantallon, Inglis, Manitoba. 

 

I so present. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I give 

notice that I shall on Thursday next ask the government the 

following question. Regarding SaskPower, the minister 

responsible has stated that Mr. David Dombowsky: ". . . has 

literally to this time saved us tens of millions of dollars . . ."  

That's Hansard of March 11, 1994, page 816. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, we would ask the minister the 

following questions: 

Provide detailed information regarding the tens of million 

of dollars Mr. Dombowsky has saved the province of . . . 

the provincial government; provide full detail of the 

number of contracts Mr. Dombowsky has had with 

SaskPower since November 1, 1991; provide copies of 

each contract with Mr. Dombowsky since November 1, 

1991 and all details therein including expenses, fees, 

length of contract, purpose of contract, and how each 

contract has benefited the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that I 

shall on Thursday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

 Regarding the Saskatchewan Government Insurance and 

the first-time vehicle registrations on vehicles previously 

registered in other jurisdictions: (1) will vehicle dealers 

along the Saskatchewan border who cannot afford the 

required testing equipment be able to be provided with this 

service;  (2) if the cost of testing -- hiring a driver, mileage 

and other expenses -- increases the cost of a vehicle by 400 

to $500 how will these dealers stay competitive while 

dealers on the other side of the border do not incur these 

additional expenses;  (3) why hasn't SGI (Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance) placed responsibility on those 

individuals or companies rebuilding vehicles which have 

been written off by insurance companies;  (4) has SGI 

contacted our neighbouring provincial governments in 

regards to implementing a similar program? 

 

I so submit. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Through you and 

to you, Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you today a 

gentleman behind the bar, a gentleman that has served as the 

CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) MLA 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) from 1960 to 1964, Mr. 

Allan Stevens.  Mr. Stevens is from my community of Harris 

and is also a very dear family friend.  And I wish to introduce 

to you, Mr. Allan Stevens. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

Assembly, 27 grade 7, 8, and 9 students from Bredenbury 

School seated in the east gallery, and their teachers, Rob 

Wilson whom I've known for a long period of time, and Kelly 

Phillipchuk.  Also assisting with the group is chaperon Michael 

Laycock and bus driver Anita Varga. 

 

I will be meeting this group following their tour approximately 

at 2:20 for pictures, and we hope to have a lively discussion 

over some refreshments 



1068 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1994 

in room 255 later on. 

 

So have a safe trip home; have an enjoyable visit to Regina 

while you're here, and we'll see you after question period.  

Thank you very kindly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 

would like to introduce to you and the members of the 

legislature, a group of some 57 grade 7 and 8 students from 

Argyle School.  They are being accompanied by Mr. Wayne 

Wilson, Ms. Joy Woodard, and Ms. Meryl Forster.  And after 

question period, Mr. Speaker, I will be meeting with this group 

for pictures and refreshments. 

 

Would you please join me in welcoming them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like also to join in 

welcoming Mr. Allan Stevens who represented the Rosetown 

constituency ably, but after that time was a colleague of mine 

and friend on the Rosetown School Division Board for many 

years.  He has made a significant contribution to Saskatchewan 

society both through his contribution to the legislature and to 

school board business, and very much to the spirit of one the 

strongest communities in Saskatchewan  

_- Harris.  I welcome Al, and I ask others of you to join me 

again in welcoming him. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to members of the Legislative 

Assembly someone that has caught my eye in the west gallery, 

Mr. George Bothwell, who has been a leader in providing 

library services in the community of Regina and is president of 

the Saskatchewan Library Board.  And I'd ask all members to 

join me in welcoming him here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

Mr. Speaker, as you and other members of the Legislative 

Assembly, I hope will know by now, our government has been 

looking at many areas of labour reform.  And one of those areas 

is job sharing. 

 

Now in an attempt to get some firsthand experience in that 

field, today I job-shared with John Lynch, the sports director 

for CKCK radio in Regina.  And in return John is today in the 

Speaker's gallery observing how my job is done.  I would point 

out, Mr. Speaker, that while I got my experience today hands 

on as an on-air announcer, John is safely removed from the fray 

of the legislative floor, sitting in your Speaker's gallery. 

 

And that's just as well, Mr. Speaker, because people who listen 

to CK62 regularly heard John yesterday staking his reputation 

on the fact that Jeff Fairholm was not going to the Toronto 

Argonauts.  And I ask you, Mr. Speaker, do we really need a 

person like that in the 

Premier's chair, even for a short period of time? 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, John and I go back quite a long ways; in 

order to save him embarrassment, I won't say how long.  And 

we share a love of sports and a deep appreciation for those who 

bring us enjoyment through that venue.  And I was very 

pleased this morning to renew my acquaintanceship with the 

radio microphone being used for something other than politics 

and political warfare. 

 

But I have to say, John, that while you've had a long and 

illustrious career, ranging, I might add, from service with the 

government in SCN (Saskatchewan Communications Network 

Corporation) to covering such things as rough sports as 

football, hockey, and full-contact figure skating, they all pale in 

comparison to what goes on on this floor. 

 

So, John, thank you for the chance to reacquaint myself with 

the gentler pursuits of the people of this province.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, I ask all members to join me in welcoming John 

Lynch to our arena today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Farm Business Management Information Network 

 

Mr. Carlson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As we are all aware, 

this week has been declared Agriculture Week in 

Saskatchewan.  We are also aware that agriculture has been 

changing rapidly throughout time because of new technology. 

 

With this in mind today, I would like to announce the great 

success of the Farm Business Management Information 

Network.  This system is a Canada-wide computer bulletin 

board database system.  Saskatchewan in particular found the 

network extremely useful.  In fact there were 1,199 users as of 

February 16, 1994.  This is the largest amount of users on this 

system in Canada, which in total has 27,000 subscribers. 

 

The Department of Agriculture and Food developed this 

concept and got it up and running.  This is yet another vehicle 

to teach farmers about other areas they can diversify into.  It is 

also an invaluable teaching tool and a precursor to the new 

information highway technology that may eventually sweep 

this country. 

 

We are happy to see the Department of Agriculture and Food 

are taking their role in our Ag 2000 very seriously.  They have 

gone to the extraordinary steps to make sure our producers are 

informed and have access to the best database possible.  It is 

through this type of cooperation that will allow the producers 

of Saskatchewan to grow and meet the demands of the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Fine Arts Week at the University of Regina 



March 22, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1069 

Ms. Crofford: - Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As the member from 

Redberry said yesterday and the member from Melville today, 

this is a crowded week.  Across the province it's Agriculture 

Week, and at the University of Regina it's Fine Arts Week.  

There are daily public events during the week, all following the 

theme: Celebration '94. 

 

Over the years the University of Regina has gone through a 

number of identity changes.  The member from Rosemont and 

the MP (Member of Parliament) from Regina-Qu'Appelle 

might recall a time when it was known as the most radically 

progressive campus in Canada.  Lately the university has 

gained favourable attention because of its connection with 

high-tech companies, its public administration and co-op work 

programs.  Quietly though during its existence, the University 

of Regina has developed and nourished a superior Fine Arts 

program, excellent instructor performers who develop superior 

students. 

 

This week celebrates that fact with daily concerts, exhibitions, 

displays, films, and culminating with a dramatic production 

directed by staff and performed by students.  I've attended 

before and I encourage members and the public to take some 

time to sample the wares of the Fine Arts school at the 

University of Regina.  And I remind us that life is short, but art 

lasts a long time.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Favourable Report from Bond Rating Agency 

 

Mr. Wormsbecker: -- Last week I reported some good 

financial news to the people of Saskatchewan.  I reported that 

the initial response to Saskatchewan's budget by the bond 

rating agencies was uniformly favourable.  Today I have more 

good news, more evidence that Saskatchewan is on the slow 

road to financial respectability.  And a long road it has been, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Moody's Investors Service of New York announced recently 

that Saskatchewan is maintaining its AAA credit rating for 

another year.  Moody's said that efforts to decrease financial 

exposure from loan guarantees and the province's deficit 

reduction plan are paying off.  These efforts have stabilized the 

financial position of the province.  A credit upgrade next year 

is quite possible, Moody's says.  The credit of course goes to 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The story this morning in Canada's national newspaper makes 

for an interesting comparison.  It points out that the federal 

government has just had its foreign currency debt rating 

trimmed from a AAA to a AA.  The Globe and Mail's reporter 

said, very gently I might add, that this move amounts to a 

mildly negative review of Paul Martin's first budget -- a very 

interesting comparison.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

Judges' Salaries Recommendation 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I think, Mr. Speaker, 

everyone in this Assembly is aware that last night was Oscar 

night, and today we're once again hopeful that the minister will 

announce a decision on judges' salaries. 

 

My question is to the minister, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, will 

you today open the envelope and announce who the winner is?  

Have you come to a decision on this matter?  Can you tell us 

what that decision will be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for the 

question.  I will be making a ministerial statement following 

question period, and at that point the envelope will be opened 

and the entire Assembly and the province will know the result 

of our deliberations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, and to the minister.  Mr. Minister, 

has your government been conducting a public opinion poll on 

matters of judges' salaries during the past few days?  If so, how 

much did this poll cost Saskatchewan taxpayers and what were 

the results? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The government has conducted no such 

poll. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, again to the minister.  Mr. Minister, 

this morning we spoke to a woman who received a call last 

night from a company called NorSask Consumer Survey.  They 

asked her the following consumer survey questions:  (1) are 

you aware of the proposed increase in judges' salaries; (2) are 

you in favour of a 20 per cent increase in judges' salaries; (3) 

should the government refuse to grant this increase in judges' 

salaries; and (4) if an election were held tomorrow, who would 

you vote for? 

 

Mr. Minister, this sounds to me an awful lot like a survey your 

government might be conducting.  How much taxpayers' 

money are you spending to make a decision you could have 

made weeks ago, and what has the survey told you? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I repeat, Mr. Speaker, that the 

government has conducted no such poll, nor have I ever heard 

of the company that the member referred to. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Questions on Matters before a Court 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, a new series of questions to the 

same minister.  Mr. Minister, on May 10, 1989, as a member of 

the opposition, you initiated a series of questions in question 

period regarding a matter which 



1070 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1994 

was before the courts.  After the minister gave a general reply, 

he said that he could not give a more specific answer because 

this matter was under investigation and before the courts.  You 

said, and I quote from Hansard: 

 

 It is very interesting that this matter has been referred to the 

RCMP but it does not absolve this minister from the 

responsibility of answering those questions in this House. 

 

Mr. Minister, do you still hold to that principle?  Do you 

believe that investigations and court proceedings should not 

absolve the minister from the responsibility of answering 

questions in this House? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I can tell the member that, as the 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General, the matters that I can 

comment on, in public or in this House, are constrained by 

certain requirements that are essential to the maintenance of an 

effective and credible justice system.  That would include an 

inability to comment on investigations and an inability to 

comment on matters that are before the court. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, again to the Minister.  Mr. Minister, 

your party, while in opposition, had absolutely no qualms about 

asking whole series of questions while an issue was at trial.  

And you were right in the middle of it.  It was the rule, not the 

exception. 

 

Remember the member from Battlefords would stand in this 

Assembly and quote from the transcripts of court proceedings 

which were still ongoing.  I refer you to Hansard . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  I think the member's questions 

come very close to challenging the convention or practice that 

has been established in the House at . . . Order, order. 

 

Order, order . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . order.  Well if you 

want to take your question period time, that's fine with me. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- It doesn't matter, you don't give it to us 

anyway. 

 

The Speaker: -- I will ask the member from Wilkie to retract 

that statement and apologize to the Chair. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- I retract that statement and I apologize to the 

Chair. 

 

The Speaker: -- I'm simply asking the member from 

Moosomin to be very careful in the phrasing of his questions, 

in making certain that he's not challenging the practice and 

decisions that have been made, not only by this Speaker, by 

many other Speakers in this House.  That's what I'm asking the 

member to do -- be 

careful in asking the questions that he's asking at the present 

time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, again just to bring the House up to 

date and the minister up to date on the question, I remind the 

minister of the comments of the member from The Battlefords, 

who would make when he stood in this House . . . and I would 

like you to refer to Hansard of May 31,'89. 

 

The minister responsible of the day would at least attempt to 

answer the question.  Mr. Minister, what has changed from 

1989 to present?  Why do you and your colleagues demand that 

ministers answer questions while the matter was before the 

courts and then today hide behind the very thing when you 

become the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: --  Well, Mr. Speaker, of course it's not a 

question of hiding behind anything.  And on the basis of what 

the member has referred to the House of statements or 

questions that I asked in 1989, I have no doubt that I said that 

because the member does not tell lies, so that I know I must 

have.  And if I did, I was wrong.  I was wrong. 

 

The fact of the matter is that the justice system simply cannot 

operate if we are to start discussing evidence that is being given 

in a court case in this House.  We simply can't do it.  The 

system has to operate and operate with integrity.  And if I said 

that in 1989, which I don't doubt, I was quite wrong. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, again to the minister.  Mr. Minister, 

we have seen via the papers that there has been sworn 

testimony which suggests that you were involved in matters 

leading up to the White Bear casino raid.  Now, Mr. Minister, if 

you are not called to refute this evidence during the trial, if you 

are not subpoenaed, will you commit to this Assembly to make 

a statement regarding that testimony after the trial? 

 

Will you make the commitment to confirm or deny the 

statements that were made under oath by the individual in 

question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I'm not certain of all of the implications 

of the member's question but let me answer it in this way.  

When the trial is over, when the matter is finished, when it is 

no longer before the courts, then it's another matter.  Then I 

have to answer for my actions.  And I am prepared to do that 

within the rules, within the limits of my ability to do that.  But I 

hide nothing, I've nothing to be ashamed of, and I'll deal with 

the matter as and when I can. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Help for Spring Seeding 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This question is 

for the Minister of Agriculture.  The Premier stood before the 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural 



March 22, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1071 

Municipalities convention recently and told delegates 

agriculture was showing signs of improvement.  He talked 

about hope and optimism.  Well I too would like to believe the 

situation of our farm families is improving.  The farmers who 

have been calling us are worried.  Even you, Mr. Minister, 

agreed.  You admitted in The Western Producer that in your 

area of the province money is very short for spring seeding, as 

it is in many areas of the province. 

 

Mr. Minister, what is your government going to do to ensure 

that farm families will be able to seed their crops this spring?  

Make it clear what your plans are.  Farmers in the south-west 

will be in the fields in a matter of a few weeks and they want to 

know what you're going to do. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't think that 

either this government, myself, or the Premier, or anybody else 

has said that the farm problems are over.  Certainly there is a 

turnaround in the farm community.  There probably is more 

money for spring seeding overall in the province than there has 

been for a good number of years. 

 

There are trouble spots and, as the member well quotes me as 

saying, there's trouble spots in my area where we've had two 

crop failures in a row and times there are very tough.  And 

there's no doubt there are farmers all over this province who are 

still struggling with debt and still struggling.  But what we were 

saying is that there is some turnaround in the farm economy, 

that cattle prices are up and hog prices are up and grain prices 

are up somewhat, and there's optimism on the future.  We 

haven't said that the problems are all solved and that the 

farmers have no more problems. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's obvious that 

the Minister of Agriculture refuses to recognize the seriousness 

of the situation in the province.  Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, 

instead of responding to the problem in Saskatchewan's ag 

industry, your government announced it is unlikely producers 

will receive an interim payment this month under 1993 GRIP 

(gross revenue insurance program).  As a matter of fact, they 

may even have to pay that money back. 

 

Mr. Minister, there's a projected surplus of $320 million in the 

Saskatchewan GRIP fund.  Do you care enough about people to 

return to farm families the program money that your 

government controls? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, we will commit in 

this government to return farmers' money if it's possible within 

the agreement, when the agreement terminates, which will be in 

the end of '95.  We are, as the member well knows, stuck in this 

GRIP program for one more year, and certainly projections of 

surplus still are possible. It's also possible that we'll end up in a 

deficit.  But if there are surpluses in there, we commit to 

attempting within the framework of the agreement to return 

farmers' premiums to them. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

that's exactly what we're asking.  When are you going to get 

those premiums back to the people.  They need that money for 

spring seeding.  Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, your government 

lacks farm policies.  Even agriculture economists in other parts 

of Canada have examined your Agriculture 2000 paper and say 

it's a nice academic exercise but lacks substance and real 

vision.  Ag 2000 isn't going to help farmers put their crops in 

this spring, but the surplus GRIP money can. 

 

Will you promise today to take the surplus GRIP money and 

distribute it to the farm families that you claim to care so much 

about, in order that they can seed their crops this spring? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I know the member 

opposite would like to follow the old Tory policy of running to 

New York and borrowing a billion dollars and lending it out to 

farmers to put another crop in.  That didn't work very well the 

last time.  I think he should be talking to Mr. Goodale and what 

they're doing to us on Crow and other cost-sharing things that 

are impacting on our farmers in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  By the way, Mr. 

Minister, I do talk to Mr. Goodale.  The problem is with you, 

Mr. Minister.  You're the Minister of Agriculture in 

Saskatchewan.  It's up to you to come up with some ideas of 

your own. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the cost of inputs for putting in a crop is high.  

There are fuel expenses, seed, fertilizer, machinery 

maintenance.  Mr. Minister, while you are sitting on the $320 

million of surplus GRIP money, farm families are trying to 

scrape enough cash together to get the crop in. 

 

Answer yes or no, are you going to help these farm families or 

have you given up on rural Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Assuming that the member has 

spoken to the federal minister, I expect there'll be federal 

payments out for spring seeding. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, again it's the magic 

calculator from the member opposite.  There is no surplus in 

GRIP at this time.  It's $43 million or whatever, this projected 

surplus in the program.  And as the old Tory program was, that 

you always had programs with deficit in and they don't know 

what could happen if a program should end up with a surplus. 

 

What we're saying is if it does end up with a surplus, we will 

attempt to refund the farmers' premiums.  That's the 

commitment that we're making.  There's no surplus; there's no 

$300 million laying around in 



1072 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1994 

spare cash at this time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Provincial Parks Changes 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I think 

we should recognize the fact that the Minister of Agriculture 

has been very consistent.  I asked that same series of questions 

yesterday, and lo and behold, what we find is that the minister's 

actually answering the same way. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, my calculations show that with $300 million 

surplus in the Premier's bank account right now . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member from Rosthern 

simply can't ask his question with all the noise that's in the 

House.  I'll ask members please to calm down and let the 

member ask his question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I was not asking a question to 

the Minister of Agriculture anyway, so we'll go to the 

appropriate source. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, is directed to the Minister of 

Environment and Resource Management.  Mr. Minister, last 

week you announced that your government, due to budget 

reasons, is considering limiting public access to some 

provincial parks and converting campgrounds and cottage 

country into wilderness protection areas. 

 

Mr. Minister, could you tell this Assembly and the people of 

this province why you feel this is necessary and which 

provincial parks and cottage areas are under consideration for 

conversion into wilderness areas?  Could you tell us, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I can tell you, although I 

haven't had a chance to talk to the journalist who did the story, 

that there are some rather inaccurate reflections of the 

discussion in that article. 

 

The fact is we were announcing the establishment of 

Clarence-Steepbank Wilderness Park.  And in the discussion 

thereafter the question was, were we converting other parks to 

wilderness; and I said no, we're not.  We discussed the 

rationalization of some parks within the province in the 

recreational area, but the theme of the address was the Act that 

we're bringing in on creating Clarence-Steepbank Park. 

 

We are, as I said then and I will say now in the House, that we 

are committed in cooperation with other countries around the 

world to helping to establish that 12 or 13 per cent of the earth's 

surface in its natural state so that our biodiversity on which all 

life is based can be maintained.  And our contribution to that is 

enchanced by establishment of the Clarence-Steepbank Park. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, let's 

go a little bit beyond that one particular announcement.  You 

have said on many, many occasions that you are out to create 

more wilderness areas and recreation sites in Saskatchewan.  

Why then, Mr. Minister, is your government also considering 

selling off a large section of the Bronson forest recreation site, 

part of the northern provincial forest in north-west 

Saskatchewan?  And you're doing that as part of the Treaty 

Land Entitlement Agreement, I believe.  Some 58,000 acres, I 

am told, Mr. Minister. 

 

It would seem to me that these two policies are inconsistent at 

best, Mr. Minister.  Could you explain why you would sell off 

one wilderness site and at the same time attempt to create 

others? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, as I believe the member 

opposite would concur, we as a province have an obligation to 

our first nations in this country to meet obligations that have 

not been met to this date.  They are obligations that were not 

met under the previous administration and they're obligations 

that we are presently committed to meet. 

 

In the process of treaty land entitlements, the question of which 

land is available is a key question.  Some of that land is clearly 

Crown land.  And in special circumstances where it warrants, 

and where there is a strong request, the option of the first 

nations accessing other Crown lands, in this case the Bronson 

forest, is a consideration. 

 

The Thunderchild Band that is engaged in the discussions 

around this, is going to meet all the conditions of the treaty land 

entitlement discussions.  And we are committed to facilitating 

the discussions so that we may have a cooperative discussion 

between the first nation interested in the land and the 

community that is situated there, so that we can meet our 

obligations as a province and meet the needs of the community 

as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you for that information, Mr. Minister.  

I think we'll pick up on some of that information as we go 

along.  But I must say to you, Mr. Minister, that I don't think 

that your policy with respect to recreation and wilderness lands 

is quite as well defined as you think it is. 

 

On March 17 a Canadian Press story says that the government, 

and I quote: 

 

 . . . wants to ease its parks system into one that emphasizes 

wilderness protection over recreation. 

 

Yet you are under negotiations right now, as you have just said, 

to sell large tracts of the Bronson forest and recreation site.  

Mr. Minister, section 4.07 of the land treaty agreement states 

that, and I quote again: 



March 22, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1073 

provincial parks, protected areas, recreation sites, historic 

sites and park land reserves . . . 

 

. . . will only be sold in exceptional circumstances. 

 

And you have just alluded to that in your previous answer.  Mr. 

Minister, what possible, what possible special circumstances 

can there be to sell off protected land? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I again need to correct the 

reference in the press article.  Please accept the inaccuracy of 

that comment.  It is not my quote and it is not accurate.  There 

is no changing of recreational sites at the wilderness sites in 

Saskatchewan; these are completely separate objectives.  We 

have a commitment to historic sites and recreational parks and 

campgrounds, and many other forms of park activity in 

Saskatchewan, including wilderness parks.  Setting aside 

wilderness areas is part of an obligation and a joint 

commitment that we have with other nations around the world. 

 

On the subject of treaty land entitlements, the former premier 

and the member from Estevan was recognized at the signing of 

the treaty land entitlements for his good work in moving that 

forward.  We finalized that agreement, we have continued with 

the process of meeting those agreements, and within that 

circumstance there are opportunities where treaty land 

entitlements can be considered from Crown lands . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . I'd like to continue answering the 

question if I might. 

 

The member opposite asked what special circumstance could 

exist.  The Bronson forest area under consideration was a piece 

of land that was under consideration in the late '70s and that 

had been identified by the federal government as a potential 

area of settlement; and when that was raised with us at this time 

we concurred in it. 

 

The Speaker: -- Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I truly wonder if that constitutes special 

circumstances, Mr. Minister.  And what I'm going to ask you 

now is for you to provide copies of the commitment that your 

government made to the Thunderchild Band in 1981.  And I 

ask you to table that information immediately so that we know 

what you're talking about. 

 

So a new question to you, Mr. Minister.  Can you tell us what 

the Thunderchild Indian Band has in mind for the land in 

question?  Is it to be harvested for logs? Is to be drilled for 

natural gas?  Would you provide us with that information as 

well, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the process of treaty land 

entitlement is a process of offerings and negotiations and 

requests.  And I think as the member opposite would know if 

he consulted with his seat mate, he would know that this is not 

a question of committing to someone something without the 

agreement of the interested parties. 

 

I am concerned about the member opposite raising the concern, 

and I don't want to question his motives.  But I am concerned 

that in a situation where we've set up an opportunity for first 

nations to discuss with others the acquisition of lands to meet 

treaty land entitlement that we all recognize we are committed 

to, that somehow the member opposite wants to make an 

unusual circumstance out of the fact that the table has been 

established for that discussion. 

 

The members, the parties to that agreement, are free to discuss 

in the treaty land entitlement process the obligations . . . or the 

interests of other parties in the area must be addressed.  And 

what we are attempting to do is to facilitate the discussion 

between the parties in the area and the first nations to see if an 

agreement can be reached whereby the first nations can have 

their interests met. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, like in 

almost all the occasions when we arise, it is not my concern 

about special circumstances that I am voicing here this 

afternoon, Mr. Minister; it is the concern of the local residents 

-- the local residents, Mr. Minister.  And they are telling us that 

the reasons the Bronson forest was designated as a recreation 

site was so that it would become under the protection of the 

parks system.  There are sensitive landscapes and many lakes in 

that area, Mr. Minister, as you well know. 

 

They are so concerned about this issue, Mr. Minister, that they 

have called for a meeting tomorrow night in Paradise Hill, 

March 23, to discuss this problem.  And, Mr. Minister, they are 

looking for answers and they are looking for reassurance that 

the Bronson forest recreation site will continue to enjoy the 

protection that it now enjoys. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, will you make a commitment today that you 

will be at that meeting tomorrow night and that you will give 

those assurances to the folks in that area that they are asking 

for?  Will you do that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I do not want to get 

emotional about this response, but I am telling you that it 

offends me that the member opposite asks the question about 

the commitment of first nations to the maintenance of the 

traditional lands of which they have been a part since . . . for 

10,000 years; that somehow the protection of lands and forests 

and lakes and rivers is put at risk by them considering having it 

as part of their entitlements.  I am offended at that 



1074 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1994 

suggestion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I have spoken with the 

person who sent out the invitation for the meeting.  The 

suggestion that there has not been information to people who 

want to be told about what's going on here and who want to 

participate is inaccurate.  Everyone who has requested 

information about this has received a full briefing on the 

matter. 

 

When I asked the member who had made the invitation to the 

meeting whether there was anything lacking, he said no, we 

just wanted to inform a broader range of people.  Now the 

broader range of people is I don't know whom exactly, but I 

can tell you that everyone in the area has an opportunity to 

meet with the department, they had an opportunity to meet with 

the Thunderchild Band, they've had an opportunity to sit at a 

table and discuss this matter. 

 

And that is the kind of negotiation that I am supportive of.  And 

I am not supportive of any intention to create division between 

first nations people and residents of that area. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Judges' Salaries Recommendation 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a statement with 

respect to the salaries of Provincial Court judges. 

 

As the members of this Assembly will know, issues relating to 

the salaries of Provincial Court judges have been a source of 

controversy for a number of years.  In an attempt to address this 

long-standing problem, this Assembly in June of last year 

approved a process by which the salaries of Provincial Court 

judges would be determined by an independent commission, 

with the recommendations of the commission to be legally 

binding on both the judges and the government.  The legislation 

received the support of the Assembly and of all parties in this 

Assembly. 

 

Today, with the benefit of hindsight, it is obvious to all that this 

decision was a mistake.  The independent commission 

appointed under this law awarded the judges a salary increase 

of 20 per cent, retroactive to April 1, 1993, with further 

increases of 2 per cent in both 1994 and 1995 -- a 24 per cent 

increase over three years.  Such an increase would be excessive 

by anyone's standards in the best of times.  Such an increase 

strikes all Saskatchewan people as particularly excessive in a 

time of restraint. 

 

But here we are, faced with a law of this Assembly's own 

creation which legally binds the government to implement an 

unacceptable salary increase.  I note that in this Chamber and in 

public statements outside it, both the Justice critic for the 

official opposition and the Leader of the Third Party have 

urged the government to abide by this law.  The end result of 

that 

advice would be a 24 per cent salary increase for Provincial 

Court judges. 

 

My colleagues and I have struggled with this difficult question.  

In recent days, we appealed directly to the judges of the court 

to consider setting aside this binding award in the public 

interest and to agree to some lesser amount.  They refused.  

Now the government must act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a general principle, this legislature should be 

prepared to live with the consequences of laws which it has 

passed even when those consequences are difficult.  It is a 

fundamental principle that governments and legislatures should 

live by their word, follow their own rules.  However, when the 

application of those laws leads to an unconscionable result, 

governments and legislatures must have the courage to act in 

the public interest to undo it. 

 

Unfortunately, this is such a case.  Why is this award 

unconscionable and in violation of the public interest?  For 

more than two years, this government has asked the people of 

Saskatchewan to make numerous financial sacrifices to help 

restore the financial integrity of our province.  For many, these 

sacrifices have been difficult. 

 

(1415) 

 

But everyone has been asked to share in the effort.  How can 

ordinary families, who have sacrificed so much, be now asked 

to provide a 24 per cent salary increase to some of the 

highest-paid individuals in the province?  In short, Mr. 

Speaker, there is the law and there is justice.  Sometimes they 

are one; sometimes they can be two very different things. 

 

Inexplicably, the independent commission appointed to review 

the salaries of Provincial Court judges failed to take into 

account the financial circumstances of the province and of the 

taxpayers, who ultimately bear the burden of any increase.  

Accordingly, I am announcing today that the government will 

not be implementing the recommendations of the independent 

commission. 

 

Instead, I am today serving notice of the introduction of 

legislation which will provide the judges with a 2.5 per cent 

salary increase for 1993 and 1994. Further, I am announcing 

that we will move immediately to repeal the legislation which 

established and empowered the independent commission.  The 

excessive size of the salary award in this case makes it clear 

that placing matters of this importance in the hands of an 

independent but unaccountable commission is undesirable. 

 

Indeed it is our view that the use of binding arbitration for 

determining compensation in situations like these must be 

reconsidered.  These independent bodies are not accountable in 

any way to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan for their decisions.  

Ultimately it is the government which is accountable. 



March 22, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1075 

These decisions do not come easy, Mr. Speaker.  They are the 

result of long and hard soul-searching by every government 

member.  As a result of this award we were faced with two 

conflicting principles -- the integrity of a law we passed, versus 

the integrity of our financial commitment to Saskatchewan 

taxpayers. 

 

By these actions, Mr. Speaker, the government has shown that 

it will not abdicate its responsibility to all Saskatchewan 

families. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the 

announcement that the minister has just given . . . or the 

address he's just given to this Assembly certainly would 

indicate there must have been a series of surveys and long 

discussion that took place regarding this particular debate. 

 

None the less, Mr. Speaker, one has to question the real 

integrity of this House and of the minister and of the 

government regarding legislation; regarding laws that are 

passed; the importance of laws; the importance to obey the 

laws that we pass in this Assembly. 

 

It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that as the minister indicated in 

his address, the law that was passed said that the 

recommendations of the commission would be legally binding 

on both the judges and the government.  It would seem to me, 

Mr. Speaker, that there are many people across this province 

that are going to look at this decision, this announcement made 

this afternoon, and they're going to say, well what about the 

other laws?  What about the laws regarding farmers in this 

province?  Or what about the laws regarding co-op members, 

Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting that even though I can 

sympathize somewhat with the minister in the fact of the 

percentage of increase that the commission was going to allow 

the judges, we have seen over the past year or so, Mr. Speaker, 

substantial increases have gone to ministerial assistants in this 

Assembly and government in ministerial offices -- substantial 

increases -- something like 37 per cent in some cases, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we're not standing here arguing about the 

increases to judges, but we must stand here and for the fact of 

what is really right legally and technically and ethically, right 

in this province -- the fact that if we're going to set laws we 

better be prepared to listen by the laws . . . to listen to those 

laws, and to adhere to those laws. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it's only fair that the taxpayers, even 

though they would certainly disagree with the rate of increase 

that the commission would have allowed the judges, at the 

same time must look at the fact that, who do we really listen to?  

Who is really important?  And as we've also suggested, and the 

minister I think indicated, there was full support in this 

House when the legislation went forward.  Well I'm not sure; 

we'd have to go back and look at the votes. 

 

But I would think that maybe as we look at this, as the minister 

looks at retroactively changing his legislation, I would suggest 

that the minister and the government take a very serious look at 

how they set up boards and commissions down the road, and 

we again take a look at setting up all-party, totally independent 

committees and commissions that will address questions 

looking at not only the taxpayers and how they're affected, but 

how we as elected representatives and governments of the day 

are perceived by the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, even though I can empathize with the 

minister, I suggest we must look at the other alternative and 

what kind of a position we take and how people review or see 

the justice-making system in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I think it's very 

important today to just review the process that has transpired 

leading up to this situation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government has a massive majority.  Any 

legislation brought forward to this Assembly is going to be 

passed in this Assembly if the government so wishes it.  And 

that's because of their massive majority, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This particular process involved the government bringing 

forward legislation.  With its massive majority, it wouldn't have 

mattered what anyone else did here, the process was agreed to, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Not only did the government agree to this particular process, 

the judges agreed to the process.  And regardless of the 

outcome of the independent commission, Mr. Speaker, the 

judges would have to have lived by the legislation because it 

was law and it was a process agreed to by all, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Not only does this indicate to the independent commission that 

its work was valueless, it leads other independent commissions 

in the future to really feel undermined, that perhaps whatever it 

is they decide will not be valued . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I don't know if the member 

from Cut Knife-Lloydminster has the floor or whether the 

Leader of the Third Party has the floor.  But I think I 

recognized the Leader of the Third Party, and she may 

continue. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I guess all that 

one should comment on, not only by the comments being 

thrown about in this particular Assembly but also by the 

thunderous applause given after the minister's statement . . . 

Perhaps that is the saddest of all, Mr. Minister: that we have 

come to the point in this Assembly where people applaud 

enthusiastically the breaking of the law. 



1076 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1994 

And I can state unequivocally that we do not think, as a Liberal 

caucus, that a 24 per cent increase for any group in this 

province is fair, nor is it just. But I can say proudly, I can say 

very proudly . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I'm sure that all the 

ministers on the other side, Mr. Speaker, are very proud that 

they took a 90 per cent increase when they became ministers. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that I would like to ensure 

that people think about today is that it was this particular 

government that brought about this process.  The people 

involved agreed to the process.  And, Mr. Speaker, they have 

now chosen to turn aside, to turn a back to, to throw out all of 

the values that the people of Saskatchewan value, and those 

values are the value of a handshake, the value of someone's 

word, and particularly the law of our particular land.  And I 

think they should all be ashamed of themselves today. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 41 -- An Act to amend The Registered 

Psychologists Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Registered Psychologists Act now be introduced and read a 

first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 42 -- An Act to amend The Physical 

Therapists Act, 1984 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Physical Therapists Act, 1984 be now introduced and read 

a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 43 -- An Act respecting the Licensing and 

Operation of Medical Laboratories 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill 

respecting the Licensing and Operation of Medical 

Laboratories be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 44 -- An Act respecting Chiropractors 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill 

respecting Chiropractors be now introduced and read a first 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Presenting Petitions 

 

The Speaker: -- Before orders of the day, I wish to 

remind members that when presenting petitions that only the 

prayer and not the whole petition is to be read.  I note today by 

the petition that was presented that the member from 

Moosomin not only read the prayer but the whole petition.  

And I think the experienced member knows full well that that is 

unacceptable in this House. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise on a point of 

order. 

 

The Speaker: -- Would the member please state his point of 

order. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Yesterday during 

question period my colleague from Moosomin rose in this 

House to ask the Minister of Justice questions regarding sworn 

testimony which alleged that the minister had ensured no police 

intervention when the Bear Claw casino opened up. 

 

Although the minister made comments that he could not answer 

this question because the issue was before the courts, the 

member from Moosomin had several supplementaries he 

wished to ask.  I refer you, Mr. Speaker, to Hansard of March 

21, 1994.  And before he was allowed to finish his question, 

Mr. Speaker called order and then interrupted the member to 

disallow the question. 

 

In Beauchesne's, 6th Edition, section 323, states clearly that 

"Questions of order are decided only when they arise and not in 

anticipation."  Mr. Speaker, my point of order is simply that the 

Speaker cannot possibly anticipate the question which will be 

asked nor can the Speaker determine whether a matter is sub 

judice.  Only the minister can make that determination. 

 

Mr. Speaker, precedent has been set on numerous occasions in 

this Assembly which allows the member to put his questions 

forward on an issue which may be before the court.  It has been 

traditionally up to the minister to answer or refuse to answer 

based on his understanding of the matter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Hansard of May 30, 1989, the present Minister 

of Justice himself took advantage of this situation.  As an 

opposition member at that time the Minister of Justice asked 

six questions about a matter which he full well knew was 

before the courts.  When reminded of that situation by the 

minister, that member, the current Minister of Justice, said, and 

I quote: 

 

 It's very interesting that this matter has been referred to the 

RCMP, but it does not absolve this minister of the 

responsibility of answering questions in this House. 

 

On the next page, the hon. member from The Battlefords used 

verbatim transcripts from a then-current court trial as the basis 

for a series of questions.  From Hansard of May 31, 1989, 



March 22, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1077 

that member stated as a preamble to his question, and I quote: 

 

 And if you are suggesting that these are our allegations, I 

suggest you read the transcripts from the examination for 

discovery of a court case that's currently going on . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, in each instance the opposition member and the 

minister answering were both fully aware that the matter was 

before the courts.  At no time was there an interruption or 

intervention from the Speaker during what was a very lengthy 

series of questions on that topic; questions which the minister 

answered. 

 

Again, the point of order, Mr. Speaker, is that it is a 

responsibility of the minister . . . it is the responsibility of the 

minister to make the decision to answer or not to answer a 

particular question, not for the Speaker to become involved in 

debate. 

 

I thank you, Mr. Speaker, for this opportunity. 

 

(1430) 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker, I wish to, since I'm 

mentioned in the hon. member's point of order, I do want to 

clarify the situation for you before you make a ruling.  I recall 

making that statement in this Assembly and the situation is 

quite different.  The situation to which the hon. member refers 

is a civil action taking place in the city of Montreal.  And at 

that time, Mr. Tsuru, a Japanese business man, was taking Mr. 

Guy Montpetit to court in a civil action to recover money that 

Guy Montpetit allegedly owed to Mr. Tsuru.  And those 

questions were asked in the House in regard to information that 

was uncovered about Mr. Guy Montpetit in something that was 

not the subject of a court case in Saskatchewan. 

 

But the key point here in terms of the references I made on the 

day that the member referred to in a previous legislature, had to 

do with the civil action.  And in the case here it's quite different 

in that there's a criminal action under way in the courts.  And I 

wanted the Hon. Speaker to be aware of that before you make 

any ruling. 

 

The Speaker: -- I thank the hon. member for his point of order 

and the member from The Battlefords for that explanation.  I 

will reserve my judgement and bring back a decision to the 

House at my earliest opportunity. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

PRIVATE BILLS 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 01 -- An Act Respecting The Saskatoon Foundation 

 

Clauses 1 to 20 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

Bill No. 02 -- An Act to amend An Act to incorporate 

Full Gospel Bible Institute 

 

Clauses 1 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 01 -- An Act respecting The Saskatoon Foundation 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- . . . that Bill No. 01, An Act respecting The 

Saskatoon Foundation, be now read a third time and passed 

under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 02 -- An Act to amend An Act to incorporate 

Full Gospel Bible Institute 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I move 

that Bill No. 02, An Act to amend An Act to incorporate the 

Full Gospel Bible Institute be now read a third time and passed 

under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' MOTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 36 -- Commendation of Farm 

Support Review Committee 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, at the 

close of my remarks I will move the following motion: 

 

 That this Assembly commend the Farm Support Review 

Committee for completing its report on farm safety net 

options which the Government of Saskatchewan will use as 

the basis for negotiating with the federal government and 

other provinces for a national farm safety net program that 

better reflects the needs of the family farm. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on January 12 of this year, the Farm Support 

Review Committee presented the report on safety net designs.  

This report is further to the interim report on guidelines and 

principles presented by the review committee in May of 1993. 

 

The report contains broad program-design concepts.  These 

concepts have been developed using principles identified in the 

report as a guideline.  The programs will most certainly require 

more analysis and development of specific design features prior 

to them being implemented, or the final program being 

designed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the committee has provided these broad concepts 

as a guideline for further development and discussion in joint 

federal-provincial meetings to 



1078 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1994 

develop a future safety net for agriculture. 

 

The committee was made up of 31 members, 12 of which 

represented the farm organizations and 19 farm members at 

large.  Mr. Speaker, the farm members at large represented on 

the board were the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, the National 

Farmers Union, Flax Growers of Western Canada, the 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, the 

Saskatchewan Cattle Feeders Association, the Western Barley 

Growers Association, the Western Canadian Wheat Growers 

Association, the Saskatchewan Canola Growers Association, 

the Saskatchewan Soil Conservation Association, the 

Saskatchewan Pulse Crop Development Board, the United 

Grain Growers, and the Forage Council of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people were appointed at large and they came 

from every corner of the province.  They were from Marcelin, 

Climax, Tisdale, Kelvington, Balcarres, Admiral, Conquest, 

and from Strasbourg. 

 

As I said, the purpose of the committee was to develop 

guidelines of principles for the development of a long-term 

farm support program.  But it was also to bring forward some 

of the program concepts to the Minister of Agriculture and 

Food.  The guidelines provided by the committee were 

regarding such things as the level of support, the distribution of 

the support, the environmental implications, trade issues, 

payment and premium delivery mechanisms, the linkage of this 

to other programs and so on. 

 

It is interesting, Mr. Speaker, when one reads the purpose of 

the committee as it set for itself.  And that reads: 

 

 The purpose of farm support is to maintain the number of 

viable farms in order to strengthen rural communities by 

encouraging agriculture which is economically and 

environmentally sustainable. 

 

The committee also set out 25 principles relating to economics, 

the community, trade, the funding of safety nets, the 

administration of safety nets, and environment.  One can surely 

understand the immense task that they then took on to develop 

programs that keep all of these principles in line and the 

purpose in focus. 

 

Of course there's no doubt where trade-offs of these principles 

were made but still they did a tremendous job, and I want to 

take this opportunity to thank the committee members for a job 

well done. 

 

These people gave up much of their time away from their 

careers to help our government establish a program that will 

strengthen rural life in Saskatchewan.  I might add, Mr. 

Speaker, that one of the principles established by the committee 

was that production insurance -- in other words, crop insurance 

-- would be maintained and be separate from other farm 

support programs. 

Mr. Speaker, the three concepts that I'm going to outline work 

alongside production insurance.  The concepts are the pool 

stabilization program, and that pool stabilization program 

provides individual protection from reduced income due to 

production losses and/or low prices.  The stabilization pool 

operates at the industry level and pools the risk over all 

participants and all commodities. 

 

(1445) 

 

Individual participants trigger payments from the stabilization 

pool.  The individual payment is the shortfall between a 

percentage of the five-year gross margin and the current year 

gross margin of the participant, not the industry.  The gross 

margin is the net eligible sales minus eligible expenses.  Some 

of those expenses could include labour and rent. 

 

A minimum income trigger, in addition to the gross margin 

trigger, may be necessary to achieve stabilization effectiveness.  

Where total net income falls below a minimum threshold, 

payments could be triggered.  The stabilization pool can go into 

deficit.  The pool account deficits are guaranteed by the 

government and interest is charged back to the pool account. 

 

The participants choose the level of protection they need for 

their farms, from 50 per cent to 100 per cent of the five-year 

average gross margin.  In addition, there could be an option for 

participants to choose support based upon a three-year or a 

seven-year average gross margin.  This allows participants to 

maintain stabilization coverage at a level and a cost that is 

appropriate to their needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the stabilization pool is the industry fund that 

holds contributions from participants and from which payments 

are withdrawn when a participant triggers a pay-out.  Surplus 

funds in the pool are invested to earn interest for the pool.  And 

when the stabilization pool has insufficient funds to make a 

payment to participants, it can borrow funds from the 

government and go into deficit. 

 

Participants pay contributions to the fund based on a percentage 

of sales, collected at the point of sale.  Premiums are 

established by commodity, based on an actual assessment of 

the risk of that commodity.  Collection at the point of sale 

results in premiums being paid throughout the year rather than 

being billed as one lump sum.  This is similar to how premiums 

were collected for the western grain stabilization plan which 

producers indicate is preferable to how premiums are collected 

for the present gross revenue insurance program. 

 

Premium rates would fall within the range of a premium band 

during the life of the contract.  Producers are assured that 

premiums would not rise beyond the upper limit defined by the 

band nor decrease below the lower limit defined by the band. 

 

An option that could be examined is to operate with no 

producer contributions and a correspondingly 



March 22, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1079 

lower level of support.  This reduces the administration costs 

that would be needed to collect producer premiums.  And the 

premiums would be tax deductible.  On the other side of that 

also, Mr. Speaker, the payments would also be taxable when 

they were received. 

 

The program would be voluntary and cover all commodities 

with the exception of supply and management commodities.  A 

producer who enrols has to participate for a period of years.  

This maintains the financial viability of the fund by ensuring 

producers participate both in the good times and in the bad 

times. 

 

Producers with over $50,000 off-farm income are not eligible 

to participate in this fund.  The program is directed at bona fide 

farmers. 

 

This program concept consists of an individualized account . . . 

or of an industry account, and would be actuarially sound over 

time. 

 

The next one is the support income stabilization account.  This 

program concept consists of an individual account which is 

sensitive to the desire of the individual to build an account for 

future stabilization purposes and to the particular sector 

circumstances which impact upon the individual's income 

situation. 

 

An individual producer has an account which receives funds 

from two separate streams.  The first stream is dependent upon 

the individual contributing levies.  These contributions are 

matched by the government and contributed to the participant's 

individual account. 

 

The second stream of funds flowing to the individual account 

are sensitive to the sector needs.  Various sectors defined for 

the purpose of the program, for example, would be cattle, grain, 

hogs, or others.  The commodities that are substitutable in 

terms of production would be grouped into each sector. 

 

The government would then provide funding necessary to 

support each sector equivalent to the shortfall between 

aggregate cost of production, between that aggregate cost and 

the net eligible sales.  Producers would not contribute to the 

sector funding. 

 

Premiums would be placed in an agriculture stabilization fund 

and the agriculture stabilization fund would trigger payments to 

individual accounts based on the shortfall of the sector.  For 

example, if the hog sector income falls below the support base, 

then a sector payment would flow to accounts of hog 

producers.  Once funds are placed in the individual account, 

either through participant contributions or sector payments, the 

funds become the participant's property.  The participant's 

account would be capped, and the two streams of the fund 

cease when the account reaches that cap.  Mr. Speaker, the 

participant receives payments according to a payment formula 

which applies to the individual account. 

Mr. Speaker, the third account is a farm income adjustment 

plan.  The objective of the farm income adjustment plan is to 

provide a simple and direct method of support to the 

agricultural industry.  The farm income adjustment plan is farm 

support based on the cost of production for a sector.  The farm 

income adjustment plan pay-outs are calculated as the 

difference between cost of production and the market revenue.  

Mr. Speaker, all support is rolled into one program with an 

individual farmer being responsible.  On this concept, the Crow 

benefit is recommended to be maintained. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that all the concepts represent a different 

attempt to meet the program principles.  I did want to say on 

the last farm income adjustment plan, Mr. Speaker, that it is 

totally funded, totally government funded on an ongoing basis, 

although it would be possible to have a producer premium 

feature built into the program. 

 

A sector pay-out would be triggered if the current year gross 

sector revenue falls below a historic average, the sector cost of 

the production on an aggregate basis.  The sector payment 

would be distributed to participants based on their historic 

market for commodities in that sector compared to the historic 

market revenue for all participants and adjusted by the 

participant land debt ratio. 

 

Of course the final program concept will depend, for one thing, 

on the relative importance that is attached to each of the 25 

principles identified by the committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, much more work will have to be done to weigh 

the program designs against the principles in order to choose 

the best program possible. 

 

The job now is to fine tune the specific program features and to 

further analyse the affordability and costability of these 

programs.  These will be among the next steps of the process 

leading to the establishment of a new generation of safety nets. 

 

The committee and the government recognizes the importance 

of joint development of safety nets with other provinces and the 

federal government.  The report brought forward will be a great 

framework for joint federal-provincial safety net development. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it's important that this farm safety net be 

revisited, a new program brought in.  The 1991 GRIP did not 

work.  The GRIP programs as they are now are not 

recommended by farmers, are not accepted by farmers.  A new 

farm safety net that will handle all farm-sector commodities in 

the province and in the Dominion of Canada has to be 

developed now. 

 

The committee will make recommendations regarding 

improvements to the production insurance in a separate report. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to again commend the people that made up 

the farm safety . . . or the Farm Support 



1080 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1994 

Review Committee for a job well done and to thank them for 

their hard work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from Melville: 

 

 That this Assembly commend the Farm Support Review 

Committee for completing its report on farm safety net 

options which the Government of Saskatchewan will use as 

the basis for negotiating with the federal government and 

other provinces for a national whole-farm safety net program 

that better reflects the needs of the family farm. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A great pleasure that 

I can rise in the Assembly and speak to the motion that was 

moved by the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood 

commending the Farm Support Review Committee for their 

work, the due diligence that they spent on putting together an 

option for Saskatchewan to use in negotiating with the federal 

government and the other provinces and a national nation-wide 

farm safety net program. 

 

The member from Last Mountain-Touchwood spent a fair bit of 

time about the details and some of the things that are in the 

report.  I want to spend a few minutes talking about more of the 

process and more of why I believe a good, strong, 

uncomplicated program with stability is needed in the '90s and 

into the year 2000. 

 

The Farm Support Review Committee, Mr. Speaker, held quite 

a few meetings throughout the province.  They did, I think, a 

good job in listening to people in rural Saskatchewan to try and 

put together a good, strong base from where the government 

can start to negotiate. 

 

That would only have been a small part of other work, Mr. 

Speaker.  I know that they spent many hours putting together 

the information and the ideas that they heard after they had 

toured the province.  And sometimes that's the most demanding 

and the most trying time is to reach consensus, especially with 

such a large committee, to be able to get a common ground 

from which to put a report together. 

 

I think that by holding these meetings in rural Saskatchewan, 

that was what I think is the most important part of it.  The 

economic flow and spin-off from agriculture in Saskatchewan 

and in western Canada and in Canada in general is quite 

enormous.  So we must be prepared to look seriously at 

maintaining and enhancing the family operation of the farms 

that are out there because that is our economic base from which 

we can grow from, in Saskatchewan and western Canada and 

Canada. 

 

I can remember as a child coming into Regina with my mother 

and father on numerous occasions, and the conversation as we 

got into the city of Regina, just on the outskirts, Regina, would 

always go something like this.  My mother would say, gee, 

look at all of this 

development and building that's going on.  Where are they 

getting all the money from?  And my dad would say, well that's 

simple; it's sort of coming out of rural Saskatchewan because 

that's the economic base of this province; that's the driver.  The 

majority of the money that drives the province, drives the 

economy in western Canada, comes out of agriculture.  And if 

I've heard that comment in that car, if I had a dollar for every 

time that conversation went around, I would be a fairly wealthy 

individual today, which I can assure you I'm not. 

 

(1500) 

 

As I had mentioned, we need a program that is as 

uncomplicated as possible, something that farmers can feel they 

can work with and is user-friendly. Something that is 

predictable.  Something that we have now that is not 

predictable. 

 

I happened to notice in The Western Producer on the last 

issue, I believe it was, where a farmer in Alberta when he got 

his GRIP payment, thought he was going to get $10,000, a little 

over $10,000.  Well when the cheque came, Mr. Speaker, he 

got $40.  That's not a program that has stability in it or a 

program that you sort of know where you're coming from. 

 

I think the new program that we're going to be designing with 

the federal government and the rest of the provinces has to 

meet the needs of the farmers so that there is stability.  A 

stability of farm income so that families that live in rural 

Saskatchewan and are shopping in our communities, their kids 

are going to school, have a stability and an income that they 

feel comfortable there and there is no drain away from the 

smaller communities into the larger centres. 

 

Mr. Speaker, growing up on a family farm in rural 

Saskatchewan in the '60s, in my particular case anyway -- I 

know my neighbour's was not a lot different -- the family, the 

whole family was involved.  Everybody -- mother, father, 

children -- would work in seeding time and milking cows and 

harvest time.  It was sort of a family operation. 

 

People are telling me today, well you know farming used to be 

a way of life.  It's not a way of life any more; it's a business.  

Well, Mr. Speaker, it was a way of life in the '60s and it was 

also a business.  We made decisions based on economics, what 

your family operation was going to be into, if you're going to 

be into chickens, or hogs, or grain, or dairy. It was based on 

economics and it's also based on economics today. 

 

But when we were growing up, everybody took part in the 

economic decision.  Everybody participated in the work.  Now 

I see in rural Saskatchewan and I see in my own family where 

because of economics, because I believe of shortfalls in support 

programs that we've had over the years, the whole family's out 

working.  So that when work has to be done on the farm, it's 

just a mad dash on a long weekend, or after 5 o'clock or 6 

o'clock, after the parents come from a day's work in the town. 



March 22, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1081 

And it's no longer sort of fun to be out there.  You got to 

shuffle the children off to grandma or grandpa, or an aunt or an 

uncle, or a neighbour because you haven't got time to spend 

with them in the farm operation, because it's so important to get 

all this work done in such a short period of time, because 

people are holding down two and three jobs.  Families are 

holding down two and three jobs besides trying to run a farm 

operation. 

 

And I think when you see that happen . . . and I look at my 

neighbours and my friends that I grew up with.  The family was 

stable, there was enough of an income, albeit we weren't 

immensely wealthy, but there was enough of an income that we 

didn't have to run out to get extra work to get extra income.  

We were able to work the farm as a unit. 

 

I think now we are seeing accidents because of the farm 

pressure and the importance to get a whole bunch of work done 

in a very, very short period of time.  We're seeing children that 

are growing up and not being involved in the farm operation, 

just simply based on the fact that there isn't the time to bring 

them along.  And I think that's part of the farm fabric.  That's 

part of the family farm, is to be able to work as a unit. 

 

And I think the farm support programs in the past, along with . 

. . because of the lower grain prices and I believe wheat farm 

programs, have sort of forced people off the farm and it's 

eroded a family base.  That's why I think that the next farm 

support program has to have some stability there so that 

families can make a decision on what sectors they want to go 

into and be able to concentrate on it, do it well, and not 

necessarily do it like I've stated in the past here, but do it in a 

haphazard manner where there's trying to get a lot of work 

done in a short order and there are accidents and a lot of 

economic hardship also, along with health problems and health 

concerns. 

 

The committee, as I had said, I think did a tremendous job by 

taking all these factors into consideration and coming together 

and hammering out a recommendation that we think will serve 

Saskatchewan well. 

 

And if it serves Saskatchewan well and the farm economy is 

strong, Saskatchewan's economy will also grow and it will 

contribute to the economy of western Canada and Canada in 

general.  And we're only one small part of the agriculture sector 

in this country . . . one of the bigger parts, so therefore one of 

the most important parts. 

 

So in closing I'd just like to again commend the Farm Support 

Review Committee for their work, for their due diligence.  And 

I think we're going to have a farm support program; I believe 

we're going to have a support program in the future that's going 

to address the needs that I talked about in my remarks this 

afternoon. 

 

Thank you very much. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  And it 

gives me pleasure to be able to participate in the debate this 

afternoon as brought forward by the hon. member opposite.  

And I have a few comments that I would like to make in 

contribution to this debate this afternoon, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And under private members' motions, resolution no. 36 is what 

we are debating this afternoon, and it states at the beginning, 

and I just want to read a little bit of the actual motion itself: 

 

 That this Assembly commend the Farm Support Review 

Committee for completing its report on farm safety net 

options . . . 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I have a copy of that report here as well and 

I want to note, Mr. Speaker, the numbers of individuals that 

have participated in this particular review and the 

recommendation that they subsequently made to the 

government, particularly to the Minister of Agriculture.  And 

it's an impressive list of names, Mr. Speaker, that have 

contributed their time and their talents toward this particular 

review and the recommendations that they have come up with. 

 

And so as I look over the 12 representatives of the farm 

organizations that were involved and the 19 farm members at 

large, Mr. Speaker, I have nothing to criticize really about the 

make-up of the individuals involved in this particular review. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I have no problem in going along with the 

member's resolution in so far as we have just stated now.  But 

having said that, Mr. Speaker, I must take some exception to 

what happens to these kinds of reports after they leave the 

hands of the committee and become property of the 

government, Mr. Speaker, because simply put, the failure to act 

and the failure on the government's part to come up with a 

concise, precise, long-term safety net for the farm families of 

this province is what concerns us as the official opposition. 

 

So having said that, Mr. Speaker, while we support in large 

measure the work of the committee, we are going to take 

exception with what this government has done as a result of 

that report. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are issues in here, for example, that deal 

with the options that farmers have, the options that will be 

available to them.  And that reminds me very much, Mr. 

Speaker, of the government's stand for example on the crop 

insurance program. 

 

It has been conceded that one of the problems that we are 

facing as a farm community is the fact that there is no recourse 

that farmers have to access funds, for example, which are 

rightfully theirs.  It's acknowledged that there will be most 

likely no pay-out under the GRIP program this spring.  That 

means that there's going to be deficiency of cash.  There's going 

to be a deficiency of cash and perhaps 



1082 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1994 

even borrowing power for farmers to be able to put their seed 

into the ground and indeed become self-sustaining once more. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it need not be that way, because there are 

funds available.  There are funds available that should accrue to 

the farmers themselves because they bought into an insurance 

program.  And with $300 million now in the account available 

to this government to pay back to the farmers, that would 

alleviate much of the concern that farmers have.  But this is the 

problem that we're facing.  It's an ad hoc type of an approach 

with no long-term plan in view. 

 

And when we take a look at the reports that are handed out, for 

example, on what this government is now basing the future of 

the province, the future of agriculture in this province, and it's a 

scheme called Agriculture 2000 -- A Strategic Direction for 

the Future of Saskatchewan's Agriculture Industry.  And that's 

part of the problem that arises, Mr. Speaker, because on page 7 

of that particular document it talks about vision.  It talks about: 

 

 In the face of powerful international pressures and trends in 

agriculture, Saskatchewan's overall objective for its 

agricultural sector must be made clear. 

 

That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the problem.  The vision is not 

clear; the vision is clouded because we do not know in what 

direction we go because, Mr. Speaker, there's ample evidence -- 

ample evidence -- that this government says one thing then 

tends to go and do exactly the opposite of what they have said 

that they would want to do and what part of their strategy is. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, to put evidence before you in the case that I 

am making, we have but to look at how they have handled the 

GRIP program.  And never mind the fact that the contracts 

were broken with 60,000 farmers of this province, the bottom 

line is that Saskatchewan farmers now are receiving less than 

any of their counterparts in other provinces.  The funds are 

available -- I've just made that point to you, Mr. Speaker -- but 

because of the direction they're going, it just is something they 

are saying and the Premier is saying, these funds will not go 

back and revert to the government. 

 

And the minister gets up and makes a nice speech, but says 

well the commodity prices are up so therefore the pay-outs are 

down, and it's a market insurance, and we don't know exactly 

how things are going to develop and therefore we can't 

anticipate the future, and there may be nothing left in the fund, 

so how can we make out payments. 

 

So this type of rationale, Mr. Speaker, is good for debate in this 

legislature but it does nothing for the farmers out there who are 

trying to cope, that are sincerely trying to cope. 

 

And then we take a look at the farming sector.  When we take a 

look at how rural Saskatchewan has been dealt devastating 

blow after devastating blow over the 

last couple of years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it's amazing that rural 

Saskatchewan is in the shape that it still is in despite the best 

efforts, it seems, of the members opposite to bring them down 

to their knees. 

 

And we can take a look at municipal sharing, the revenue 

sharing.  The municipal revenue sharing is a good example of 

extra burdens and extra stress being put upon rural 

Saskatchewan in particular.  We can take a look -- and I say 

this, Mr. Speaker, in the context that while in appearances the 

government may be trying to put their best foot forward, may 

be trying to help rural Saskatchewan, very often the policies 

that they adopt are counter-productive -- they will do exactly 

the opposite what they were intended to do. 

 

You take, for example, the . . . (inaudible) . . . that this 

government put forward as far as the FeedGAP was concerned. 

What did they do?  The first announcement they made when 

this minister became Minister of Agriculture was to do away 

with the FeedGAP program.  Then when there was a uproar in 

the province they said, well perhaps on second thought, maybe 

we should not do away with the FeedGAP program. So they 

replaced it with the red meat interim stabilization program. 

 

And I can't for the life of me understand why the cowboys of 

the province got full restoration and yet the hog producers only 

got two-thirds.  And that rationale is something that I would 

want the Minister of Agriculture to address in estimates when 

we have that opportunity to ask those questions. 

 

(1515) 

 

But here's an example.  Now immediately . . . and the rationale 

being of course that Alberta had their Crow offset program so 

therefore to be competitive we needed that in Saskatchewan.  

But at the first opportunity, what does the Minister of 

Agriculture do?  He says, now at the end of September there 

will be no more red meat interim stabilization program. That is 

dust as well. 

 

And that follows, Mr. Deputy Speaker, exactly on the heels 

where the Minister of Agriculture says agriculture is number 

one; it's top priority; we must do everything that we can do to 

maintain it. 

 

And this other document that I was just showing you here, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, is their vision for the year 2000, Agriculture 

2000, where we're supposed to have . . . diversification is the 

key word.  Diversification is the direction which this 

government wants to go. 

 

But yet in the very same breath they will do away with the 

FeedGAP program, they will do away with the red meat interim 

stabilization program, they will raise the energy prices, which 

is a very, very significant portion of intensive livestock 

producers' cost of production.  They raise them willy-nilly, 

along with SGI and SaskTel, and you can name whatever you 

want to name -- the utilities have all increased.  In other 



March 22, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1083 

words, the cost of doing business in Saskatchewan has been 

raised significantly, again counter-productive to their alleged 

objective, which is to diversify and to increase the economic 

viability of the agricultural sector of Saskatchewan. 

 

And that is what I find, and many farmers are telling me they 

find, so distressing about the direction in which this 

government is going. 

 

You take a look at the rural service centres.  How significant 

were those rural service centres and the expertise of the 

agrologists in those service centres in disseminating 

information to farmers.  Farmers who were looking and taking 

seriously the government's commitment to diversification and 

saying, all right, how do I get into the hog business; how do I 

get into the beef business; what are the pros and cons; give me 

some ideas, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  That information is not 

readily available to those members now, to those members of 

the farming community.  Another counter-productive step 

taken by this government. 

 

We could go on and we could talk about the livestock cash 

advance.  You see, Mr. Minister, that is the direction that they 

are going.  Now am I standing here in my place today 

recognizing some of the fiscal realities of this province, 

advocating that the government go holus-bolus into programs 

that are going to cost the taxpayers a lot of money. 

 

I think we have to rationalize that entire situation on the fact 

that we've got to get bangs for our bucks.  If we're going to go 

into industries and if we're going to diversify, the support must 

be there.  Not necessarily only economic support, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker; that's not what I'm advocating.  But we are in a 

changing world.  We are in the world here where Saskatchewan 

has the leading edge when it comes into biotechnology. 

 

We take a look at the University of Saskatchewan, the potential 

that is there.  What has this government done, what has this 

Minister of Agriculture done to diversify?  Has he gone to 

Ottawa, has he asked the NRC (National Research Council), for 

example, give us a bit of your action?  Has he asked any of the 

federal agencies to come into Saskatchewan, look at our 

regional advantage that we have?  We've got a university, 

leading in medical and biotechnology, as I was saying; we've 

got the open spaces; we have the facilities.  Let's get some of 

those things into the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Has the minister even done any advocating on our part?  I 

suspect not.  Because there are producer groups out there, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that have approached me and said, can you 

help us get this federal agency in, because the provincial 

Minister of Agriculture does not seem to want to move on this.  

And so there's an opportunity there that we could be taking, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

What about contract marketing?  What about contract 

marketing?  What are we doing in that respect?  Because if 

you're going to get bigger business, if you 

could get more farmers doing bigger things . . . The techniques 

of farming are changing on a daily basis and the old technique 

of adjusting your beef herd, depending on your crop, are no 

longer with us.  I think that is a reality of the changing times.  

And we want a government that is willing and able to do that, 

not only on the short term, but we have to take a look at the 

long term as well. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the other thing that I think that we 

have to spend a little bit of time on, and that is the so-called 

crop insurance program -- production insurance.  When we take 

a look, and when I listen to the farmers that approach me and 

they say: what has this government got in store for us; GRIP is 

totally unreliable now; we've got production insurance; we're 

told we have production insurance; what is that?  It's like 

buying the chassis of a Cadillac and paying for that and then 

having to pay for all the options -- do you want a motor? 

 

We say we're going to have crop insurance.  We say that there's 

going to be spot loss hail, for example.  Well spot loss hail is 

something that a lot of farmers have approached us on on a 

continual basis and it's a recognized fact that we need that. 

 

But what does this government decide to do?  Immediately 

double indemnity?  Oh no, no.  If you have spot loss hail with 

crop insurance and you get hailed out in that section, that's all 

going to be subtracted because the rest of your crop is going to 

still support you within whatever that minimum income is 

supposed to be.  There's no point in it.  But you're paying extra.  

It's an option, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And this whole plan is built on options that are going to cost 

farmers extra, with very little opportunity to get anything back.  

That whole farm insurance, it's the same thing, where you roll 

all your crops into a basket as the saying goes, which makes 

that program into a basket case as far as many farmers are 

concerned. 

 

Because they can pay their premiums . . . Oh yes, the premiums 

may be a little bit lower, the Minister of Agriculture will say.  

But what opportunity does a farmer have for pay-out relative to 

the cost of insuring it?  Or the specialty crop, the specialty crop 

insurance, again as an option, and again farmer facing 

additional costs in order to acquire that insurance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, quite frankly I think the farmers of this province 

are viewing the plans of this government somewhat like you no 

doubt are viewing my speech right now, in that it seems to be 

going from this point to this point to that point -- as somebody 

said, a point here and a point there, that's the definition, and a 

lot of bull in between. 

 

But the point that I'm trying to make is that this is the concept 

that farmers have.  The farmers that I talk to do not have 

confidence in this government.  The farmers that I talk to say, 

how can I get out? I want nothing to do with this.  That is what 

the farmers are telling me. 

 

What we have to impress upon this government is that 



1084 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1994 

they must put action to the words.  And you can have all these 

flowery reports that I've alluded to in here, the best intentions, 

and the individuals who were involved in these had the best 

intentions and they gave of their time and their energies and 

their abilities to come up with these reports.  But unless it's put 

into action, it is all futile, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I want to move an amendment to this motion, and the member 

from Kindersley will be seconding this amendment.  And it 

states thus: 

 

 That all of the words following "Assembly" be deleted and 

the following substituted: 

 

 demand the provincial government to immediately address 

concerns of Saskatchewan agriculture producers and to stop 

the implementation of decisions harmful to the agricultural 

industry such as the government's restructuring of GRIP; 

slashes to municipal revenue sharing; cancellation of 

FeedGAP; closure of rural service centres; massive hikes to 

breeder fees and Crown pasture rental fees; cancellation of 

livestock cash advance program and others; 

 

 and instead, consider implementation of a program for the 

21st century dealing with biotechnology, commodities, and 

contract marketing; use of the information highway to 

develop a workable, practical, long-term solution to problems 

plaguing Saskatchewan's agriculture industry, because the 

Farm Support Review Committee report fails to address 

immediate problems faced by Saskatchewan agriculture 

producers, as well as those in the future. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I so move this amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- I find the amendment in order.  So at 

this point the debate will continue concurrent on the 

amendment and on the main motion. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I think the amendment is an excellent amendment to a 

motion that I think the government members should be 

embarrassed to bring forward into the legislature of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They bring forward a motion, Mr. Speaker, that deals with 

agriculture, a subject that I would say, Mr. Speaker, that a lot of 

the members opposite don't have a great deal of credibility to 

even be discussing in light of the types of things that they have 

done towards agriculture in the course of the last two years, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

What they have done is nothing but a cruel joke on the farmers 

of Saskatchewan since they have taken office, Mr. Speaker, in 

the sanctimonious way that only the 

members of the back bench of this government can come 

forward and bring forward motions dealing with agriculture. I 

say that they should be ashamed of themselves for talking 

about agriculture in the way they do. 

 

If we just think back for a few years ago, Mr. Speaker, on the 

campaign trail prior to the election in '91, members of the 

government were running around this province all over the 

place.  And you can point them out.  There's a whole bunch of 

them sitting there, Mr. Speaker, that I can think of that ran 

around the province -- there's one standing and waving his hand 

-- suggesting that they were going to go down to Ottawa and 

they were going to get more money for agriculture and they 

were going to do everything possible for agriculture. 

 

And the member from Biggar knows . . . I remember being at a 

meeting where he was at and said that we're going to go down 

there and we're going to grab more money out of the hands of 

that federal government and we're going to bring it back and 

share it with all you farmers -- that's what he was going to do -- 

and we're going to bring in a farm program that deals with all 

of the problems associated with agriculture in Saskatchewan. 

 

And where is it?  Where is it?  Haven't done one thing, not one 

iota since you've taken office, except hurt agriculture.  Haven't 

done a single thing that's addressed any of the concerns with 

respect to agriculture at all. 

 

Had a program called GRIP '91.  There was some problems 

with it; everybody understands that.  But at least, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, at least, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the farmers of 

Saskatchewan believed it was bankable.  They believed it was 

bankable, and it was bankable. 

 

I recall, Mr. Speaker, going to the bank in the spring of 1990 

and when the discussions were taking place with respect to the 

farm program, and you walked in there and the bank said, I 

want to see what your figures are going to be for the GRIP 

program upcoming.  And farmers laid it down right in front of 

them. 

 

I remember in my situation it was something like $150 an acre, 

$160 an acres, and they accepted it and said yes.  Well I was 

just back at that same bank a couple of days ago, Mr. Speaker, 

and they look at this program, the '93 GRIP program, the 

changes that you guys made, and he said, this is nothing but a 

cruel joke on the farmers of Saskatchewan. 

 

They wouldn't lend 5 cents on the program today, not a nickel 

they would lend against the program that the Minister of 

Environment today -- the minister of Agriculture of that day -- 

brought in, Mr. Speaker.  They wouldn't lend a sou against your 

program, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I mean it was interesting, as we all recall members all over the 

House were going to go down and squeeze a bunch a money 

out of the federal government. So they 



March 22, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1085 

loaded up all their friends on a plane right here in Regina, I 

think it was.  I think . . . was the member from . . . were you 

there with them, the member from Biggar?  Didn't get to go on 

that holiday. 

 

But anyway they flew off, flew off down to Ottawa; chartered a 

big plane -- Kinistino went, that's right.  Went down to Ottawa; 

chartered a plane. Roy was at the head of the parade and the 

member from Rosetown-Elrose was sitting right behind him, 

and away they went.  Going to go down to Ottawa and come 

back with a big load of cash in the back. 

 

(1530) 

 

And what did they come back with?  They came back with a 

big, fat bill for the freight that day, Mr. Speaker.  Come back 

with zero. Not a thing.  And I remember being at the meeting at 

the Agridome, and the Premier stood up, and that was when he 

was going to lead the charge.  And he was, in only the form 

that the Premier of this province can give, he gave this rousing 

speech about how he was going to go down there and grab all 

the money out of the hands of the federal government and bring 

it back and sprinkle it all over the land, sort of thing. 

 

And what did he get?  Nothing.  And since that day, Mr. 

Speaker, there hasn't been 5 cents given to the farmers of 

Saskatchewan by this government and there never will be, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

What have they done for agriculture?  Let's look at it.  Change 

the GRIP program.  Took a bunch of money out of farmers' 

hands.  We now understand at the end of this year it's probably 

going to be something in the range of $320 million.  And I'm 

glad today it appears at least that the Minister of Agriculture 

suggests that he is going to try and find out some way to give it 

back to farmers.  Well I should say so. 

 

The farmers of Saskatchewan right now are going into spring 

seeding in the course of another month or so, six weeks.  They 

haven't got money to put the crop in the ground, and this 

government's sitting with $320 million of farmers' premiums in 

their back pocket and won't distribute 1 cent of it because they 

know darn well that the farmers of Saskatchewan want it right 

now and they can't give it right now. 

 

What else did they do?  They've increased FeedGAP . . . or I 

mean they took away FeedGAP. They've increased fees in 

every single area of agriculture.  You people are so caught up 

in the '50s and '60s of agriculture policy, you don't know where 

you're going. 

 

Politics of the National Farmers Union and other left-wing farm 

groups.  That's who you people listen to.  The only ones you 

listen to are the likes of the National Farmers Union -- the most 

backwards farm lobby group in the history of Canada, that's 

what I say they are, Mr. Speaker.  The most backwards farm 

group in the history of Canada.  One good thing about them 

though, one good thing about them though, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I understand they won't be around 

much longer.  That's the one good thing about them, Mr. 

Speaker. They're flat broke, can't even run their own 

organization, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They won't last; I predict they won't last another year.  They're 

down to 4,000 members, something in that range -- 4,000 

members.  This big, broad, nationwide political farm group -- 

4,000 members.  What a joke.  What a joke -- 4,000 members, 

broke, don't have any money to carry on the operations of their 

current mandate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They've been against, Mr. Speaker, every single, every single 

initiative to improve agriculture in Saskatchewan, or in the 

nation for that matter.  Every single initiative to try and bring 

Saskatchewan agriculture into the 21st century they've been 

against.  Hang your hat on the Crow, stuff like that, Mr. 

Speaker -- outmoded, outdated information of the years gone 

by, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I also remember years and years ago when the minister of 

Agriculture used to stand in his place -- Gordon MacMurchy, 

of that day; maybe some of you remember him.  He used to 

stand in his place and say, the farmers of Saskatchewan, we 

don't need tandem grain trucks in this province. The farmers of 

Saskatchewan, you can get along with a little old one-ton or 

two-ton; you don't need to have that big stuff; I know what's 

good for you; the farmers of Saskatchewan understand that the 

minister of Agriculture knows that. 

 

Well I ask you, whose business was it of his to suggest to 

Saskatchewan and farmers how they should run their 

operations?  Whose business was it of his to enter into that kind 

of discussion?  He knew nothing about modernizing 

agriculture.  And the people opposite understand that, Mr. 

Speaker, but they still are caught up in them same old 

outmoded, dated, policies of the Gordon MacMurchys of the 

world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you destroyed the GRIP program -- a program 

that needed some changes, no doubt, Mr. Speaker, but needed 

some changes for the benefit of agriculture, not for the benefit 

of the Minister of Finance's treasury.  Three hundred and 

twenty million bucks sitting in a bank account waiting for 

something -- I don't know what, Mr. Speaker.  We would hope 

only that these people come forward with their promise and pay 

out that money, pay out that money that should be within the 

farmers hands, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The member from Rosetown-Elrose, everyone remembers him 

-- probably the most despised minister of Agriculture in the 

history of the province of Saskatchewan.  And it's no doubt, 

Mr. Speaker, it's no doubt, Mr. Speaker, the reason why the 

Premier had to remove him.  He was universally against the 

people of Saskatchewan.  The farmers of Saskatchewan 

understood that, Mr. Speaker.  Everyone will remember 

forever, I think, the famous quote that came out of the minister 

of Agriculture, the member from Rosetown-Elrose, when he 

made the changes to the GRIP program and said, well don't 

worry about it.  When the committee said to him there's going 

to be 



1086 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1994 

some problems, legal problems, he said: don't worry about that; 

we'll get around it. 

 

Everyone, every farmer in Saskatchewan, should have that 

memory in the back of their minds I think forever, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, because that's what he said to the farmers of 

Saskatchewan.  We'll get around it; don't worry about it.  These 

little legal niceties about contracts and stuff like that, we know 

how to deal with those kind of problems, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

We'll bring forward legislation that doesn't allow farmers to 

take us to court.  That's the way you deal with it.  Just bring in 

legislation and stamp out the rights of the farmers of 

Saskatchewan.  Doesn't matter.  Doesn't matter what they think.  

We can do it; we're the government. 

 

And so that's exactly what they did, Mr. Speaker.  That's 

exactly what they did.  They brought forward legislation.  But 

what happened?  They got hauled off into court, Mr. Speaker, 

and they're still in court over that very issue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I would say that very likely it will go to the Supreme 

Court of Canada, very likely will go to the Supreme Court of 

Canada because we're talking about 320 to $350 million worth, 

Mr. Speaker, and that's not chump change.  The farmers of 

Saskatchewan are deserving of that money, Mr. Speaker, and I 

think that the Supreme Court of Canada will rule that way 

eventually.  Eventually they'll rule that way, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think there's precedent for that because of the farmers in 

Manitoba taking the Government of Manitoba together over the 

changes in the lentil coverage that was done after the appointed 

date of changes in the contract.  And, Mr. Speaker, I think that 

will be the precedent that brings this government to its knees on 

this question as well.  It will be the precedent that is necessary 

to put it forward to the Supreme Court. 

 

And the Government of Saskatchewan will lose, I suspect, Mr. 

Speaker, and I predict, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And $350 million 

will have to be pulled out of that bank account somewhere.  

And I don't know what you guys are going to do then.  How are 

you going to pay it out?  How are you people going to pay out 

that kind of compensation to the farmers of Saskatchewan after 

the Supreme Court of Canada rules that you have to? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we've seen changes in a number of areas, and I 

would suggest that almost every single one of the changes that 

this government has brought forward has damaged agriculture 

in one way or another.  The crop insurance program is in a 

shambles, Mr. Speaker.  We see lower coverage and higher 

premiums -- all as a result of the things the Minister of 

Agriculture has done to change the '91 GRIP program -- higher 

premiums to the point where it's breaking farmers out there and 

they're withdrawing from the program, or would like to 

withdraw from the program as quickly as possible. 

But the legislation was such that they couldn't get out of the 

program, Mr. Speaker.  They now are caught in a program 

where they've got higher premiums coming and lower 

coverage, and they say, no way out, Mr. Speaker.  No way out 

from a program that has done nothing but rob them of the 

premiums that they have put into the program, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see no livestock policy except a move to move in on the 

horned cattle fund.  The National Farmers Union and the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool wanting representatives on the 

board.  Can you imagine that?  Can you imagine that -- wanting 

representation on the board?  They have no right.  They have 

no right to representation on that board -- never have and never 

will have.  Never have and never will have, Mr. Speaker.  The 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool is a marketer of cattle and shouldn't 

be represented on that board, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the National Farmers Union wanting 

representatives on that board as well -- 4,000 members 

nationwide.  I wonder how many of those 4,000 in 

Saskatchewan are there.  Are there 2,000 of them in 

Saskatchewan?  I doubt it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The farmers of Saskatchewan are desperate, desperate for help 

from a government and the government unwilling to provide 

them with anything other than the vague notion of some kind of 

targeted assistance program that will try and save the way of 

agriculture, save the family farm, the Ma and Pa Kettle type 

operations that you people like to talk about all of the time.  A 

couple of chickens and a cow and a little house out back on the 

prairie some way.  Some lifestyle you want to preserve -- some 

lifestyle you people want to preserve.  An old barn and a 

worn-out old piece of machinery, and that's what you call the 

backbone of agriculture.  You should be ashamed of 

yourselves. 

 

Agriculture's moving into the 21st century and you should 

move along with it, Mr. Member.  When will you people join 

us in the 21st century of agriculture?  An exciting time can be 

had in agriculture today, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  There's all kinds 

of things happening around this province.  Farmers are 

awakening to the opportunities that are out there, and not as 

any result of anything you people are doing though. 

 

They're awakening to things like biotechnology, zero tillage, 

information technology, and marketing opportunities.  

Marketing opportunities, Mr. Speaker, and I'd like to touch on 

that for a little while.  Marketing opportunities -- maybe you 

never heard of marketing, but we'll touch on that a little bit. 

 

The Wheat Board for ever, is their cry.  The Wheat Board for 

ever.  They're the be-all and end-all when it comes to 

agriculture, and don't let anybody tell you any different, Mr. 

Speaker.  Deny farmers any flexibility.  Deny farmers any 

flexibility, it doesn't matter, Mr. Speaker.  It doesn't matter at 

all.  Deny them any opportunity. 

 

The farmers in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker -- here's 



March 22, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1087 

how it works.  You go out and produce a crop, through all of 

the sweat and blood and tears and all that sort of thing, and 

capital that it takes to grow a crop in Saskatchewan.  You grow 

the crop to the best of your ability -- the long hours that go into 

seeding and summer-fallowing and spraying and harvesting of 

that crop, shovelling the grain into the truck -- and then you 

take her off to the elevator, dump her into the pit, and then 

hope, hope that the Canadian Wheat Board does its job and 

sells it to the countries around the world.  And hope that they 

do it at a level of price that's profitable for you. 

 

Well I would say to you, Mr. Members over there, that there's 

lots of farmers in Saskatchewan that now are awakening to the 

opportunities of marketing their own products.  They're 

awakening to that.  And your outdated, outmoded methods of 

dealing with marketing of grain are becoming under a lot of 

question -- under a lot of question, Mr. Members.  That's the 

way it works.  Trust them that they're going to do it.  No vote, 

don't even think about having a vote, you people don't know 

what you're doing out there.  That's what you say to the farmers 

of Saskatchewan -- don't give them any chance to decide on 

their own. 

 

But what's happening out there with canola marketing and 

specialty crop marketing and a whole bunch of things like that?  

Barley marketing, oat marketing, flax marketing, the farmers 

are awakening now, Mr. Speaker, to the opportunities that are 

out there.  They now are beginning to learn to market their own 

products, and they like it.  They like it.  And they like that kind 

of stuff, Mr. Speaker.  They don't want to spend their labour 

and their capital and everything else for the opportunity to 

grow grain and then just turn over the marketing to anybody 

and everybody. 

 

I would think, Mr. Speaker, that these people opposite should 

be allowing farmers choice; allow them another marketing 

opportunity.  Allow them the opportunity to sell their grain as 

they see fit.  That's what I advocate, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I 

think the farmers of Saskatchewan have matured to the point 

where they feel they can market their own products and they 

don't need the help of people like the members opposite who 

suggest that the Canadian Wheat Board is the only alternative 

to them that's out there. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the Liberals aren't entirely without sin when 

it comes to this issue as well.  I recall during the federal 

election the current Minister of Agriculture, Ralph Goodale, 

going around the province on every stump that he could climb 

up on and suggesting that there'd be a vote on barley marketing.  

And where is that?  Not a vote, no chance, is what he's saying 

today.  He doesn't want a vote on barley marketing because he 

knows very well that the farmers of western Canada will 

support an opportunity for alternative marketing of products 

right now. 

 

And I wonder, I wonder, Mr. Speaker, who is in favour, who is 

in favour of opening up the opportunities for farmers to market 

their own 

products.  It's groups like the United Grain Growers who are in 

favour of the dual marketing system, another alternative to 

marketing grain into the continental barley market.  The 

Western Canadian Wheat Growers are in favour of it, the 

Alberta Barley Growers, the Alberta government, Alberta 

Grain Commission -- all farm groups, almost all farm groups . . 

. (inaudible interjection) . . . Well let's get to it then. 

 

We can discuss who's in favour of it and who isn't in favour of 

it.  I mentioned that the farmers of Saskatchewan want a vote.  

Who doesn't want a vote?  Who doesn't want a vote on an 

opportunity to open up the barley marketing question? 

 

The members over there say that there are people out there that 

don't want a vote, and I don't believe that's the view of farmers.  

All farm groups want a vote on barley marketing. 

 

(1545) 

 

Canadian Wheat Board Producer Advisory Committee suggests 

they want a vote on barley marketing.  In the most recent issue 

of Grainews, and I quote, The Canadian Wheat Board 

Producer Advisory Committee says: 

 

 At its December meeting, the committee passed the following 

resolutions: 

 

 That the federal government conduct a plebiscite on all 

western Canadian grain producers prior to taking any action 

which might change the way in which barley is currently 

marketed. 

 

So the Canadian Wheat Board Producer Advisory Committee is 

in favour of it.  Who else is in favour of it?  Leroy Larsen from 

the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool is in favour of a vote.  Did you 

know that, Mr. Member from Kinistino?  And I quote: 

 

 As president of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool I respect the 

farmers' right to be heard on important issues.  Our 

organization defends the producers' right to have a 

democratic say in the choosing of a marketing system for 

their barley. 

 

That's what Leroy Larsen says.  He's in favour of a vote on 

barley marketing.  Who else is in favour of it?  The 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool members are in favour of it. 

 

 Survey results confirmed that almost all of our members 

favour a plebiscite to decide the issue.  More than 

three-quarters say that they 'strongly' agree that a plebiscite 

was needed. 

 

 iWestern Producer r, October 21, 1993.  So they're in favour of 

a vote on barley marketing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Who else is in favour of it?  You probably don't even know, but 

the Government of Saskatchewan is in favour of a vote. 



1088 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1994 

In Saskatchewan, the provincial government released a 

survey indicating 88 per cent of farmers polled want a vote 

on the matter. 

 

Vern Greenshields, Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, April 21, 1993. 

 

The Saskatchewan government is in favour of a vote.  And not 

only that, the Minister of Agriculture, the current Minister of 

Agriculture in Saskatchewan today says: 

 

 "The federal government should find out what farmers 

want before making a final decision on the rules for selling 

barley to the United States," provincial Agriculture 

Minister Darrell Cunningham said Wednesday. 

 

Regina Leader-Post, April 8, 1993. 

 

So all over the province of Saskatchewan and all over western 

Canada the farmers are agreeing and the governments are 

agreeing and the farm lobby groups are agreeing.  The only one 

that's against a vote, that I'm aware of, the only two people that 

are, is the National Farmers Union and the federal Liberal 

government.  They're the only two people now that are against 

a producer vote on barley marketing, in direct contrast to what 

the federal Minister of Agriculture said during the 1993 federal 

election. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Shame on him. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Shame on him.  And the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone says, shame on him.  And I agree.  Shame on him.  

I'm glad that the Liberal leader, the current member from 

Saskatoon Greystone, says shame on Ralph Goodale for not 

allowing a producer vote. 

 

And I would ask her, I would ask her, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

she convey that same message to Ralph Goodale and stand in 

this House and say it, and say it to the farmers of 

Saskatchewan, that she's ashamed of the way Ralph Goodale is 

treating the farmers of Saskatchewan and western Canada with 

respect to a vote on marketing of barley into the continental 

barley market. 

 

I'm glad she said that.  I wasn't aware that she was in favour of 

a vote.  I thought it was only the . . . I thought it was the 

Liberals provincially and Liberals federally, but apparently it's 

only the federal Liberals.  And I'm sure the federal minister 

would be interested in hearing your comments on that, Madam 

Member. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that the amendment that's been put 

forward by the member from Rosthern is a good amendment.  

It deals with the kinds of issues that we should be dealing with 

in agriculture today and not some safety net program that is 

supposed to be the be-all and end-all and all it is is a basis for 

discussion. 

 

They go around the province of Saskatchewan, hold meetings 

all over the place.  Nobody turns up at them because their 

agricultural policy is discredited and 

every farmer out there in Saskatchewan understands that -- 

probably wasn't 150 people total at the meetings they held 

around the province.  And now they come forward and say this 

is the basis for discussion on agriculture policy in 

Saskatchewan.  And it doesn't amount to anything, Mr. 

Speaker, and the farmers of Saskatchewan understand that. 

 

And I believe that the amendment is a good amendment, Mr. 

Speaker, and I'll be voting in favour of it.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Johnson: -- Mr. Speaker, the amendment as put forward 

by the member from Rosthern covers a whole, wide spectrum 

of agricultural issues.  A number of those issues are problems 

today because of the former Conservative government and how 

they implemented those particular programs and things of that 

nature.  And the member from Kindersley, in seconding the 

amendment, Mr. Speaker, indicated that a former member in 

this legislature, Gordon MacMurchy, did a number of things 

that were not acceptable. 

 

But if you take a look at what he did put forward . . . and one of 

the things that he did to a very large degree, was a plan and a 

program called the beef stabilization program.  Now this 

program achieved a number of things and I would like to point 

out to the members opposite exactly what it did. 

 

Number one, it stabilized that segment of the cattle industry, of 

the beef industry, that all of the rest of the beef industry is 

based on -- and that's the breeding and production of calves.  

And it did something else, Mr. Speaker, that most of the 

programs of the previous Conservative government and the 

same members that came up with this amendment didn't do, in 

that it stabilized the production of calves and beef based on 

actual production.  No way of slipping a 350 pound calf in for 

the same benefits as a 650 pound calf, if you were taking it to 

market. 

 

So the program was very effective.  And in fact if it was in 

place today, I say that most of the other short-term, quick 

bang-for-the-buck programs that the Conservatives 

implemented during the '80s wouldn't have been necessary.  

Because, Mr. Speaker, what the Conservative government 

previously did, based on the beef stabilization program, is they 

monkeyed around with it and shifted the money away from the 

calf end of it into the feeder end of it and destroyed the 

program in its totality. 

 

Now I understand why it went down as the member opposite 

indicated.  And I understand why at this present time the 

members opposite are chiding back, because I hit a very sore 

spot.  They simply destroyed a program that was very effective 

and stabilizing production of the agricultural area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individual from Kindersley in this House took 

the time to run down one of the organizations that had a 

member on the review committee to design some safety net 

designs. And I say that that's very mean-hearted of him and 

strange 



March 22, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1089 

that he would spend the time running down the National 

Farmers Union, as one of the members on it, and do it after the 

member that moved the amendment said that the committee 

was actually did a very good job and that you should commend 

the members on the committee. 

 

And here in the next speaker standing up, he picked out one of 

the members and run it down.  I say, Mr. Speaker, that's very 

inconsistent of the members opposite in moving forth an 

amendment to a resolution to attempt to stand on both sides of 

an issue of that nature. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite in their discussion 

indicated that the program, the GRIP program, was a bankable 

program, and that today it's no longer bankable.  I would think 

that if you would take and go into either Alberta or Manitoba 

where you're looking at people that are going to be in this 

program with payments in Manitoba, at least for an extra two 

years, that the bankability of that program, of the '91 program 

has deteriorated substantially in those provinces as well.  

Because now it is collecting back money to offset the payments 

that were made previously. 

 

The concept that was put forward in saying . . . the incredibility 

is saying that you should take $320 million that's in a program 

and pay it back, irregardless of the rules and the design of the 

program which the members opposite, when they were in 

government on this side of the House, agreed with the federal 

government at the time and set up a program. 

 

It tells me, Mr. Speaker, the reason why this province has a 

debt.  If you can access money, spend it.  It didn't matter 

whether you knew how you were going to pay it back.  If 

somebody would lend it to you, go and get it and spend it.  If 

there is money some place that is to be used for a program but 

you want it some place else before it's used in that program, 

take it out and spend it. 

 

That's not a very effective way of managing and putting forth a 

budget and coming out of a long-term thing.  And if that was 

what the members opposite did on their own operations, I can 

tell the members opposite that they would be losing their farms 

and not be functioning.  So why would they do that as a 

government and as a structure for the community?  I can't 

understand why you would do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that I'm going to be voting 

against the amendment and supporting the resolution -- 

resolution no. 36.  Because, Mr. Speaker, the resolution as it 

was originally placed on the blues, and what we are speaking 

here today, directs its attention to giving recognition to a group 

of people who put forward effort and time, with some to their 

own expense, and they deserve that recognition individually 

and as a group, rather than trying to politicize this particular 

motion and move it into a discussion of the whole farm 

economy. 

 

I thank you, Mr. Speaker, for your time, and I will be 

supporting the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  It's a 

pleasure for me to enter the debate this afternoon and support 

the amendment put forward by my colleague, the member from 

Rosthern.  Because the amendment, if members would take the 

time to look at it, deals with what is now and what will be 

reality in the near future. 

 

And what we're debating here today, as my colleague has 

pointed out, is the fact that the government has no conception 

of what reality is in agriculture in Saskatchewan today.  One 

only has to look at the moves that have been made by this 

government since 1991 to realize that the situation which they 

seemed to empathize with prior to the election in October of 

'91, but in fact since that date have done absolutely nothing 

except worsen the situation in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And really the only thing that has changed, not because this 

government has done anything, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the fact 

that certain commodity prices have gone up; that certain 

marketing availabilities have happened to Saskatchewan and 

western Canadian producers and there isn't one single small 

item that this government can claim any degree of 

responsibility for in seeing that picture turn around. 

 

Now they would like people in the province of Saskatchewan, 

and particularly rural farm families, to believe that they do have 

something in mind, and so we've had this grandiose Ag 2000 

plan floated out in front of us, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And I can tell you that when you go to the coffee shops in rural 

Saskatchewan, you go around my riding -- and I've been all 

over this province, Mr. Speaker -- that thing is an absolute joke.  

It is an absolute joke because it doesn't deal with anything 

dealing with the bread and butter issues that farm families deal 

with today. 

 

(1600) 

 

My colleague pointed out today in the legislature that spring 

seeding will be imminent in parts of this province, and there are 

people honestly wondering where the money will come from 

for the necessary input.  This isn't a laughing matter, Mr. 

Speaker, this is absolute reality.  If you didn't have the good 

fortune last year to grow canola, or to grow some no. 1 hard red 

spring that's going to be up there in the high protein end, or if 

you didn't have a bunch of durum wheat probably carried over 

from the year before, then you are in serious trouble. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you go around this province and talk to the 

machinery dealers who tell you that they are selling machinery, 

and you ask them the average age of the person buying the 

equipment, they'll tell you that most of those people are over 

the age of 55.  These are 



1090 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1994 

people that are not carrying land debt.  These are people, quite 

frankly, that are looking at the tax side and looking how they 

manage their taxation picture rather than actually building in 

rural Saskatchewan. 

 

That's the dilemma in front of us, Mr. Speaker.  And that's why 

I find this motion brought forward by the government today 

just one more in a long line of hypocritical motions dealing 

with agriculture. 

 

We've had the spectacle of this review committee travelling 

around the province, supposedly bringing back 

recommendations that this government is going to implement 

when we have the very fact of this government being the only 

one of all the provincial governments in Canada saying that 

they don't like a national GRIP plan.  Why don't they like it?  

Because they campaigned against it in 1990 and 1991.  That's 

the only reason.  Because they campaigned again. 

 

And we had the spectacle of the now Premier, the member 

from Riversdale, travelling around to the various farm rallies -- 

I remember it well, Mr. Speaker -- making those 

pronouncements about how he had the answers for the 

agricultural situation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no one today in Saskatchewan believes there's a 

pot of money at the end of the rainbow.  Everyone realizes 

there are difficult times, that there are difficult decisions, and 

that farm and rural families want to play a part in solving those 

decisions. 

 

But the simple fact is, Mr. Speaker, they have no confidence in 

a government that willingly breaks contracts, that does not 

abide by the law of the land, that simply -- and we had another 

example of it today in this Legislative Assembly -- if the 

political heat is too much you simply bring in a law and you 

break the existing one. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is the bunch that then bring forward a 

motion in this Legislative Assembly that says that we should 

congratulate this review process that they've instigated. 

 

Well the body of evidence, Mr. Speaker, suggests that once 

again it will simply be another case of smoke and mirrors; that 

there is no substance.  Because this hidebound bunch here, this 

bunch of ideologues that sit across from us simply don't have 

the capacity, Mr. Speaker, to get on with reality, to do what 

people are demanding out there. 

 

People are saying, government simply help us even out the 

playing field; help us design marketing strategies; let us be part 

of a national program that is fair and reasonable; and simply 

don't worry about your unrealistic promises that you made prior 

to the 1991 election which you are now trying to find ways to 

not keep.  And that's the reality, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The expectation level was raised so high and that expectation 

level was unrealistic.  And now we find this New Democratic 

government doing everything they can to find ways to blame 

someone else and simply let rural Saskatchewan slide.  And it's 

evident out there. 

And the motion talks about . . . the amendment brought by my 

colleagues talks about all of the things that have changed in 

rural Saskatchewan in the last two and a half years.  Changes 

that are nothing but harmful; they are hurtful.  And the 

solutions, Mr. Speaker, the solutions are directly tied to some 

of the things also brought forward by the member from 

Rosthern as solutions. 

 

And if this government would listen to some of the groups out 

there, listen to the people, allow the votes to take place, in fact 

get in the forefront of reform not only in this Assembly but 

reform in the agricultural industry, then there would be some 

credibility attached to motions like we saw here today.  Then 

there would be some credibility to this committee that they 

trotted around the province.  Then there would be some 

credibility and some hope for the future by Saskatchewan farm 

families and those people in our communities that live 

alongside and work with them.  And as it is, Mr. Speaker, that 

hope is dwindling out there. 

 

The only thing that is left is the individual initiative of some 

very, very tough and dedicated people.  The only thing that 

gives a person hope today, as we go into the 1994 spring 

seeding program, is that individuals have figured out ways that 

they can do things better and survive.  And they will survive as 

long as this government gets off their back. 

 

As long as we don't see another round of utility rate increases; 

we don't see another round of cuts that pile more education 

taxes on our farm land.  As long as we don't see more 

offloading onto our municipal governments by this provincial 

NDP (New Democratic Party) government, then those people 

will survive because they are tough and they are resilient and 

they have been through some of the most difficult economic 

times in our history. 

 

And the last thing they need is this bunch bringing in a new set 

of regulations and legislation that really, at the end of the day, 

Mr. Speaker, they may break anyway if it doesn't fit their 

political calendar, as they have broken so many agreements in 

this Legislative Assembly.  The rule of law doesn't mean 

anything around here any more, Mr. Speaker.  You simply run 

a poll, and if the poll says that you bring in a piece of 

legislation and break it, then you do it.  That seems to be what 

we heard today. 

 

And I can't believe that the rural members of the government, 

the rural members of the government would put up with that 

kind of thing, because they know that a handshake is a bond in 

rural Saskatchewan.  They know that when agreements are 

made and signed that people live by them. 

 

There's all kinds of rental agreements out there, calf share 

agreements, seed sharing -- all sorts of things that are done in 

each and every rural community, and they're done on a 

handshake, Mr. Speaker.  They're done on the person's word 

and his credibility.  And when they see legislation and 

agreements, laws of the 



March 22, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1091 

land in this Legislative Assembly just simply cast aside to fulfil 

the political agenda of a particular party, they don't like that. 

 

So you have the spectacle, Mr. Speaker, of the government in 

court, and they will be in court again and again and again 

because of this attitude.  And rural people don't like that, Mr. 

Speaker.  They simply don't abide it.  They look for something 

more in the democratic process than the men and women that 

they send to this Legislative Assembly to stand on their behalf.  

And if I had seen one of the government members today stand, 

and stand on those principles, then maybe this motion would 

mean something. 

 

But the simple facts are that they have never, not once, gotten 

out of their back-bench seats and stood for that type of 

principle, Mr. Speaker.  And as the years go on, and this 

government gets deeper and deeper into the hole, and the 

problems in rural Saskatchewan are not solved, then the 

political price that these people will pay at the end of the day 

will be more I think than some of them can bear.  Because that 

is a reality, Mr. Speaker.  You and I both know, after many 

elections in this place, that people expect the rule of law to 

mean something. 

 

When we see the spectacle now of the government perhaps 

having, perhaps -- and I will give them the benefit of the doubt 

because the minister says it's not all there -- but having 

hundreds of millions of dollars, a good portion of which comes 

from the back pockets of Saskatchewan farm families, piled up 

in their GRIP account, piled up.  And at the end of the day, Mr. 

Speaker, a lot of that money won't end up in the pockets of 

Saskatchewan farm families.  It perhaps will end up in the 

pockets of this NDP administration and the Liberal government 

in Ottawa.  And, Mr. Speaker, it was never, never intended that 

that would be the case. 

 

And if rural members of that government can justify those kind 

of actions when their neighbours cannot find the money to sow 

a crop, when their neighbours are still losing land to 

foreclosure, when their neighbours are putting their children on 

school buses at a quarter after seven in the morning because the 

educational structures are falling apart out there -- when they 

can put those six-year-old kids on buses at a quarter after seven 

in the morning and justify it and sit there, after they have 

picked their money out of the pockets of farm families -- then 

they, Mr. Speaker, have got a lot of explaining to do to the 

people that elected them to this Assembly. 

 

And those are facts, and that is reality out there today.  And you 

can go find it in every last rural community in this province, 

because it's there.  The hurt is there and it isn't going away 

easily.  Not this year, next year, or the year after.  And that 

means the planning and the process has to be in place.  That 

means that there has to be a systematic addressing of the 

problem. 

 

And today in this debate, the only systematic addressing of that 

problem that I have seen come forward, Mr. Speaker, is in the 

amendment proposed 

by my colleague from Rosthern.  Because I certainly didn't hear 

it from any of the government members.  It was simply more of 

the same, and more of the same, as a recipe for disaster.  It's 

more people leaving this province, it's more people leaving the 

land, and it is more people simply having to fend for 

themselves.  And, Mr. Speaker, they'll fend for themselves as 

long as the government gets off their back.  And unfortunately, 

that isn't the case. 

 

In light of that, Mr. Speaker, I think it would be very proper, 

very proper, that we start addressing the solution, one piece at a 

time.  And what I think what should happen today here, on 

private members' day, is that we go to one small area that 

affects agriculture in a big way, affects farm families in a big 

way, affects rural Saskatchewan in a big way, because it is an 

inherent cost that simply won't go away.  It simply is there each 

and every day when you get up in the morning.  And that's the 

whole area of utility rates, utility rate costs.  And what do we 

do about them?  And how do we factor them in to making our 

lives on the farm and in rural Saskatchewan better?  How do 

we address our bottom line? 

 

And I think it would be most appropriate, Mr. Speaker, if at this 

time we got on with debating, and I would move, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 That we move directly to Bill No. 1, An Act to amend The 

Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act (Legislative 

Utilities Review Committee). 

 

And that's seconded by the member from Morse. 

 

And that we deal with the issues surrounding rural 

Saskatchewan, making a living out there, and we put in place 

an all-party committee in this House that would review those 

utility rates and make sure that people in rural Saskatchewan 

aren't being gouged by our Crown corporations and that they 

know what the costs of producing are going to be. 

 

And that as members if we did that, Mr. Speaker, we could then 

say to our constituents, we were doing something productive in 

this House, that we were setting in place things that 

back-benchers and opposition members were intended to do, 

and that is control the cost associated with making a living in 

this province. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The division bells rang from 4:15 p.m. until 4:24 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

Yeas 

 

Swenson Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens Goohsen 

Boyd Haverstock 

Toth Bergman 

-- 10 



1092 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1994 

Nays 

Thompson Trew 

Lingenfelter Draper 

Shillington Serby 

Anguish Whitmore 

Koskie Sonntag 

Teichrob Flavel 

Johnson Roy 

Goulet Cline 

Kowalsky Scott 

Penner Crofford 

Hagel Wormsbecker 

Bradley Stanger 

Lorje Knezacek 

Lautermilch Harper 

Calvert Keeping 

Renaud Jess 

Murray Carlson 

Hamilton Langford t 

-- 36 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It gives me a 

great pleasure to enter into . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- I'm not certain that anybody else heard the 

member, what the member said.  I certainly didn't.  And now 

we have two members standing.  Why is the member from 

Kelsey-Tisdale on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Mr. Speaker, in the west gallery is a 

friend of mine, Mr. Larry Frisky of Arborfield.  Larry's 

involved in the Dehy industry in that community.  He's also on 

the division board of the Tisdale School Division.  Larry's son 

Marlon was the person that was injured in a hockey game 

recently in Arborfield, and he informs me today that Marlon is 

doing fine.  I would like all the members in the House to join 

with me in welcoming Larry to the legislature this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' MOTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 36 -- Commendation of Farm Support 

Review Committee 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  And it gives 

me a great pleasure to enter into this debate on the motion put 

forward by my colleague, the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood, on the issue of agriculture, and in 

particular the future development of farm safety net programs 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

I think it's important here, Mr. Speaker, to give the members 

opposite, in particular the members of the third party, a little bit 

of a history in the development of agriculture, in particular in 

the context of the constitution. 

Mr. Speaker, if one picks up the Canadian constitution, one of 

the main provisions of the section that deals with agriculture, 

and one -- it jumps out right away at the reader  -- is the fact 

that agriculture has always been recognized in this country as a 

national issue.  It's a national responsibility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our forefathers, when they were putting this 

constitution together and developing, recognized that 

agriculture is going to play . . . would play a very important 

role in the development of this country.  And that it would also 

be integral to the development of our society and to the country 

that we had good, high quality farm products at a reasonable 

price.  And they recognized that in order to achieve those 

particular goals we needed to have a national farm policy.  And 

that is in the Canadian constitution. 

 

Now it also states, Mr. Speaker, that the federal government, in 

the development of agricultural programs, will always enter 

into discussions with the provinces to see what the provinces 

are able to contribute to these particular programs. 

 

Now I want to take you, I want to fast forward you to about 

1986-87.  That's about the time, Mr. Speaker, that the federal 

government initiated the first discussions on revenue insurance 

programs for this country.  And Saskatchewan, as an important 

player in the agricultural industry in this country -- I might add 

one of the biggest players in the agricultural sector in Canada -- 

was forefront in the discussions on the development and the 

design of farm safety net programs. 

 

As these discussions were ongoing, there was a number of 

hardships that hit the agricultural sector in Saskatchewan and 

other parts of Canada.  What was the response from the federal 

government?  Ad hoc assistance.  A band-aid solution to major 

systematic problems in the agricultural industry.  That was the 

solution. 

 

(1630) 

 

Prior to 1991 -- or 1990, I should say -- the federal government 

picked up almost 100 per cent of the costs in crop insurance 

and in the western grain stabilization program.  Note that -- the 

federal government, because they realized it was always a 

national issue.  And Saskatchewan, with 50 per cent of the 

arable land in Canada and with less than one-fifth of the 

population in this country, and bearing in mind that the small 

tax base that Saskatchewan had, the federal government 

historically had always recognized those factors. 

 

But unfortunately there was some events that were going to 

change the history of Canada.  And those events were an 

election, provincial election, coming up in October of 1991.  

And the members opposite know while those discussions were 

going on that there was time lines -- there was an election 

coming -- and that they had to make some very quick decisions 

on a farm revenue insurance program. 



March 22, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1093 

And, Mr. Speaker, they caved in.  They caved in because the 

federal government had given them ad hoc solutions in the '80s.  

And because of that the federal government asked the members 

opposite: listen, now you are going to pick up nearly 35 per 

cent of the cost of future safety net programs.  I tell you, that is 

shameful.  No government should have ever accepted such a 

deal.  But, Mr. Speaker, they did. 

 

And we, of course, in October 1991 came to power.  And we 

immediately started to look into this safety net program, and we 

soon realized that Ottawa had abdicated their responsibilities, 

their national, historical, constitutional responsibilities toward 

agriculture. 

 

And the members opposite went along with that because, Mr. 

Speaker, they had been bought off with Ottawa money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we moved to open up the safety net programs and 

look at them and moved swiftly to make them, number one, 

actuarially sound.  And what that means, Mr. Speaker, if the 

members opposite don't understand, is that you cannot, Mr. 

Speaker, keep running huge deficits in a farm safety net 

program.  In particular with the magnitude of agriculture and 

the problems inherent in the GRIP, the original GRIP program, 

were so huge financially that it would have buried, Mr. 

Speaker, this province; it would have buried Saskatchewan 

producers, and we could not accept that.  We could not accept 

that, so we renegotiated and we opened up and we redesigned 

the GRIP program. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, producers have been telling us, well we still 

believe, we still believe that there is a need for some type of 

revenue insurance program for the 1990s.  We're accepting that 

responsibility.  We're hearing the producers out there and we're 

reacting to that.  And thus, Mr. Speaker, we have the report 

from the farm safety review committee which was handed to us 

on January 12 recommending some of the components, some of 

the particular aspects and the design of future farm safety net 

programs.  And I know the members opposite will say, well 

obviously the committee -- and I think I heard one of the 

members say -- that the representation on the committee was 

questionable. 

 

Well I'll tell you what the producers said -- told us -- Mr. 

Speaker.  They said, after the review of the former GRIP 

program, they told us, we want a grass roots consultative 

process.  We want farmers; we want grass roots people on that 

committee, and that's what the opposition members said.  They 

stood up in that place and said, you got to have farmers making 

the recommendations. 

 

We've listened to them and we've delivered; that's who was on 

this particular committee.  It was farmers speaking out and 

listening to the concerns of farmers and farm families across 

this province.  They bring back a report.  I wish the members 

would start to maybe comment on the report instead of trying to 

criticize the committee.  Maybe they should read it; 

might be a very enlightening exercise for them. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have heard and we have listened to the 

farmers in this province.  And we have delivered by setting up 

a process, a process in which we take farmers and we put them 

on a committee and say, go out, consult with the farmers, farm 

organizations, communities; take a look at the future direction 

of agriculture, the future direction of farm safety net programs, 

and make recommendations.  And that's what they've done.  

And that is going to be the framework in which the 

Saskatchewan government's position is going to be on the 

future of farm safety net programs. 

 

I think it's the right process and I think the members again 

should take the time to consider that report and certainly make 

comments on the recommendations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the comments made by some of the members 

opposite, we heard some of the members comment about Ag 

2000.  And I want to tell you that Ag 2000 speaks to the future.  

It speaks to the principles and the values of Saskatchewan 

people, of Saskatchewan communities, of Saskatchewan farm 

families.  That's what it speaks to, Mr. Speaker.  And it also 

speaks to the values and the principles of cooperation, caring, 

and sharing. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that has been included in the Farm 

Support Review Committee's recommendations.  They have 

taken into consideration the direction of agriculture in the 

future, and they've realized that the family farm unit is the most 

productive, the most viable, and that we need to look at 

mechanisms and farm support programs that will enable these 

farm families to be viable and certainly be very efficient and 

successful in the 1990s. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to comment briefly.  I know we've heard 

about . . . I want to . . . that was some of the historical aspects 

that I believe have to be taken into consideration when you 

consider farm policy and the direction of farm safety net 

programs, and that is that the federal government has to realize 

its responsibilities. 

 

And here we come to the future where we have a Liberal 

government in Ottawa now that is charged with the 

responsibility of delivering.  What we're asking from the 

federal government now, today, is for them to take back some 

of their historical constitutional responsibilities. 

 

And I'm not sure if they're willing to do that.  Judging by the 

cut-backs to the western grain transportation subsidy, judging 

by the mannerisms and the responses from the minister, I think 

that this new federal government is the same as the former Tory 

government that was there previously.  And that is, it's going to 

continue on the very same type of policy and direction. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You mean we're into the same chicken 

again? 



1094 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1994 

Mr. Roy: -- Same chicken, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I tell you I want to put as much, and I want to put it as bluntly 

as I can -- that the federal government has to take back these 

particular responsibilities.  When you see every day the 

financial pressures that this province has been placed under, 

and when you see the kind of decisions this government has 

implemented to try to spread the sacrifice around to everybody, 

and when you realize, as I pointed out, how important 

agriculture is to the future development of Canada and to the 

future development of this province, I think it is imperative that 

the Leader of Third Party here sends a message loud and clear 

that, Mr. Agriculture Minister, federal Agriculture minister, no 

more cut-backs to the western grain transportation subsidy.  

Mr. Agriculture Minister, you promised during the election that 

there would be no more interest on cash advances. 

 

I want her to deliver that message and I want her to deliver it 

loudly.  And I want a response for Saskatchewan people, 

Saskatchewan farmers, so that we can again start to work on a 

more national, cooperative, collaborative approach to 

agriculture and the design of future farm safety net programs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- In closing, Mr. Speaker, I want to again thank the 

House for giving me the opportunity.  And I want to say that I 

wholeheartedly support this motion by the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm happy to stand and support 

this private members' motion. 

 

One of the members of the Farm Support Review Committee is 

a member from my constituency, Helena Pike.  Helena has 

lived on the family farm for over 40 years.  She was a teacher 

in Waseca for 30 years and she understands rural 

Saskatchewan.  It was members like Helena that worked hours 

to write the report on the farm safety net.  I thank them for their 

efforts. 

 

Also, a thank you to the entire agricultural community and the 

staff of the Department of Agriculture and Food in the 

development of Ag 2000 -- A Strategic Direction for the Future 

of Saskatchewan's Agriculture and Food Industry. 

 

(1645) 

 

People haven't been speaking this afternoon on some of the 

principles that are included in this, so I thought that I would 

cover seven of the principles so that people that are listening 

and will be reading Hansard and are watching would know 

some of the principles that are included in this report. 

 

Number one, the maintenance of the family farm.  It is an 

important principle.  It is the family farm that has 

been the backbone of rural Saskatchewan, and this will 

continue to be so. 

 

Communities controlling their own future.  We know that 

producers want to have input in decisions that affect their 

future, and they are right. 

 

The third principle, cooperation, decision making in the 

community.  Decisions that are made collectively are usually 

the best decisions, and people out there are moving in this 

direction. 

 

Number four, forming partnerships among farmers, 

communities, industry, and government.  Being on the 

employment and economy caucus committee, I realize how 

important it is that all Saskatchewan people work together to 

attain economic advantage to farmers, business people, and 

communities alike. 

 

The fifth principle embodied in this report . . . Now so far these 

are the kind of things that people are asking for out there.  Talk 

to anyone.  These are progressive, futuristic steps and goals.  

Number five, adjustment of the agriculture and food sector to 

changing trends in world food demand. 

 

Our farmers realize the need to diversify.  And last year, 12 per 

cent of our land was diversified into all types of crops -- crops 

like peas and lentils, borage, sunflower seeds, and the list goes 

on.  These are innovative people that realize what the future 

holds; farmers operating independently over time with 

decisions relating to resource allocations, made regardless of 

government support programs.  Individual farmers want to be 

able to make their decisions related to their operations, not 

related to ill-conceived farm programs. 

 

The seventh principle, primary production of plant and animal 

products in response to market demand.  Very crucial.  Ways 

must be found to shape and influence the forces of change that 

will help farmers and help the industry make productive, 

long-term adjustments. 

 

I will be supporting this motion.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise today to address the private 

members' motion introduced by my colleague from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood.  I will be voting against the amendment 

and voting in favour of the motion in support of the Farm 

Support Review Committee, which reads: 

 

 That this Assembly commend the Farm Support Review 

Committee for completing its report on farm safety net 

options which the Government of Saskatchewan will use as 

the basis for negotiating with the federal government and 

other provinces for a national whole farm safety net 

program that better reflects the needs of the family farm. 



March 22, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1095 

I must say, it is one again a pleasure to go out in rural 

Saskatchewan and talk with our farmers.  It is a pleasure as 

there is once again optimism out there amongst our farmers.  

When I have listened to them over the last two or three years, 

one of their main concerns was the lack of spot loss hail 

insurance.  I'm very pleased to see that the private insurance 

companies' Tory friends are no longer in office either 

provincially or federally. 

 

So we as farmers were able to have some very important 

protection once again.  Spot loss is important as it deals with 

the very real losses that otherwise would provide no income 

unless there was an overall yield loss.  Spot loss is just one 

point creating optimism. 

 

The increase in the number of crops that are now protected 

under crop insurance makes it more attractive for farmers to 

react by varying their crop rotations even more.  And that is 

just what the farmers are doing, to the advantage of 

Saskatchewan people as a whole. 

 

World prices for grain are on the increase and livestock 

incomes have been much better than in years gone by.  In 

recent years governments in other countries supported their 

farmers with their national treasuries.  Unfortunately Ottawa 

continued to offload its national responsibilities onto the 

producers and provincial taxpayers.  It is impossible to bear the 

whole cost provincially.  No state in the U.S. (United States) 

attempts to.  It seems that Ottawa only shows interest in such 

support programs at election time. 

 

We as a government have introduced an outline for discussion 

entitled Forging Partnerships in Agriculture.  We are and have 

been consulting with farmers, communities, business, labour, 

and cooperatives to secure our future through a self-reliant, 

sustainable agriculture industry.  This is being led by our Farm 

Support Review Committee. 

 

My government is giving wholehearted support to the value 

added industries to support further processing in our borders. 

 

Serious consideration is being given to methods to prepare 

young men and women to become the successful farmers of the 

future.  Virtually everyone in Saskatchewan has direct or 

indirect family and financial ties to family farms.  Nearly every 

member in this Assembly can reach back to a farm background.  

Personally, both sets of my grandparents were homesteaders in 

this province in the early part of the century.  My father and 

mother farmed, and I am a farmer.  My two sons are both trying 

to establish themselves as farmers. 

 

In their particular case, they are the 10th generation of my 

family to farm in this country.  I am pleased to say that our 

government is working towards creating an atmosphere where 

their generation could also have a full and rewarding life as 

farmers in this great province and great country of ours. 

Farming is changing and has changed over the years and will 

continue to change in the years to come.  Our government is 

doing its part to make it possible for a top quality lifestyle to be 

a part of a prospective future in the young farmers of this 

province. 

 

In this year's budget we are providing 320 million in support to 

farm families and the agricultural industry; 20 million to 

increase value added projects for agricultural products provided 

by the agri-food equity fund; 1.4 million to enhance markets for 

the Saskatchewan beef industry. 

 

Budget '94 brought down the beef industry development fund, a 

1.35 million pool of money that will assist with projects 

relating to product research, technology transfer, and 

development or promotion of new markets.  The agriculture 

industry of course will have input on how and when this money 

is spent. 

 

This fund fits neatly into our road-map for the revitalization of 

the agricultural industry, the Ag 2000 strategy.  Our 

agricultural strategy, Ag 2000, emphasizes stability and growth 

in Saskatchewan's most important industry.  The strategy must 

accommodate the entry of young farmers into the agricultural 

sector. 

 

A number of programs are currently under investigation that 

would facilitate this -- such as the community-based land trust.  

History has shown the need for such a program as the 

capitalization of farm land has always been a heavy burden. 

 

Younger farmers are often high risk farmers because of their 

low equity position.  Therefore adequate credit terms and 

innovative financing must be available for those farmers who 

demonstrate financial liability.  We do in fact need a more 

effective farm safety net program.  That program must be based 

on federal-provincial commitment.  This program must target 

those most in need, be geared towards recognizing cost of 

production, and above all be designed to provide farm families 

with long-term income security. 

 

I am pleased to be part of a government that has the needs of 

our farmers as a top priority.  Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to 

support the motion by the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, I move we adjourn debate on 

this motion. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:55 p.m. 

 


